House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 122, 1981 Tuesday, 12 May 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2215

Tuesday, 12 May 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Proposed Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mountford and MrScholes.
Petitions received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may. partake of the three basic needs oflife: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most oftheindustry's 5811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the

ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increase to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
I!. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
1. Recognise the importance and place of the Australian Hotel industry in social and economic life of the nation.
2. Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Porter, Mr Scott and Mr Thomson.
Petitions received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has hud serious adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden prodnce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.

2216 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Petitions

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cowan and Mr Les Johnson. Petitions received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny unemployment benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.
That the level of benefits for all unemployed people, and including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120 per cent of the poverty line.
That future employment policies be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.
Public acknowledgement of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Sir Phillip Lynch, Mr N. A. Brown and Mr Lloyd.
Petitions received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the prospect of the proposed Plant Breeder's Rights legislation. The reasons are as follows.
(1) We believe it will restrict free growing and exchange or sale of non-chemically treated seeds.
(2) We believe it will cause a decline in the genetic diversity of plants as evidenced in Europe following implementation of similar legislation there. (3) We believe that prolonged public debate is necessary as is a referendum before a final decision is made.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take positive action as soon as possible to arrest the implementation of such legislation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHowe. Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And further, that annual Budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free and Mr Mountford. Petitions received.

Discriminatory Legislation
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That the right to work without discrimination on any ground including, inter alia, discrimination on grounds of race, ethnic origin, pregnancy, marital status, sex and/or sexual preference, is a fundamental human right; and
That it is both the duty and the responsibility of society to fully support those denied work and therefore those who are unemployed as a result of society's inability to provide full paid employment should be guaranteed an adequate income without discrimination on any ground, including inter alia discrimination on grounds of race, ethnic origin, marital status, sex and/or sexual preference, or pregnancy.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That appropriate and adequate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employment, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasi-governmental organisations, in employment of individuals under federal awards, and in employment of all persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal opportunity legislation should have jurisdiction; and
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons without regard to race, ethnic origin, marital status and/or sex.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Birney.
Petition received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(1) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Petitions

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2217

by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. The proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. The proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a 'poor risk' (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. In regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. The proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school eady.
5. The proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid 1980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality ofteaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or for any category of students;
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students;
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced; (iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary
Assistance; (v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CABs unless they are
rationalised be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.
Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purposes; and
(b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, industry and educational research laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Privacy and Personal Information

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.

The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia

respectfully showeth thal:

--

Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personai Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the
Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Chris-
tian basis of our society, by proposing that "between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent."

It is your petitioners sincere belief that:

(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.

Your petitioners therefore pray:

That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Dobie.

Petition received.

Plant Breeders' Rights
To: The Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled
We the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth do humbly pray that the Commonwealth government
1. Uphold the principle that the seeds and cuttings of plants are a public resource and a common heritage to all that accordingly seeds should be freely available to all, freely multipliable, able to be sold, exchanged, exported and imported by anyone who wishes. This is seen as a matter of national food security.
2. Recognise that plant breeding is a highly co-operative venture often involving private enterprise at the very last stages after basic seed collection, storage, and research has been publicly funded.

2218 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Petitions

3. In view of the aforementioned paragraphs, recognize that any system giving 'property' or ownership rights over seeds to individuals, organisations or enterprises is inappropriate and unjust.
4. Recognize that legislation establishing plant patenting schemes overseas has had serious adverse effects namely: i. a slowing-down of scientific information exchange and exchanges in basic plant breeding materials, that is, germ plasm, ii. subordination and/or curtailment of public breeding programmes, iii. farmer unrest at seed prices, iv. monopoly control of seed production and sales has passed into the hands of giant petrochemical and drug corporations also marketing crop chemicals, v. increased uniformity of crop varieties leading to a vulnerability to pest and disease attack.
5. Reject any proposal to legislate for any system such as the drafted Plant Variety Rights Act, which gives exclusive ownership rights over seeds to individuals, organisations or enterprises.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrDuffy.
Petition received.
Pornographic Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we the undersigned having great concern at the way in which children are now being used in the production of pornography call upon the government to introduce immediate legislation:
I. To prevent the sexual exploitation of children by way of photography for commercial purposes;
2. To penalise parents/guardians who knowingly allow their children to be used in the production of such pornographic or obscene material depicting children;
3. To make specifically illegal the importation, publication, distribution and sale of such pornographic child-abuse material in any form whatsoever such as magazines, novels, papers or films;
4. To take immediate police action to confiscate and destroyall child pornography in Australia and urgent appropriate legal action against all those involved or profiting from this sordid exploitation of children.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will protect all children and immediately prohibit pornographic child-abuse materials, publications or films.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hunt.
Petition received.
Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Owing to an overwhelming and continuous demand by the Australian people for a cruise service within the economic scope of the working man and his family, we request the Government to lift the ban placed on Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels entering Australian Ports.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions and the ACTU, the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our National Airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
EI Salvador
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the present government of El Salvador has been responsible for the deaths of at least 10,000 people in 1980 alone; and that it has been condemned as one of the worst human rights violators in the world by organisations such as Amnesty International and the US Conference of Catholic Bishops.
Therefore we humbly request that the government of the Commonwealth of Australia:
(i) Ulge the government of the United States of America to immediately cease all military aid to the government of El Salvador;
(ii) support the freedom of the Salvadoran people against the governing military dictatorship.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scott.
Petition received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B52 bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA. and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52s:
(a) carried nuclear weapons; (b) were engaged in bombing missions against another
State.
Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies

Petitions

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2219

thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy.
Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region.
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents.
Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US. Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham, Mr Free, Mr Les Johnson, Mrs Kelly and Mr Kent.
Petitions received.
Raymond Terrace Telephone Exchange
The Honourable Mr Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the residents of the Shire of Port Stephens respectfully showeth that they are dissatisfied with the services provided by Telecom Australia through the Raymond Terrace exchange and sub exchanges and that businesses lose money and citizens are inconvenienced by the many problems found.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will ensure that the services are upgraded as a matter of urgency.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrCowan.
Petition received.
Importation of Canned Ham
To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain pork producers of the Electoral Division of Maranoa respectfully showeth that importation of canned ham from Romania, Yugoslavia, Holland and Canada is having a disastrous effect on the Australian Pig Industry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that steps be taken to prevent the importation of canned ham into Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ian Cameron.
Petition received.
Child Care Centre: Australian Government Clothing Factory
To the Honourable the Speaker, members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the State of Victoria respectfully request that the Federal Government keep its promise of 1979 to build a work-based child care centre on land adjacent to the Australian Government Clothing Factory, under the

guidelines of the original approved proposal, and that the matter receive urgent attention.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrHawke.
Petition received.
Vehicle Testing Service: Phillip, Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned electors of the Division of Canberra respectfully showeth:
The members of the public are seriously concerned at the drop in the high standard of vehicle testing, when this service is handed over to private enterprise. It is well known that state testing of vehicles, where it occurs, is considerably inferior to that which takes place in the A.C.T.
Considerable capital has been expended to further improve the service at Phillip. This taxpayers money should not be wasted.
If vehicle testing is to be carried out by private enterprise, the public will have to pay a fee. If given the option, they would rather pay this fee to a government agency, in the knowledge that the findings of the test would be completely un-biased, whereas through private enterprise, this may not always be the case.
The south-side population of Canberra are entitled to the service provided by the Phillip Office. It would be difficult to give this service at Dickson due to the limitations of the building.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly. Petition received.
Two-airline Policy
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor . service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting Western Australia and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean.
Petition received.
FRENCH PRESIDENT Notice of Motion
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House(I) congratulates and compliments the French people in
displaying the wisdom necessary for the election of a new Socialist President-the first in 23 years;

2220 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

(2) calls on the Government to seek urgent talks with the new President with a view to discussing the immediate banning of nuclear testing in the Pacific and the question of self-government of French possessions in the region;and
(3) calls on the Government to seek assurances from the Reagan Administration that the Central Intelligence Agency will adopt a policy of non-interference in France to avoid a repetition of the overthrow of the Allende Government in Chile and the Whitlam Government in Australia.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon---Prime Minister)-With your indulgence, Mr Speaker, could I say something that might be helpful to the honourable gentleman. On behalf of the Australian Government I have sent messages to the President of France indicating that we would want to work with the President to continue to advance Franco-Australian relationships. Clearly, we will want to discuss a number ofmatters with the Government of France. I hope that the warm and friendly relationships established under his predecessor will be continued under Monsieur Mitterrand.
AGE AND SERVICE PENSIONS Notice of Motion
Mr GOODLUCK (FrankIin)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House is of the opinion that age and service pensions should remain payable to women when they attain the age of 60 years.

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
COMMONWEALTH FUNDING TO THE STATES
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister: Is it a fact that the strongest opposition has been expressed by every State government to proposed cuts in funding to the States, the objectionable manner in which those cuts were achieved, and particularly to cuts in health funding? Is it a fact that both the Queensland and Western Australian Premiers consider the cuts not only wrong on policy grounds but also immoral in the way in which they were achieved, and probably illegal? In view of that, and in the interests of trying to establish some harmony in Federal relations, will the Prime Minister now swallow his pride and recall the Premiers Conference as soon as possible to work out a fairer and more honest deal?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The arrangements that have been worked out with the Premiers in relation to these matters are fair. They are fair in particular when we have regard to the needs of the taxpayers of this country. At a Premiers Conference during the winter last year, the Premiers indicated to me that they were going to have meetings amongst themselves, excluding the Commonwealth, and that they would then put proposals to us for a review of the tax sharing arrangements because under the original agreements the tax sharing arrangements had to be re-established, re-negotiated, by 30 June this year.

COMMONWEALTH FUNDING TO THE STATES
Notice of Motion Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House totally rejects the reasons given by the Prime Minister in depriving the State Premiers of $70m in revenue and calls on the Government to increase its allocation by the sum of $70m forthwith.
FOREIGN AID Notice of Motion Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House rejects the appeal made by the Queensland Premier to the Federal Government to cut foreign aid, and calls on the Government to increase aid to overseas countries to 0.7 per cent of Australia's GNP and increase to 4 per cent the proportion of foreign aid channelled through recognised non-government organisations such as World Vision.

I put it to the Premiers at that time when they made their own proposal known that it would be much better if the Commonwealth could participate in that discussion with the Premiers. I said that if they did not do that, it could so easily lead to a situation where we have Premiers putting one view and the Commonwealth in the interests of the Australian taxpayers having another view-a situation where it is difficult to get to a final agreement. The Premiers persisted with the view that they wanted to meet by themselves. They met in September. I think letters were sent to me at that time indicating a need for an urgent meeting then to discuss the results of their review but that could not take place because the results of their review did not really come forward until some time in February. So, the Premiers themselves, discussing these matters amongst themselves, took from September till about February to be able to formulate their own view.
The document which they provided to us was one in which firm views were not really put. They

Questions Without Notice

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2221

argued on the one hand for maintaining a percentexcept to say that the main thrust of the arrange-

age of income tax revenue; they argued on the ments that we have made in relation to health will

other the merits of making the percentage a perstand.

centage of total taxes. We obviously have examined the States' document in the decisions EMPLOYMENT OF DISABLED PERSONS

that we have made. If J might take that one Mr DOBIE-J refer the Minister for Employ-

point-a percentage of income tax or a percentment and Youth Affairs to recent newspaper ad-

age of total taxes to be defined by discussion bevertisements by the Government which promote

tween ourselves and the States-the second the employment of disabled persons. Assuming

alternative is obviously one that would give the these advertisements are part of a campaign for

States greater security in the revenues that they the International Year of Disabled Persons, will

have because the fluctuation in all Commonthe Minister advise the House whether this is all

wealth revenues is likely to be to a degree less than the Commonwealth will be doing in the field of

the fluctuations that could occur in one particular employment for disabled persons in their desig-

form of revenue.

nated year? If not, will the Minister advise the

In addition to that, since the States had exHouse as to what else is being done or planned to pressed concerns over the previous years that be done?

adjustments to income tax should not be made without prior consultation with them-and that obviously put any Commonwealth government in difficulty in relation to the formulation of its own Budget because one cannot discuss major matters of that kind on a wider front-the Commonwealth had come to the view and put to the Premiers that it would be better to relate the funds that go to the States as a percentage of all revenue to be defined rather than as a percentage ofincome tax. The Commonwealth Government, as a result of reviewing matters that the Premiers put and the reference by the Treasurer and me of these matters back to the Cabinet, had decided to maintain the view that a percentage of all revenue was better from the States' point of view than a percentage of income tax.

Mr N. A. BROWN-Even before the International Year of Disabled Persons the Government clearly recognised the importance of improving the employment prospects of disabled people. This concern has been heightened and emphasised by the fact that this is the International Year of Disabled Persons. Accordingly, the Commonwealth has embarked upon a number of specific initiatives to achieve this objective. In the first place, as the honourable member pointed out, there has been a significant promotional campaign under way to encourage the placement of disabled persons in employment. This program has two stages. The first is directed to senior management and the second is directed to those people in management who actually take people on and employ them in companies and

There would be no purpose in reconvening the enterprises. Secondly, the Government has also

Conference at the present time. It needs to be established Commonwealth employment pro-

understood that there will be a meeting with the motion committees in each State and the North-

Premiers in June that has important matters to ern Territory to look specifically at the employ-

discuss, including the infrastructure program, the ment problems of disabled persons.

Loan Council programs and the borrowing programs of semi-government authorities and smaller authorities. On that occasion there will be opportunity for the States to raise matters related to those issues. But I should indicate that the main thrust of the Government's decisions in relation to tax sharing has been made. There has been discussion with the Premiers in relation to it. In discussion this morning, the Government made it very plain that in the interests of Australian taxpayers who are interested in smaller government, whether that be from the Commonwealth or from the States, we adhere to the views that have been put and we adhere to the decisions that have been put.

Thirdly, in respect of specific programs to assist the disabled, the Minister for Housing and Construction has already taken initiatives to ensure that improved access is provided for disabled people within Commonwealth premises. It is perhaps not widely known, as it should be known, that there is an incentive available from the Government of some $2,000 for the purchase of special equipment and the making of necessary modifications to the work place to enable disabled persons more adequately to take their place in the work force. In Commonwealth Employment Service offices there are special personnel who are attuned to the needs and specific requirements of disabled persons. This likewise is making a very

The Minister for Health has also reported to us substantial contribution to enabling disabled per-

on discussions which he had. I do not want to sons to obtain employment. The Commonwealth

make any comment about that at the present time is doing all those things and more. I can assure the

2222 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

honourable member that, especially through the work of the State committees, the Commonwealth is determined to make every effort to adapt the work place as far as possible to the needs of disabled persons and to ensure that as many disabl<?d persons as possible are placed in suitable and satisfying employment.
PREMIERS CONFERENCE
Mr LES JOHNSON-I refer the Prime Minister to his statement late last week in which he refused to recall the Premiers Conference and said that the Premiers would not get another cent or another dollar. I ask: Does he still stand by that statement? Under what circumstances would he have been prepared to advance to the Premiers the extra $70m which the Cabinet had apparently approved?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman has a misunderstanding of the negotiating mandate that the Treasurer and I had on that occasion. It is perfectly plain that a Cabinet is capable of expressing a view to a Treasurer and Prime Minister and saying: That is the maximum extent to which you can go but we do not want you to go anything like that far. That is precisely the situation the Treasurer and I were in. We negotiated within the authority. It is not a question of there being an extra $70m. That money would have to be prospectively taken otT the taxpayers of Australia to be paid to the Premiers. It is not a question of the $70m being in somebody's kitty or up in the sky. It is a question of its having to be prospectively taken from the taxpayers of Australia to be paid to the Premiers or somebody else. The Commonwealth has made the decision that that ought not to happen.
OIL RIGS
Mr HYDE-I direct a question to the Minister for Transport. Is it a fact that off-shore oil search has been inhibited because the industry is not permitted to import foreign rigs? Is it true that the industry stands to lose up to $35m if it does import a rig and then a local rig becomes available? Why is there this protection for local rigs? Has the Minister knowledge of the approximate total cost to the Australian community of protecting Australian vessels from competition? If not, will he seek to obtain that information and make it public?
Mr HUNT-The policy that the Government has pursued for some time is administered by the Minister for Industry and Commerce and me to provide protection to the Australian shipbuilding industry. This policy has been under some criticism by companies wishing to drill for oil offshore. I have had a number of representations

from people expressing concern about the matter. As a result of that concern the policy is currently under review to ensure that it does not unduly inhibit, or add to the costs of, oil search in this country. I do not have at my fingertips the actual cost of this policy, and any costs associated with it, but [ will make sure that I get the information that the honourable member requires and make it available to him. If it is necessary, I will make it publicly available.
As J have said, the policy is under review. At present 1 am not aware of the policy having had an impact on any particular company. We have had discussions with a number of companies and I think their requirements have been adequately met as a result of negotiations that have transpired. We will not inhibit the oil search program with a policy that could provide an impediment to oil search generally in this country.
COMMONWEALTH-STATE FINANCIAL RELATIONS
Mr HOLDING-My question, which is directed to the Prime Minister, relates to the letter from the Premier of Western Australia to the Prime Minister. Does the Prime Minister agree with Sir Charles Court's statement that the States' share of personal income tax is theirs as of right, being equivalent to taxation reimbursement arrangements which have existed since 1942? Will the Prime Minister make a reality his claim to decentralise financial responsibility by holding what Sir Charles calls 'proper consultation' rather than unilaterally dictating what funds the States can receive? Since the States together have the legal power to control the Loan Council, what action will the Prime Minister propose should the States decide to make up for the cuts in their general assistance grants by increasing thci r borrowing?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman would be well advised to wait until the Loan Council meeting takes place before he decides what can or should be done in relation to it. I can assist him to this extent: In relation to the infrastructure programs where some States have claims for massive increases which would double the size of the total program, before a project can be approved there needs to be a simple majority of the Loan Council, of which the Commonwealth must be a part. The States are examining at the moment whether they, as States, see any par-ticular level at which the borrowing requirements of the States would be too high. It will be interesting to see what judgment they make on that but obviously the Commonwealth is in a position of being
able to make its own judgment if it has to. rt is odd

Questions Without Notice

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2223

for governments to look upon the taxpayers' funds, whether from income tax or some other tax, as belonging to any government as of right. I believe that the funds earned by taxpayers are theirs as of right and that governments need to justify spending that part of people's incomes which the governments do spend.
MEDIBANK FRAUDS
Mr HODGES-Can the Minister for Health advise whether the Government takes a soft line with doctors who defraud Medibank? Is it true that members of the medical profession, because of their status, are able to pull strings to avoid action or are less likely to be thoroughly investigated for possible fraud under the Medibank system? Is the Minister satisfied that penalties provided for and imposed, both of a monetary and a gaol term nature, are adequate? Finally, is the Minister aware of and concerned about a report that a Canberra doctor who pleaded guilty to 183 charges was fined $27,800 but as an alternative had to serve only six days in gaol?
Mr MacKELLAR-I would like to confirm to the honourable gentleman and to the House that the Government in no way takes a soft line in relation to fraud of Medibank or other Commonwealth moneys, whether that fraud be perpetrated by doctors, patients or any members of the other professions involved. In fact, as you would remember, Mr Speaker, I have been criticised by some people for the way in which the Commonwealth follows up allegations of fraud in relation to bills presented to the Commonwealth by particular members of the medical profession. In say-
ing that, r do not want to give the impression that
a large number of people are involved--
Dr Everingham-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I draw your attention to Question on Notice No. 2202, parts (2) and (3).
Mr SPEAKER-This question deals with a different issue and is in order. I call the Minister.
Mr MacKELLAR-I want to confirm to the House that there is no way that this Government would agree to any proposition that people could pull strings to avoid prosecution for fraud. I am sure that the Opposition would agree with me in that approach. I have been concerned about some of the penalties imposed in relation to matters of fraud. My attention was drawn to the case of the Canberra doctor who elected to spend some time in gaol rather than repay a certain amount of money. It is my belief that the magistrate who imposed the sentence did not believe that the result which actually occurred was in contemplation or would occur. Obviously, it is a matter

for some concern and one which I am presently considering in relation to an appeal.
AUSTRALIAN WOOL TESTING AUTHORITY
Mr KERIN-My question is directed to the Minister for Primary Industry. Is it a fact that all private wool testing firms in Australia have failed? Is it a fact that the Australian Wool Testing Authority is an official, independent and impartial body of absolute international reputation which costs government nothing and levies charges lower than any other test house in the world? Is it a fact that if the Australian Wool Testing Authority is sold, there is every chance that wool sales may have to be cancelled, and that the cost of wool testing will rise by 40 per cent to 50 per cent? If so, can the Minister inform the House of the benefits to the Australian wool industry and Australian taxpayers if the Government proceeds with its plans to sell the Authority?
Mr NIXON-Whilst I can understand the purpose behind the honourable member's question, I have to point out to him that there is a great deal of guessing involved in some of the figures which he has used. The real test that had to be applied to the Australian Wool Testing Authority, when the Review of Commonwealth Functions committee looked at it, was whether there would be any detriment to the industry were the Authority to become a private wool testing house. The secoJ;ld test to be applied was whether there would be any detriment to the wool growers separately were the Authority to become a private testing house.
Mr Hurford-Yes.
Mr NIXON-The honourable member says: 'Yes'. He knows all about it. He knows that in New Zealand, for example, private wool testing houses are used. He knows that in the United Kingdom private wool testing houses are used. These private wool testing houses have achieved the same high reputation as has the Wool Testing Authority in Australia. On all the criteria that are applied to the matter, it cannot be claimed at this point that any real detriment would occur to either the industry or the wool growers if the Wool Testing Authority became a private wool testing house. That is the first point to make. With respect to the second part of the honourable member's question concerning the transfer of the Australian Wool Testing Authority, it is our intention to give it adequate time within which to prepare for an orderly transition from a government-owned organisation to a private test house. Thus there should not be any delay or hiatus in the issuing of certificates. It should prove

2224 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

possible to transfer the organisation as a going any other licences that may be granted at any time
concern. r point out to the honourable member in the future?

that all his fears will prove to be nought.

Mr HOWARD-I am interested in the sugges-

AUSTRALIAN FILM INDUSTRY Mr TAMBLING-I direct a question to the Treasurer. Investors interested in the film industry in Australia have expressed apprehension in backing productions currently scheduled to commence filming in Australia and, in particular, in the Northern Territory. Can the Treasurer indicate when legislation is to be introduced to clarify the position to ensure that planned film time tables can be met?

tion made by the honourable member. Certainly, it is the fact that the issue of a banking licence confers upon the recipient of that licence an extremely valuable asset. That is more particularly the case under existing policy whereby considerable restrictions are placed upon those persons or organisations which can hold banking licences. As I think the House will be aware, the subject of the regulations under which banks operate in Australia is one that has been examined very closely by the Campbell Committee of Inquiry

Mr HOWARD-I have indicated previously to into the Australian Financial System. I expect

the House in response to a similar question that it that that Committee will report in August or Sep-

is our intention to introduce that legislation with a tember of this year. I would be surprised if the

request to Parliament for its passage before the Committee did not have something to say in some

winter recess. That remains the intention of the detail about banks and banking practices and the

Government.

conditions on which the Government ought to ap-

AUSTRALIAN CmZENSHIP Mr DAWKINS--I ask the Minister for Communications whether it is a fact the Broadcasting and Television Act presently requires a person to be an Australian resident to escape the limitations placed on foreign ownership of broadcasting licences? Has the Government, as was reported in yesterday's Australian Financial Review, decided to replace this measure by the qualification of Australian citizenship? I ask the reason for this change and whether such a change would then be inconsistent with the taxation Act and the Foreign Takeovers Act?

proach banking operations in this country. In those circumstances, the type of proposal
that the honourable member has in mind obviously could be considered by the Government in the context of looking at the Campbell Committee's report. Some differences exist between the considerations that bear upon the sale of privileges of that kind by tender in respect of other industries and those that might bear upon the sale of them in respect of banks. In any event the question loses some of its relevance depending upon the extent to which one removes the restrictions on the granting of licences.

Mr SINCLAIR-The honourable gentleman will know that that definition is available to any honourable member by looking at the existing legislation. I suggest that the honourable member should not take that much note of some of the rumours he reads in the Press.

OVERSEAS INVESTMENT IN AUSTRALIA
Mr KEATING-I refer the Treasurer to the figures released yesterday showing that the level of capital inflow in the March quarter of$I,705m was the highest ever recorded. I ask: Is it a fact that a very high proportion of this capital is being

TRADING BANKS: TAKEOVER

brought to Australia as portfolio investment to

PROPOSALS

buy shares in existing Australian businesses and

Mr SPENDER-My question is directed to the Treasurer. No doubt he is aware of the fact that at present there are two takeover proposals announced in respect of two trading banks. Many people would regard a licence to conduct banking business as an extremely valuable asset. Arising out of those comments I ask the following questions: Firstly, has the Treasurer given consideration to the sale by tender or by some other appropriate means of licences to conduct banking .business? Secondly, if not, will he take that subject under examination both in respect of licences

not for the purpose of establishing new industries? Will the Treasurer tell the House what procedures, if any, are employed by the Foreign Investment Review Board to monitor the level of foreign portfolio holdings in Australian companies and what criteria are used to arrive at the classification of certain shareholdings as Australian? Finally, what steps is the Goverriment taking to protect the Australian ownership of existing businesses against the capricious investment policies of large foreign companies and large foreign institutions?

that may become surplus if either or both of the Mr HOWARD-I am aware of the figures re-

proposed takeovers are successful, or in respect of ferred to by the honourable member for Blaxland.

Questions Without Notice

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2225

They are further evidence of the attractiveness of appropriate for the Government to put the onus

this country to foreigners as a place in which to inon the banks by requiring them to demonstrate

vest. Much and all as those on the opposite side of that strong national benefits would result from

the House complain and find it a matter for adthese mergers before they are allowed to proceed?

verse comment, this country is regarded as having

a stable economy. That is precisely why there is

such very heavy investment in this country. The Mr HOWARD-The problem with the

honourable member for Blaxland knows as well as honourable member's suggestion is that it ignores

I do the provisions of the Foreign Takeovers Act the provisions of section 63 of the Banking Act

which relate to the acquisition of Australian which provides that the consent of the Treasurer

businesses, he knows as well as I do the provisions is required for a merger and that that consent will

of the foreign investment policy so far as they renot be unreasonably withheld. That is utterly in-

late to new projects, and he knows as well as I do that the high level of portfolio investment in this country is a tribute to the success of this Government's economic policies.

consistent with' the course of conduct which is suggested by the honourable member. To suggest that to put upon those seeking consent the onus to demonstrate the national interest meets the re-

Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of quirements of a provision that consent should not order. There is a Standing Order which provides be unreasonably withheld is an odd construction

that answers should be relevant to the question. I of the language of section 63 of the Banking Act. I

addressed to the Treasurer a question not about have indicated that the Government has yet to re-

takeovers but about the cancerous behaviour of ceive formal applications in respect of either of

this buying up of shares in fairly small parcels by a the mergers that have been mooted in recent days.

myriad of institutions overseas. They are not When those formal applications are received, con-

takeovers as block investments. I want to know sideration will be given promptly to the question

what the Government's attitude is to the buying of consent under section 63, I expect the parties

up of Australia in parcels by a number of instiseeking approval for the respective mergers will,

tutions, whether this is monitored and what the in their applications, address a number of things,

Government will do about it.

including such matters as the question of future

Mr SPEAKER-The answer given by the Treasurer may be construed by the House as not being an answer to the question asked but the answer was relevant. The House will make its own judgment as to the value of the answer.
DISALLOWED QUESTION

staff arrangements and the provision of an adequate branch network to service the needs of different parts of the country. There are a number of other matters which no doubt will be addressed by the banks in making their applications. A judgment will then be made on the basis of the applications put forward by the respective parties. I re-

Mr Good luck proceeding to address a question peat the view I expressed yesterday, that strong

to the Minister for Business and Consumer national interests need to exist in order for the

Affairs-

Government to interfere in what are essentially

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will rephrase his question.

commercial arrangements between financial enterprises in this country. In company with a lot of the comment that has been made in other

TRADING BANKS: TAKEOVER

places about these mergers, the honourable

PROPOSALS

gentleman talks as though the only banks in

Mr WILLIS-I refer the Treasurer to his statement yesterday on the two proposed bank mergers in which he said that his general view was that strong national interest considerations would need to be involved before the Government sought to interfere with normal commercial

Australia are the six trading banks, including the Commonwealth Banking Corporation, which was referred to in his question. I remind him that a significant number of State banks are in existence in Australia and that, since the last occasion on which there were significant mergers between

processes. In view of the fact that these mergers trading banks in this country, there has been a

would reduce the number of banks by one-third very major change in the structure of the financial

and concentrate almost half of the assets of all sector in Australia and there has been a significant

financial institutions in the hands of four banks, rise in the contribution of merchant banks. There

thereby reducing competition and providing more has been a significant rise in the strength and the

scope for excessive profits, is the Treasurer contribution of building societies offering, as they

seriously suggesting that strong national interests do, a number of facilities which are offered also by

are not involved? Further, would it not be more parts of the trading bank structure. It is a total

2226 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

misunderstanding of the Australian financial sysMr MacKELLAR-I think it has to be br-ought

tem to talk as though it is entirely constituted by home to the Opposition that the Government's

those six trading banks.

philosophy in relation to centralisation of control

WOOL STORES

in Australia is very different from the Opposition's philosophy. The Government believes

Mr HICKS-I refer the Minister for Primary that the constitutional responsibilities of the

Industry to the Government's proposal to sell States involve the provision of public health ser-

some wool stores to private enterprise. Can the vices and include the provision of public hospital

Minister advise the House of the Commonservices. A decision as to whether a means test

wealth's equity in wool stores? Is it a fact that the will be imposed for access to public hospitals is

rationalisation of these stores will result in entirely a matter for the States concerned.

increased costs to wool growers?

Mr NIXON-As described in the report of the Australian Wool Corporation, the Common-

COSTS OF CONSULTANTS AND CONTRACTING SERVICES

wealth's equity in wool stores covers the CorporMr ROCHER-I direct my question to the

ation and the public equity in the land and in the Minister representing the Minister for Finance.

stores held by the Corporation. It is true that the Have government departments been instructed

Corporation had an obligation in times of emergnot to prepare separate estimates for the costs of

ency to store Australia's wool clip. That obconsultants and contracting services in the

ligation will be maintained in the future. But it is future? Would such a course make it almost im-

also true-I think it is agreed-that there are a possible for the Parliament to identify and scruti-

number of wool stores that are surplus to the renise these costs? If instructions have been issued

quirements of the Wool Corporation. We on this in this connection, what are they and what are the

side of the House believe that it is not appropriate reasons for them?

that a government monopoly, such as the Corporation, in this sense ought to be competing with the private sector in the leasing of stores that are not used for their main purpose. Therefore the decision has been taken that, after discussion with the Wool Corporation, some of the stores should be sold. I -do not know where the honourable member gets the idea that in some way this will create an extra cost to the wool grower, but I will look at that aspect of his question and see whether I can give him any further information.

Mr HOWARD-I cannot answer the honourable gentleman's question. I will speak to the Minister for Finance about it and I will provide what information I can. I can say that it would certainly be a matter of concern if the capacity of this Parliament to scrutinise expenditure by government departments was in any way watered down by the actions of government. I am sure that that is a view that would be shared by my colleague the Minister for Finance. Beyond that, I will seek further information.

HOSPITAL MEANS TEST

Dr BLEWETT-I refer the Minister for

HEALTH CARE COSTS

Health to his election statement of 9 October Mr DUFFY-I refer to the claim by the Minis-

1980 in which he stated:

ter for Health that the Government's new health

. . . there was absolutely no truth--
I repeat the words 'absolutely no truth'-

insurance arrangements are based on the user pays principle. Can the Minister say whether this principle could or should be extended to other

in the statement that the Government was planning to restrict patients' free access to public hospitals by reimposing a means test for hospital care.
Was this merely a contingent electoral statement,

health areas-for example, to such public health facilities as baby health centres and immunisation programs-all of which are currently free at the point of delivery? Does he believe that hospitalis-

dispensable when the election was over, or was it ation for other acute forms of medical disorder

an example of the new law of politics advanced by should be treated differently from hospitalisation

the Minister?

for psychiatric disorders which is provided free in

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable all States except New South Wales?

gentleman will not argue the case. He can seek information.

Mr MacKELLAR-The general philosophy behind the Government's changes to the health

Dr BLEWETT-I simply wish to ask: Does insurance arrangements is well known. We be-

this statement reflect the Minister's view that 'no lieve that those people who can afford to make a

government can keep promises which are not concontribution towards their health costs should

sistent with its policies '?

properly do so, but also that those people who are

Questions Without Notice

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2227

in genuine need in the community should be protected. In fact the Government's changes achieve both of those objectives. It is a matter for State governments to make decisions about services provided by them.
CONVENTION CENTRE: CANBERRA
Mrs KELLYI direct my question to the Minister for the Capital Territory. On 19 September 1980 the then Minister for the Capital Territory, Mr Ellicott, announced that an international convention centre with hotel and office accommodation would be built in Canberra on sections 11 and 60 in Civic. The closing date for submissions for that project was 1 December 1980. Will the Minister explain why that project will be now 'postponed indefinitely'? Will the companies who prepared submissions be compensated for the incorrect information given to them? Does the Minister acknowledge that this project would have been a great incentive to the tourist industry and the Canberra economy? Does he acknowledge that the convention centre and hotel could proceed without Federal Government assistance if a casino were included in the project? Will he advise the Minister for Industry and Commerce that his figures of record investment in the hotel industry in the Australian Capital Territory, as stated in the Canberra Times of 6 April 1981, are now wrong?
Mr HODGMAN-The decision announced by the Government following the Review of Commonwealth Functions was that no funds would be made available for the convention centre in 1981-82. In addition a statement was clearly made that none of the tenders was acceptable to' the Government. I repeat for the benefit of the honourable member and others that there is nothing to prevent any corporation, group or consortium establishing a convention centre in Canberra. The honourable member might be interested to know that as recently as yesterday an indication of interest in establishing a convention centre in Canberra without government support was communicated to me.

national capital. If the honourable member accepts the proposition that there are people prepared to invest, she can go into the market place with me and support the cause. Lastly, in relation to the comments attibuted to the Minister for Industry and Commerce, the Minister's figures are not incorrect.
JAPANESE ROLE IN THE PACIFIC
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Has the Prime Minister studied the text of the agreement reached last week between Japan's Prime Minister and President Reagan? Ishe aware that, under this understanding, for the first time, Japan will playa strategic role-as opposed to simply deploying a self-defence force-in the Pacific? Given the importance of this development for Australia, was the Government informed in advance by the United States Government and, if so, were our views either sought or offered?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-For some time discussions have taken place between the United States Government and the Australian Government at different levels on the role that countries around the Pacific, including Japan, might be able to play or, in the view of some, ought to play in the general defence of the whole theatre. For example, the honourable gentleman will recall that, as I understand it, over the last year or perhaps the last two years units of the Japanese fleet have in fact participated in the Rimpac exercise. I think that indicates a degree of changed circumstances. In short, there have been discussions over a period relating to the subject raised by the honourable gentleman.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I inform the House that the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) left Australia on 8 May to attend ministerial discussions in New Zealand. The Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) is acting as Minister for Trade and Resources until Mr Anthony returns on 13 May.

Mrs Kelly-With office accommodation too?
Mr HODGMAN-Indeed. If the honourable member had paid any attention to the discussions which took place relating to the proposed convention centre she would know that it was proposed that office accommodation would be available. One area was to be for the potential use of a government department. I suggest to the honourable member that, if she is genuinely interested in pursuing the establishment of a convention centre, she should do as I am doing and support any group which is prepared to invest in the

SPECIAL BROADCASTING SERVICE
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications)-Pursuant to section 79zH of the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1977, I present the second annual report for 1979-80 of the Special Broadcasting Service.
COMMONWEALTH COUNCIL FOR RURAL RESEARCH AND EXTENSION
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report for

2228 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

North West Cape Naval Agreement

1979-80 of the Commonwealth Council for Rural Research and Extension.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report of the Industries Assistance Commission on certain four-wheel drive vehicles.
MARINE SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGIES RESEARCH GRANTS
SCHEME Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Marine Sciences and Technologies Research Grants Scheme report for 1980-81.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh)-Mr Speaker, I claim to have misrepresented. Mr SPEAKER:-Does the honourable gentleman wish to make a personal explanation? Mr SCOTT--c-Yes. Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed. Mr SCOTT-The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee), speaking in a debate on voting rights for migrants, is reported at page 2126 of Hansard as having said:
It is not uncommon for us as members of the Federal Parliament to be assailed by people at meetings and elsewhere about matters which we know are within the purview of local government or State government. Indeed, the honourable member for Hindmarsh once raised a matter at Question Time, I recall, with my colleague the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) about a matter that was fairly and squarely within the realm of a State Minister.
The question referred to by the Minister concerned the lead levels at the Thebarton Primary School. As part of my question, I asked:
Will the Minister give urgent consideration to making the necessary funds available to enable the school to be relocated away from the busy traffic intersection and flight path of the Adelaide Airport?
I further draw attention to page 82 of Budget PaperNo.11980-81, Under the heading 'Schools' the following statement is made at page 82:
. . . Commonwealth assistance is provided to both government and non-government schools systems for disadvantaged schools . . .
Mr Speaker, the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) and I issued a Press statement in which we clearly raised the question of disadvantaged schools. That was the point of the question: It was a Federal matter.

NORTH WEST CAPE NAVAL COMMUNICATION STATION
AGREEMENT
Ministerial Statement
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-by leave-On 5 May this year, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) repeated to this House two demands for renegotiation of the North West Cape Naval Communication Station Agreement. These were demands he first stated when he spoke to the National Press Club on 14 April 1981. The demands are:
Firstly, that Australia's cOnsent is mandatory for all orders to initiate military action which flow from the station; and secondly, that we be given firm and convincing assurances that the station will not be used to send orders for a first-strike nuclear attack or to initiate a limited strike.
Responding to my statement that these demands amounted to an Australian veto over United States use of the North West Cape Station, and that it was unreasonable to expect the United States to co-operate in such a veto, the honourable member said:
Does he know what the two most senior people in the American Embassy, apart from the Ambassador who is yet to arrive, have declared to me, to members of my staff and to at least one of my colleagues that they find no problems with what we are proposing. They understand completely our concern about national sovereignty. They believe they can work with the proposal.
I immediately had inquiries made of the United States Embassy about this statement by the honourable member. On 6 May, the United States Charge d'Affaires, Mr Stephen Lyne, wrote to me in the following terms:
Dear Mr Minister:
Statements made in Parliamentary debates yesterday by the Leader of the Opposition regarding the installations jointly operated by the Australian and US Governments in Australia have come to the Embassy's attention.
The Hansard for May 5, 1981, quotes Mr Hayden as stating that senior Embassy officials told him and his staff that they found "no problem with" and "can work with" his proposals. I wish to clarify that, insofar as Mr Hayden's statement refers to his two proposals that the North West Cape Agreement be renegotiated to provide for mandatory Australian consent to initiate military actions and convincing assurances that the Station not be used to send orders for first-strike nuclear attack or to initiate a limited strike, the Embassy did not give such assurances nor did it haVe the authority to give them.
With the Embassy's permission, I nqw table this letter. Although marked confidential the letter has since been declassified. I should noFwish a misunderstanding between my honourable friend and officers of the United States Embassy to become the central feature of our discussion of this important topic. My honourable friend might have misinterpreted some general comment by the Embassy-to the effect that, should a Labor government come to power, the United States

North West Cape Naval Agreement

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2229

Government would discuss any concerns about associated with that. It then related to joint de-

the facilities that that government might raise. fence facilities in this country-Nurrungar, Pine

This seems to me the sort of response that one Gap, Smithfield and North West Cape. I then

would expect from an Embassy in such outlined the reaction of the Deputy Leader of the

circumstances.

Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen), who ac-

Let me add that it would really be fruitless for us to become side-tracked by this issue. Clearly we cannot know how a United States government might respond to the Labor Party's demands regarding the North West Cape agreement until the Labor Party is able to form a government and formally put its proposals forward and require a governmental response. This is not the position at the present time. It remains for me to say that if there are some further briefings that my friend would like then I would be quite willing to facilitate those briefings at his convenience. I present

companied me on my visit to those facilities and both before and after that visit participated with me in quite extensive briefings and inquiries we projected at the people conducting the briefings at the Department of Defence. In relation to North West Cape I expressed certain reservations about the implications of how that facility could operate. I will not go over that. But, after I spoke I left the hall where the Press Club luncheon which I addressed took place and went to the bar-a perfectly understandable reaction.
Mr Killen-l went there, too.

the following paper:

Mr HAYDEN-Yes, and we both enjoyed

North West Cape Naval Communication Station good company. My private secretary, Mr Mike

Agreement-Ministerial statement, 12 May 1981.

Costello, was standing in the foyer near the recep-

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:

tion desk. He was approached by Mr McAndrew of the American Embassy. Mr McAndrew said,

That the House take note of the statement.

explicitly, the things I have stated. He not only

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (3.17)-The facts in relation to what it is claimed I said, as outlined by the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen), are correct. That is, I did say that the two most senior people at the American Embassy-the Ambassador not being present and therefore not included in that count-conveyed to me, members of my staff and at least one of my colleagues, on separate occasions, that they can find no problems with what we are proposing overall concerning my statement of 14 April to the National Press Club, which included, specifically, reference to the North West Cape. They stated that they understood completely the Opposition's concern about national sovereignty. They said that they believed they could work with the proposal. Mr Speaker, that is what I said was stated and I stand by my statement. There can be no ambiguity as to what was conveyed to me. The Minister for Defence was generous enough to say:
My honourable friend might have misinterpreted some general comment by the Embassy-
If I misinterpreted the general comment of Embassy spokesmen, so did several other people, mainly members of my staff and at least one colleague.

stated them~voluntarily-but also he said them in the hearing of my Press secretary, Mr Alan Ramsey. A little later Mr McAndrew entered the precincts of the bar at the National Press Club. He approached me and repeated those things to me. He repeated them in the hearing and presence of another member of my staff, Mr Michael Roche, a research officer, who heard the full discussion. Some of that discussion was overheard by MrCostello, who had joined us. Subsequently, I think in the first week of the Easter recess, but certainly during that recess, Mr McAndrew called at my office in Canberra. I was absent. He spoke again with Mr Costello and repeated the views which I have put; that is, that the Americans found no problems with what we were proposing, that they understood completely our concern about sovereignty and that they believed they could work with the proposals. That, comprehensively, was their view. There were no ifs or buts, no qualifications and no special reservations about any aspects of those proposals, including North West Cape.
My colleague Senator Gareth Evans tells me that unsolicitedly-all of these comments were unsolicited-Mr Stephen Lyne, charge d'affaires of the American Embassy; approached him and

I give honourable members the facts for the said exactly that too. It seems that there is now

record so that there is no doubt about the circumsome re-assessment of the view earlier extended

stances and the justification in association with by the American Embassy representatives. I re-

my claim. On 14 April I addressed the National peat: Firstly, none of us asked for these tes-

Press Club. It was a speech which covered, first of timonies to be expressed by those spokesmen, and

all, the relationship between the super-powers secondly, apart from being voluntary, they were

concerning nuclear strategic doctrine and matters given quite openly in the presence of other people

2230 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Science and Technology 1980-81

and were not in any sense what could be described as confidential comments. They were given openly and freely to several people and in the presence of several people. The only other observation I have to make on this matter is that the Minister for Defence was generous enough to say:
Clearly we cannot know how a United States government might respond to the Labor Party's demands regarding the North West Cape agreement, until the Labor Party is able to form a government and formally puts its proposals forward and require a governmental response.
That is a considerably diminished expression of view on this matter to that which the Minister put not just forthrightly but I thought provocatively about a fortnight ago when he made his statement in relation to this matter. It would be unfortunate if these matters were to be taken up with some sense of inflammation on the part of the people taking them up, if the debate were to get under way in circumstances somewhat frenetic and if we were to lose sight of the real issues at stake. These are powerful issues; they are crucial issues. They are central to so much that is related to the future of mankind. As I have said before, because of these joint facilities we are deeply involved in superpower strategic nuclear doctrine and the implications that flow from that. We need an informed and sober debate on these matters.
If there has been a misunderstanding as to the extent to which the American officials could present their views, then I accept that, but I will not accept that I, members of my staff or my colleague Senator Evans have misunderstood in any way at all what has been said. I am prepared to leave the matter there and to debate the issues. But, if it is the wish of any person concerned about this, from the Government side or from the American Embassy, to make an issue orit then I am happy to enter the lists and continue the debate.
Debate (on motion by Mr Bourchier) adjourned.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 1980-81
Ministerial Statement
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt Minister for Science and Technology)-I have pleasure in tabling the science and technology statement 1980-81. I seek leave to make a statement in connection with this document.
Leave granted.
Mr THOMSON-The Government's aim is to advance the welfare of the Australian people. The great social and humanitarian reforms of the last century were largely possible because of increased industrial productivity, better health services and

improved communications. Science and technology played a major role. It is equally true that science and technology will underwrite Australia's economic and social development in the future.
Questions of the Government's role, the ways of co-ordinating science policy and establishing priorities must fall within this aim. The first science statement was tabled last year and I believe the document was a major development in helping to answer science policy questions. It provided a new basis for analysis, observing changes and providing data.
The response to the science statement has been positive and this year it has been expanded to cover not only research and development but also a range of scientific and technological activities. It is now the science and technology statement, not just the science statement, and some new figures have to be treated cautiously. It is a post-Budget analysis of Commonwealth expenditure listed by agency, Ministry and by socia-economic objectives. I would like to thank fellow Ministers, their officers and the Australian Science and Technology Council for their help in compiling the statement.
Development of Science and Technology Policy
In formulating Government policies towards science and technology, both long and short term factors have to be examined and taken into account. Over the past decade there have been significant changes in community attitudes to science and technology which cannot be ignored. Presently there is concern about job replacing technology, the environment, the availability of a highly skilled work force and a continuing supply of energy. In addition, I sense a growing fear of the impact of science and technology among the less well informed.
Looking towards the year 2000 there are several factors which will have an important impact on science and technology policies. Some examples are the emergence of new technologies, such as biotechnologies and micro-electronics, changes in the patterns of energy supply and demographic changes. Coherent and far-sighted policies are needed to meet these challenges. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has pointed out that these challenges and changes will require a different sort of policy response-one in which science and technology policy is taken together with economic and social policy.
Australian science itself must also recognise these changes and respond to them. This is as

Science and Technology 1980-81

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2231

much the responsibility of individual scientists as it is of governments and other bodies responsible for formulating science policy.
Government role
The Government is determined that the science and technology sector should not be considered in isolation. It must be linked and co-ordinated with other sectors such as manufacturing, tertiary and primary industries and energy to form a coherent research policy to meet national goals. Scientific, economic and social policies must be integrated. At the same time the public must be kept continually informed. Society should not be put in a position of being swept along by new developments without influencing their direction. This is the basic reason that I have produced the science and technology statement. To help meet these objectives a four point plan was outlined last year in the science statement. The plan balances the demands for science and technology to meet community needs and problems with public concern over possible side effects from new technologies. The plan is to stimulate and support basic research, applied research, to transfer research results into the market place and to minimise any undesirable impacts of new technologies.
Government Support for Industrial Research
Apart from establishing policy and priorities, governments are examining the extent to which they should promote innovation through funding of basic research and industrial research and development. This question was discussed at an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Conference of Science and Technology which I attended earlier this year. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development reports are challenging the prevailing economic wisdom that the solution to current economic problems lies solely with conventional demand management mechanisms. Major recommendations focus on the critical importance of restoring declining innovation. Co-ordinated technological and economic policies must be used to create a growing economy. Governments throughout the world have accepted this premise.
For the information of honourable members, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the Declaration adopted by Ministers at the OECD meeting.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows--
ANNEX
Declaration on Future Policies for Science and Technology
Ministers responsible for policies concerning science and technology in the OECD Member countriesand in

Yugoslavia, meeting in the framework of the Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy of the Organisation;
Recognising the essential contribution of science and technology to the economic and social dcvelopmen t of both industrialised and developing countries;
Recognising that common challenges now face Member countries, such as the slow-down in economic growth, high levels of unemployment, low rates of productivity increase, persistent inflation, structural imbalances in their economies, increased energy prices and environmental problems;
Recognising that science, technology and innovation have a vital role to play in the resolution of these difficulties and in responding to the needs and aspirations of society;
Recognising that fundamental research plays an indispensible role in the generation of ideas and new knowledge, including those needed for future technological innovation;
Recognising that national policies have an important influence on the vigour of the scientific enterprise and innovation;
Recognising that progress in science and technology depends upon many forms of international co-operation and on the widest possible circulation of ideas and new knowledge between scientists, between institutions and between countries;
Recognising the value of continuing international consultation on the formulation, implementation and assessment of policies concerning science and technology;
- The mention of Member countries is deemed to apply also to the European Communities.
DECLARE
That it is necessary to integrate policies for science and technology with other aspects of government policy, particularly economic, social, industrial, including energy, education and manpower policies;
That the following require attention in the formulation and implementation of policies for science and technology in Member countries and in Yugoslavia:
A. With regard to technological innovation, steps to:
(i) promote innovation as an objective within the framework of economic, social and regulatory policies;
(ii) assign priority to investment in research, development and innovation so as to ensure that short-term pressures do not jeopardise the sources of future economic growth; higher levels of employment and structural adjustment.
(iii) develop favourable conditions for innovation, including the openness of markets, and encourage risk-taking in innovation in the public and private sectors;
(iv) give particular attention to the innovative potential of small and medium-sized firms;
(v) stimulate research, development and innovation to increase the effectiveness and quality of output in the public and social services sectors;
(vi) stimulate research, development and innovation related to worldwide problems in such areas as energy, raw materials, environment, food, urban conditions, health and the work environment;
(vii) promote the difTusion of technological information;
B. With regard to long-term research, steps to:
(i) maintain the strength and continuity of fundamental and long-term research to increase the stock of basic scientific and technological knOWledge throughout the range of disciplines:

2232 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Science and Technology 1980-81

(ii) reinforce the research capacity of the universities and other relevant institutions, having appropriate regard to problems of their funding, administration, research facilities, staffing, and their links with industry and the public sector, and with other sectors ofsociety;
C. With regard to the social, economic, cultural and political effects of technological change, steps to: (i) take due account of the social and cultural implications of new technologies, in respect of the employment, mobility and training of the labour force; (ii) monitor the introduction and spread of new technologies while attempting to assess their possible future implications for the economy, the environment and society; (iii) facilitate public participation in the definition of major technological orientations, particularly through public access to information concerning their foreseeable long-term impacts, and through fostering public understanding of science and technology;
D. With regard to international co-operation in science and technology steps to: (i) stimulate the exchange of scientists, engineers and students between Member countries, facilitate the exchange of scientific and technical information, and encourage the flow of technologies;
(ii) explore new opportunities for co-operation in areas of common interest, with a view to making more effective use of human resources and major research facilities, to sharing of costs, to obtaining more rapid results, and to mounting large scale efforts where these are necessary for an effective attack on problems;
(iii) encourage at the international level measures conducive to an improved scientific basis for regulations in areas such as health, safety and the environment;
(iv) pursue a broad range of activities in cooperation with developing countries to strengthen their scientific and technological capabilities, and contribute to the implementation and assessment of these efforts;
Ministers further declare that OECD should: (i) give increased emphasis to the integration of scientific and technological factors within the activities of the Organisation and, in particular, within its work on the various aspects of economic policy; (ii) improve the understanding of factors underlying the innovative performance of Member countries, and of the effects of international transfers of technology; (iii) assist the less-industrialised Member countries as they tackle the problems of increasing the contribution of science and technology to their economic and social development;
(iv) continue the exchange of experiences and information among Member countries concerning policies for science and technology, and facilitate the definition of such policies;
(v) facilitate the assessment by Member countries of the consequences of technological change upon economic growth, rates of employment, productivity increase, structural changes in the economy, upon the environment and upon society at large;
(vi) facilitate the identification by Member countries of both research areas in which they would wish to cooperate and arra'ngements conducive to such co-operation;

(vii) facilitate the efforts of Member countries to strengthen the scientific and technological potential and capabilities of developing countries.
Mr THOMSON-I thank the House. The Australian Government has been involved in 'pump priming' industrial research and development through the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Scheme. It is the Government's plan to use the scheme to increase employment, raise productivity and maintain the competitiveness of Australian industry. This year $53m is being spent. We believe this investment will repay itself many times over in the future. My Department has conducted a survey of estimated benefits which companies expect to receive this decade from project grants under the scheme. The companies estimate that new sales generated in this period will total $8,600m in domestic sales and a similar amount in exports. Jobs created will be an estimated 29,000.
Applied Science
The Government is continuing to support Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation research aimed at assisting Australian industry. In particular, CSIRO is stepping up its work in the manufacturing and energy sectors. A new Division of Manufacturing Technology has been created. Initially it will focus on the processing of metals and computer-aided manufacturing.
Also CSIRO is establishing a new Institute of Energy and Earth Resources formed from existing CSIRO energy research activities and the nonnuclear research sections of the Australian Atomic Energy Commission. Research will be expanded in such areas as fossil fuels, mining of energy resources, energy conservation, alternative fuels and renewable energy. Policy will be formulated in co-operation with my colleague, the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick). In marine sciences, CSIRO will be expanding activities also to assist the fishing industry and the exploitation of off-shore resources.
Basic Research
I have concentrated mainly on policy considerations, particularly in meeting practical problems. Basic research must not be ignored. It is a paradox that, in order to applyscience more directly and effectively to problems, we must extend our knowledge of basic science. Without this fOlindation successful te'chnology transfer will not be possible. Basic research must be funded at a realistic level without necessarily being measured against short term application. The need of man to extend constantly his knowledge of himself and

Science and Technology 1980-81

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2233

the universe is an undeniable argument for the funding of basic research.
The Government mainly funds basic research through the Australian Research Grants Scheme, the Australian Marine Sciences and Technologies Advisory Committee and the National Energy Research, Development and Demonstration Council. Over the past few years the Australian Science and Technology Council has examined the role of the Australian Research Grants Scheme, the role of university research, the objectives of funding basic research and the appropriate levels of funding. The Government has agreed to a recommendation from the Australian Science and Technology Council that the role of the Australian Research Grants Scheme must be used to support the most outstanding research projects. We have agreed also to an Australian Science and Technology Council recommendation that the universities themselves should allocate their internal research funds to give greater support for good quality research. Even greater emphasis will be placed on excellence as the basis of the Australian Research Grants Scheme support for research.
Role of private sector I am concerned that the private sector is still not investing enough in research and development. The Industrial Research and Development Incentives Scheme has arrested an alarming slump in industry spending in this area during the mid-seventies. There has been a slow upturn and I am challenging private enterprise to increase its spending in this important area, Research and development are essential if we are to compete internationally. Yet OECD figures indicate that spending by Australian industry is very low compared with other Western countries. I would like to see research and development spending by industry more than doubled in this decade. The whole innovative process from invention to commercial marketing will have to be strengthened also in line with this aim.
The Australian Government makes an unequal contribution to research and development spending in Australia, currently accounting for about 70 per cent of the estimated total of $1,200m. The Government should not be expected to upgrade that figure further unless industry also greatly increases its research and development funding. It is in the interest of the private sector to increase its own effort and, in so doing, create new jobs. Industries not willing to do this run the risk of being left behind, and, as such, should not expect government protection. Australia's financial institutions also have been tardy in providing risk

capital to develop and commercialise new products and processes.
Along with resources development, the creation of specialised high technology industries is necessary for Australia's long term economic well being. My Department has conducted forums bringing together financiers and high technology entrepreneurs. Matters discussed included changes to the capital market, establishing a specialist venture capital financing body and taxation incentives. We are planning also a high level symposium bringing together the Academy of Technological Sciences, financiers, and the Government to look at these points. The House will be aware that the Campbell Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System is examining these and other related points.
Conclusion Australian science and technology policy must be integrated with economic and social goals. If not, the nation's scientific and technological resources will be wasted. All sections of the economy must play their part in supporting science and technology if Australia is to be counted among the technologically advanced countries of the world. High technology industries must be created. Present industrial processes and products must incorporate the latest technology and must be basic research promoted. Australia must maintain and improve its data base of technological and scientific knowledge otherwise we will lose jobs and business opportunities to other countries. We must not forget that science is a cultural activity essential to the spirit of mankind. This Government has adopted policies aimed at making the best use of science and technology for the economic and social advancement of all Australians. In pursuit of these goals, the Government is acting to minimise the undesirable social consequences of new technologies. A special subcommittee of the Australian Science and Technology Council has been established to advise the Government on this matter. The science and technology statement will be the factual basis on which scientists, policy makers and the public can work. I present the following paper:
Science and Technology 1980-81-Ministerial statement, 12 May 1981.
Motion (by Mr Hodgman) proposed.
That the House take note of the papers.
MrBARRY JONES (Lalor) (3.40)-TheOpposition welcomes an opportunity to comment on the statement Science and Technology 1980-81. There are several points where we can offer strong support for a bipartisan policy on science

2234 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Science and Technology 1980-81

and technology: First, recognition of the central role played by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation-an enormous national asset and worth every cent of its $256m; second, concern that the private sector is still not investing enough in research and development; third, development of science and technology polcies in an economic and social context as recommended by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development Council of Ministers, attended recently by the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson); fourth, increased government expenditure in research and development, which already is about $840m for the year; fifth, support of basic research, broadly defined, even where an immediate economic application is not obvious; and sixth, recognition of the significance of some of the newly emerging high technology industries such as biotechnology.

his case is the greatest conversion since the Damascus Road. As far as this Government is concerned, we have a Minister who is trying his best to get a greater degree of government involvement in science and technology and a free marketeer group behind him and in the Ministry which says: 'No, slash it out. Leave it all to the market'. I applaud the Minister for saying that he does not believe in that. We do not believe in it either. I am glad that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has come into the House. I welcome him. The Minister also said:
The Government is determined that the science and technology sector sh01.ild not be considered in isolation.
We agree.
It must be linked and co-ordinated with other sectors such as manufacturing, tertiary and primary industries and energy to form a coherent research policy to meet national goals. Scientific, economic and social policies must be integrated.

However, the Minister's statement is inadequate because it evades or ignores the economic and social problems which face the nation in areas related to science and technology. There is a fundamental contradiction between the interventionist philosophy advanced by the Minister, which we will gladly support, and the Friedmanite views advanced so recently by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the razor gang. Let me quote what the Minister said:
OECD reports are challenging the prevailing economic wisdom that the solution to current economic problems lies solely with the conventional demand management mechanisms.
We agree.
Major recommendations focus on the critical importance of restoring declining innovation. Co-ordinated technological and economic policies must be used to create a growing economy.
He then said:
Governments throughout the world have accepted this premise.
I can think of a few examples that do not-the Australian Government, for example. The Minister advocates priming the pump. The free marketeers who sit behind the Minister want to sell the pump. They have no interest in having further investment in technology and science. Tell the razor gang that we want more pump priming, that we recognise that we have to invest far more before we can expect to get an economic return. Tell that to the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher). Tell it to the honourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton) or the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) or the honourable member for Eden-Monaro (Mr Sainsbury).
Mr Young-Or Bendigo.
Mr BARRY JONES-Or the honourable member for Bendigo (Mr Bourchier), although

There are several outstanding omissions from the factors which the Minister said ought to be taken into consideration. There are no references to the information sector of the economy or to education. The word 'education' never appears in the statement. In 1975 an OECD conference in Paris recommended recognising that information was itself a vital factor of production and that we ought to recognise information-based employment, that is to say, teaching, research, the media, the arts, office work, public services, and many business activities such as banking, insurance, and real estate, which are dependent on the collection, processing and dissemination of information, as a separate employment sector. The information sector is recognised as the largest single component of the United States economy, with about 45 per cent of employment. The Australian figure is above 30 per cent. It is about time we recognised this as a separate sector, its needs and its significance but it is completely ignored in the Minister's statement.
The Australian Government is also pursuing a policy of benign neglect in respect of education. It sees resources exclusively as something which is dug up out of the ground. It does not see resources in human terms. I blush for the Minister, if he does not blush for himself, after the razor gang report urged that the Commonwealth should divest itself of its national responsibilities in education and transfer them back to the States. How can we possibly have a rational and coherent-coherent was the word the Minister used-set of national goals if education is to be divided and sent back to the States, saying: 'You work out in your individual areas what you want to do with the nation's education'.
Mr Scott-Irresponsible.

Science and Technology 1980-81

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2235

Mr BARRY JONES-Quite so. About 40 per cent of Australian research is conducted in universities, much of it by people pursuing second or later degrees-in other words, precisely the people singled out for the slash of the razor gang. Australia cannot expect to expand its research and development, whether industrially based or not, and contract its educational base. We cannot do these two things at the same time. It is an absurdity. The Minister is trying to push for an expansion in industrial research and development, but at the same time his base-the educational base-is being undercut by the razor gang. That contraction is a recipe for disaster. Yesterday afternoon I was at the Engineering School at Monash University. The Dean, a very dis tinguished engineer, Professor Lance Endersbee, the outgoing President of the Institution of Engineers of Australia, made the point that because of the starvation of funds and because of extraordinarily low contribution of industry to the work the university is doing-so much of its work is directly related to industrythey find that only 20 per cent of post-graduate engineering students at Monash are Australian residents.
Dr Cass-What?
Mr BARRY JONES-I will repeat that. This was said in the presence of other professors. It was not just a casual piece of conversation. Four other professors were discussing it. Of post-graduate engineering students at Monash, 80 per cent of students are not Australian residents. We need to make it perfectly clear that the Australian Labor Party has always welcomed the bringing in of students from South East Asia and other countries. But where are the Australians? Where is the expansion we need in that area so that we can provide not only for those numbers of people from South East Asia but also have adequate representation of Australians? The failure of the Government to provide facilities-I must add too, the failure of our own young people to respond to the challenge-is a matter for very grave concern.
I urge the Minister to use all the strength at his command to persuade the razor gang and the Government that, in the national interest they must reverse the decisions they have made on education. They have come to regard education as a kind of non-essential activity, almost a wasteful activity. They see expenditure on education as a cost, they do not see it as an investment and a lot of them see post-graduate and research work as 'caviare for the general'. They do not really see it as being essential, central to the whole future of this country. The Minister rightly deplores the failure of industry to pay its share of the costs of

research and development. The Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment report entitled 'Industrial Research and Development in Australia' deals in Table 4.15 with the ratio of business enterprise research and development to government research and development in OECD countries. I seek leave of the House to incorporate that table in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as follolVs- .

RATIO OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE R&D TO GOVERNMENT R&D, OECD COUNTRIES, 1973
AND 1975

1973

1975

Sweden Belgium Japan USA Germany Italy Netherlands France Norway Finland UK Spain Denmark Canada
Ireland Australia Portugal New Zealand

8.1

8.6

3.6

8.6

5.0

4.8

4.6

4.3

4.2

4.2

n,a.

3.0

2.9

2.9

2.4

2.6

2.6

2.5

3.1

2.4

2.5

2.4

1.0

1.7

2.1

1.6

1.1

1.2

0.7

0.7

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.4

Source: OECD data
Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the House. I will summarise what the report says, and it underscores what the Minister was saying: In countries such as Sweden, for example, there is between $8 and $9 of business investment in research and development for every $1 equivalent spent by the Government. The report goes on:
. . . in 1975 there were only three countries, apart from Australia, in which more than half of GERD--
That is, gross expenditure on research and development-
was performed in the government sector. These countries were Ireland, New Zealand and Portugal. Only two of these countries, New Zealand and Portugal, perform less GERD . . . in the Business Enterprise sector than Australia.
The tragedy is that if we look at the figures provided in this excellent report, then go back to the science and technology statement, and then add the Minister's words today, we find that the situation is worsening. Government funding of Australian GERD in 1968-69 was 46 per cent. In 1973-74 it was 56 per cent, in 1976-77 it was 64 per cent and in 1978-79 it was 62 per cent. The Minister's statement indicates that it is now 70 per cent. Industry, where its own survival is involved,

2236 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Science and Technology 1980-8/

is kicking in only 30 per cent towards industrial research and development. That is a national scandal.
Whilst I agree with so much of what the Minister said, he failed to deal with the question of why this is so. He observes the fact; he does not say why it happens. The reason is Australia has come to depend on technology which is derivative and, because we have derivative technology, there is felt to be no need to develop our own. If one goes to the companies which determine so much of the commanding heights of the Australian economy-the food processing, computers, drugs, chemicals, plastics and petrol industries and so many other areas-and says: 'What about doing research and development?' They will say: 'Why? It is all done at head office. Why do we need to do it in Australia? What is the point of doing it? It is all done overseas'. As I said last week, why does General-Motors' need to do basic research and development in Australia on the Commodore? It is a German car. It was developed there. It would be completely superfluous to go through the exercise here. That is a reason which the Minister did not touch on.
We are following step by step with the Natsemi project in Canberra the same fatal path as we followed in the case of General Motors' and IBM. We are saying: 'If you come over and do it for us, we will buy your product'. J am glad to see the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) present.
Mr Thomson-I am sure she agrees with you!
Mr BARRY JONES-She agrees with me 100 per cent on the question of derivative technology. The Natsemi project is another example of that. We are following the same pattern. The Minister suggested, although he did not exactly say it, that there is a certain lack of entrepreneurial spirit in Australia. The Government has done very little to encourage innovative small companies. That is a very important task for the Minister in the next 18 months, or however long the Government lasts. In the United States of the 'Fortune 1,000' companies-that is to say, the 1,000 companies with the largest turnover-about 500 did not exist in 1950. In the United States, as new technologies have developed, new firms have 'hived off' from already existing corporations or universities and often they have further subdivided into a new generation of firms. Most innovation and employment generation has come from small, new firms. Some of the new high technology firms, such as Intel, Genentech and Cetus, are examples of this.

In Australia we have a completely different tradition. We tend not to develop our own technology, preferring to buy it off the shelf, and when new technological firms are developed they tend to be owned or taken over by already existing companies. This is the exact reverse of the American hiving off process. Professor R. W. Connell has calculated that of Australia's top 50 companies only four have been established since 1936. None of these four is Australian owned. All are based on corporate structures which had an Australian presence long before 1936. We have in Australia a corporate profile of an ageing country. It is not the corporate profile of a young country.
The Minister touched on the question of job creation. I ought to say a few words about that as well. The Minister said that his Department had conducted a survey of estimated benefits which companies expect to receive this decade from project grants under the Government's Industrial Research and Development Incentives Scheme. Unfortunately, that paper is not incorporated in the science report. I hope that the Minister will make it available to the House. The companies estimate that new sales generated will total $8,600m in domestic sales and a similar amount in export sales and create an estimated 29,000 jobs. Like the great mineral boom, we wish them all the best of British luck. But we would like to see some evidence of where those jobs actually will be created. With an approximate average increase of 120,000 jobs per annum for this decade-a total of 1.2 million jobs-29,000 new jobs will be the equivalent of 2.4 per cent of the total. Even if the estimate is correct, this leaves a shortfall of 97.6 per cent in the potential new job market, bearing in mind that many of the former job areas will be subject to sharp contraction due to technological change. So we need much more information about that.
The most disappointing part of the statement-it ended not with a bang but a whimper-concerns who makes decisions on science and technology. Instead of saying that matters would be referred to the Parliament for its consideration and decision, the Minister says: 'It's all right. All this will be dealt with by a subcommittee of the Australian Science and Technology Council'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER eMr Millar)~ Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Debate (on motion by Mr Bourchier) adjourned.

Joint Committee on the ACT

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2237

INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES
AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Membership Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Mr Speaker has received advice from the Leader of the Government in the Senate that he has nominated Senator Reid to be a member of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Report Mr FRY (Fraser)-On behalf of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory, I present the report of the Committee on proposals for variations of the plan of layout of the city of Canberra and its environs (73rd series), together with extracts of the minutes of proceedings. Ordered that the report be printed. Mr FRY-by leave-The report I have just tabled deals with item 15 in the 73rd series of variations of the plan of layout of the City of Canberra and its environs. The Committee presented its report on the other 16 items contained in the 73rd series on 5 May 1981. At a meeting to consider the 73rd series the Committee decided to defer consideration of this item until further information on the proposal had been obtained from the Department of the Capital Territory. Variation 15 is in the Jerrabombera-Tuggeranong district and is part of the Hume industrial estate. It concerns the construction of a road which would service industrial sites. The industry which would initially use this road is Koppers Australia Pty Ltd, a timber processing plant. The proposed road reservation is in the southern portion of the estate designated by the National Capital Development Commission as an area identified for large-scale industrial use. The main concern of this Committee and the reason further investigation of this proposal was undertaken was due to the lack of legislation controlling air, noise and water pollution in the Territory. The Committee wishes to place on record its disappointment concerning the slow progress of proposed pollution legislation which has been under consideration for some years. Assurances have now been given by the Department of the Capital Territory that such legislation will be introduced by the end of 1981 and the Committee

welcomes this development. Tn its examination of the proposal the Committee is not satisfied with the practice of burning waste timber in the open which is presently taking place in the area. This is discussed in greater detail in the report. The Committee approves variation 15 but recommends that the period of grace for existing operators to conform with the proposed pollution legislation in the Australian Capital Territory be reduced to three years from when the new ordinance takes effect.
I would like to advise the House that at the meeting of the Joint Committee this morning Senator Margaret Reid was nominated as Chairman of the Committee to replace the late Senator John Knight. I take the opportunity of thanking the members of the Committee for their cooperation and support during the time when I was Acting Chairman.
FUNDING FOR THE STATES Discussion of Matter of Public Importance Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Fraser Government's provocative and improper appropriation of funds due to the States.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number afmembers required by thi! Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (3.59)-The Fraser Government's provocative and improper appropriation of funds due to the States is a national scandal. It is the cause of notorious comment throughout the media. It has established widespread public disgust at the squalid way in which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) went about this exercise. All that it has achieved is a split in the Government ranks and a welding into a common front of the State Premiers-regardless of political philosophy-determined to repudiate this tawdry behaviour by both the Prime Minister and the Treasurer (Mr Howard). It is in this respect that the Prime Minister is not only answerable but also responsible to this Parliament. One would never presume this to be a fact. It is almost impossible to capture the Prime Minister in this Parliament so that he will participate in a debate in which he should properly present the Government's defence of its actions which have led to widespread discontent and condemnation. This is such a case.

2238 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Fundingfor the States

I guess the greatest difficulty the Prime Minister of the Fraser Government, at a point, therefore,

has with a debate like this is, being unwarned sevwhen it should be bathing in the full flush of suc-

eral days beforehand, he has no opportunity to cess, we find it in total disarray. Five and a half

recycle the old speech which we heard on the years after the initial election of the Fraser

occasion of the resignation of the former Minister Government, at a stage when there should be no

for Industrial Relations, the honourable member doubt as to the direction or the nature of policy,

for Kooyong (Mr Peacock), and last week on the with no requirement for refinement that would

occasion of the censure motion moved by the arise with a new government because of the

Opposition.

novelty and difficulties of certain policies, we find

The fact is that we have a Prime Minister in control of the. affairs of this country who, after some 30 years m this Parliament, is terrified at the pros~ect that he.might have to participate, off the cuff, In a debate In defence of his Government and his actions. I have to confess that I too would be terrified. I think the task is beyond human credulity or ability. Why will the Prime Minister not come into this Parliament and defend the Government, its actions and his own intolerable behaviour? I !epeat, we have a Prime Minister, a parliamentanan, who is absolutely terrified of the proper processes of parliament. So we have this situation where Question Time is an empty farce with the Prime Minister droning on endlessly and irrelevantly to questions which are put-the knight behind the doleful countenance. The forms o.f.the. House have to be exploited by the Oppos1tlOn In a desperate effort to draw the Prime Minister into debate in this Parliament.
I give honourable members this fact so that it is

that there are no policies and no programs and there is no direction for this country. Instead we have a government that is reeling about and tripping over itself like a drunken man on a mindless binge. It is directionless, it is careening about in a storm of distress that is created by its own incompetence. Regrettably the nation is afficted by a crisis prone Prime Minister. Look at some of those crises such as the Peacock affair and all of the unseemly, dirty washing hung out for the view of the community. Another crisis involves the freedom of information legislation. The Government senators believed the Prime Minister when he said that he wanted freedom of information and now he cannot understand why they are trying to establish that. Another one is the broadcasting and television legislation amendments, the Murdoch amendments-the deal for a mate, as it were. It is a total corruption of the proper processes and standards that one would expect in national government.

understood on the record: The only way in which we can feel s0Il'!-e certainty, but not total certainty, the only way m which we can draw the Prime Minister into a debate in this Parliament to defend properly his Government, its actions and his
?ehaviour, is to move a censure motion. However, 1t seems to me that to move censure motions week after week is a very inappropriate procedure and an improper standard to establish. Yet what alternative is left to the Opposition? It debases the coinage. But it is the only measure which is available to us if we are to have the Prime Minister speak to us. He does not speak to his own members much so I suppose we should not cavil too mu~h. But he s~ould speak to the people of Australia and outhne a defence of what his Government is about and how it got the country into this shambles. It is one of the strongest and wealthiest economies inherently in the world. There is no excuse for the problems that we have

It is bad enough under the backwards standards that apply in the Parliament of Queensland and under the Premier of Queensland. It is intolerable that there should be such a dilninution of standards at the national level. The uncertainty and conflict about civil aviation policies, the confusion about health policies and, of course last but not least, the conflict over the States all boils down to this: The affairs of this country, a strong and secure country which is entitled to confidence, are being run by a man who is inherently insecure. Day by day he is trying to prove to himself that he is tough and he tries to do that at the expense of his colleagues and at the expense of the unity and harmony of this country. Some time ago he said
that it was his purpose in government to establish co-operativeness with the States. I shall quote him exactly from his 1915 policy speech, in which he said:

had in the past several years under the Fraser

Administration. The fact is that administration of We will provide a sound basis of financial independence

Government is in a state of suspense as a result of the internal brawling of this Government. There should be an explanation.

and responsibility for the States and Local Governments with the most significant reform of the federal system since Federation.

I ask honourable members to consider these Our policy has been hailed around Australia by State and facts: Six months after the third election success Local Governments.

Fundingfor the States

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2239

that the Prime Minister is dishonest and dis-

It is the greatest advance in Federal-State relations since Federation.
That was all said before the Government tried it

honourable. He cannot be trusted. His word cannot be relied on. There can be no confidence in an association or in a working relationship with a man like that. That is the standing of the Prime

out.

Minister with Sir Charles Court. The $70m that

Mr Holding-Did he leak that?

the States have been deceitfully deprived of is important in a symbolic sense because it shows the

Mr HAYDEN-He is prepared to tell the pubsorts of qualities the Prime Minister applies in

lic about that. The following year in Decembergovernment and in his negotiation with respon-

bear this in mind because it is just so delightful sible public figures regardless of how close they

and delicious-he said:

may stand to him in political texture. It is import-

So, if these developmental proposals are to work it will reant also because it shows the qualities of a cheat quire the kind of co-operation that comes from people of our and a sneak. Those are squalid qualities.

political philosophy; the sort of co-operation that one finds

from Sir Charles Court or Mr Hamer. . .

This is not a game of fiscal bingo in which the

Should 1 say: 'Enough said'? Sir Charles Court, Mr Hamer, and every Premier in Australia now know that Fraser federalism is nothing more than a knee capping exercise designed to cripple the States. Let us hear what Sir Charles Court said about his colleague and friend, his party associate. He said that the Prime Minister's word is valueless and that the Prime Minister is dishonourable. He said that the Prime Minister disregards the States and that he has converted States into departments of the Federal Government. He goes on in an ancillary fashion to say that the hospital arrangements he is proposing are nothing more than a tax trap for the States whereby, in fact, they will end up far, far worse off. Of course by rearranging the basis for funding the States from income tax revenue to the total of revenue, he aims at disadvantaging the States because the fact is that with the elimination of tax indexation in any form at all the public will be paying $1 ,000m more in tax than they would if the Government had honoured its promise to preserve or to establish

Government is running a country, conducting the affairs of the nation and administering the national economy. It is a matter of responsible fiscal administration. The Government, in its negotiations with the States, establishes the level of expenditure which is proper for the States to receive. It allocates funds to the States on that basis. Those funds are not the Government's funds; they are the public's funds. They go back to the States to benefit the people living in the States. I repeat-J say this on the basis of experience as a former treasurer-that the assessments are made quite austerely and the States are not funded too abundantly. We are all in the same boat. We cannot have abundant funding because of limited resources. But it is nonsense to talk about parameters and the option for movement within those parameters and then, like a cheap braggart, give the story to the Press and expect that there will be no reaction. I guess that it is the quality of a braggart which more than anything else has offended the Australian community.

full tax indexation. I ask honourable members not The amount of $70m is small beer to the States

to take this from the Australian Labor Party bein terms of the overall disabilities that they will

cause it may be a little prejudiced. Let us get an suffer. One must admit that the State Premiers

open mind on this at least. Let us go to the South have been particularly green in buying this fiscal

Australian Premier, Mr Tonkin. He said: 'I have version of the Sydney Harbour Bridge. But it is

never seen anything so inept in all my life in polialso symptomatic of the way in which the affairs

tics'. He should be in the Labor Party. We have of the Fraser Government are conducted. We

been saying that for years. He continued:

have the Fraser Government leaking to the Press

Obviously the Commonwealth regards the States as members of a kindergarten. The Commonwealth was dishonest with us and did not give us our fair share. I cannot tol-

but not prepared to talk to the Parliament. Let me tell honourable members about the real nature of the disabilities. The total allocation of funds avail-

erate dishonesty. Our relations have been damaged irreparably. The whole thing stinks. In two words Mr Bjelke-Petersen said: 'It is a crooked dcaI'.

able to the States in real terms has been hacked back quite dramatically as against the preceding year. That will mean more unemployment at one

Sir Charles Court's searing condemnations were level or another; it will mean more government

contained in a letter which he sent to Liberal charges. At the State level, they are inequitable

members of parliament and which has been charges and they will be inflationary. It will mean

telexed to the newspapers of this country. 1repeat a reduction in the standard of services and the

that it is a condemnation from a friend who knows range of services available at the State level. In

the Prime Minister better than any of us. He said 1980-81, the actual allocation to the States is

2240 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Fundingfor the States

$6,541m. The amount that should have been allocated to them if allowances were made for inflationary movements and movements in population and wages was $6,821m-a $280m shortfall, to which must be added a shortfall of $267m in the health allocations. The States will have to make up the shortfall in one way or another. The total amount is nearly $550m. Let us project that figure in terms of employment-the total number of jobs at risk involved with that sort of shortfall. Directly, nearly 46,000 government employees could lose their jobs. But the multiplier effects will reach out into the community and into the private sector.' When these government employees lose their jobs, they will not spend money. There will be contractions elsewhere and there will be a multiplier figure of three, not the ignoble multiplier of 10, 12 or whatever figure strikes the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) when he is in the House. That will take the number of jobs in jeopardy to nearly 137,000. They will not all be lost in the public sector because governments will raise charges, but reducing spending outside government to pay for these things will reduce the number of jobs outside government. The State governments will not increase the employment of people at the rate they should to maintain standards. The consequence will be a diminution in standards.
Commonwealth-State relations are in a shambles. They are overridden by an atmosphere of total distrust. The Government is about to go into the June Loan Council meeting with this atmosphere prevailing. It will be a Loan Council meeting at which an impasse will arise. I want to move in a positive sense to suspend Standing Orders. I move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Leader of the Opposition moving-
That this House, in the light of the Prime Minister's admission that the States have been deprived of $70m to which they are entitled and the clear evidence, therefore, that the Fraser Government is appropriating funds to its own use which properly belong to the States, directs the Government to reconvene the Premiers' Conference immediately for the purpose of:
(a) Making the additional $70m available to the States; and
(b) taking such other steps as wiII restore the confidence of the States in the integrity of Commonwealth-State relations.
The problem is that the events of the past fortnight have confirmed and emphasised the flaws which we always knew existed in the Fraser Government. It is a government which lacks personal honour and integrity, a fact which the Premiers and the citizens of the States have discovered to their cost. It is a government that is paralysed

by the open divisions and bitter rivalries that fester within it. This Government which, at the last three elections, has promised us reliable and responsible administration, instead has reduced the nation to chaos and confusion. This Government, which is prepared to do nothing but favours for its few friends, is incapable of bringing harmony and unity to the nation. If we ever needed proof of these fundamental truths about this Government, we had it pushed in our faces by the extraordinary events of the past two weeks. By its disgraceful and deceitful behaviour, the Government has forfeited the trust of this Parliament and the respect of the Australian people.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (4.16)-1 second the motion. No more important a meeting than a reconvened Premiers Conference could take place at this time. For the reasons outlined today by my leader, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden)-I believe they would be supported by the whole nationit is important that the Premiers reassemble in Canberra next week to tell the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Treasurer (Mr Howard) clearly the real needs of their States. At Question Time this morning, the Prime Minister said, in effect: 'The Premiers decided to meet in secret without me'. Apparently, because of that, they are to be penalised. One could readily understand why the leaders of all the States would want to meet to have a uniform case to put forward to the Prime Minister and the Treasurer. It did not matter to the Prime Minister that he did not tell the Premiers that he had already met in secret with Cabinet and had decided not to give the Premiers as much as they were entitled to.
In fact, he withheld from them some $70m. There is an urgency about this situation. To rub salt into the wound, the Treasurer and the Prime Minister clearly indicated to the Press by leaking information that the Premiers could have got more if they had asked for it. The Prime Minister has belittled the Premiers of every State. There is a complete fragmentation and a complete confrontation between the Federal Government and the Premiers of all States. Let us place on record that this is the same Prime Minister who said: 'A federal system offers protection against those elements which Liberals abhor'. The real problem we have now is that every Liberal Party leader in this country is against the Prime Minister and the Treasurer. Why would there not be some consternation? Let us have a look at the urgency of the situation.
You would understand, Mr Deputy Speaker, that under the new health arrangements it appears that Queensland is to get less money than,

Fundingfor the States

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2241

for example, is going to Western Australia. Queensland is to get a mere $142m and Western Australia $146m. Obviously, Western Australia is entitled to $146m, but why has the amount given to Queensland been reduced to a lesser figure than that allocated to Western Australia, bearing in mind that Western Australia has 8.7 per cent of the total national population and Queensland's has 15.2 per cent of the total national population? There are very good reasons why the Premiers Conference should be reconvened. Nobody has heard an explanation of why there was a diminution of $280m in funds provided. The scheme announced by the Federal Government, which was approved and accepted by the Premiers in February 1976, was that they were to get 39.87 per cent of personal income tax collections. The offer on this occasion meant really that they got something like 38 per cent. Was there any understanding that the Commonwealth would cut its
share of the funds? Not at all. These are matters coming from the Premiers. They want to reassemble here next week because they have made very clear that they have rejected the offer made by the Commonwealth. It is for that reason and the reasons that we went into in detail last week that this conference should be reconvened. A reconvened meeting would consider not just the additional $70m. It would be reconvened also on the basis of honouring the arrangements that were made. The Premiers can put forward a very good case because if they had received 39.87 per cent of personal income tax they would have received a 13 per cent increase in funding not 9 per cent, which has been given to them. Of course, as we explained last week, it was suggested that they received 10 per cent. The only reason they got an additional one per cent was on the basis that there had been incorporated in the revenue grants money that had previously been allocated for specific purpose grants. Wherever one turns at the
present time and whatever city one is in in Australia, one finds a whole nation in uproar because the Premiers-State leaders-have been deceived and cheated of moneys to which the Australian people are rightfully entitled. Let me place on record that every dollar that is received by way of tax is taken out of a constituent's pocket. Is the Government now saying that the States have to find more money for schools, hospitals and transport? If so, people will have to pay additional State taxes. That is a form of double taxation. It is for that reason that the people are
prepared to decimate the Government at the polls. If the Government were to go to an election tomorrow, it would be lucky on the basis of what has happened to win even 20 seats. Every Premier
would be working against it.

Mr HowardYou don't believe that.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I believe it because I thought that normally you were honourable in your approach. But the Government has given itself away in recent days. Once a person, no matter what walk of life he is in, is found to be someone whose word cannot be trusted, he will never get any more support. The problems facing this country at the moment are immense. The proposition that the Commonwealth Government as the tax gatherer is going to cheat and deceive those who pay taxes will bring about its undoing. It is for those reasons that we encourage the Government to bring the Premiers here next week, offer them the $70m - -
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (4.19)-The Government is opposed to the suspension of Standing Orders. It is opposed to the motion for two reasons. The first reason is that the motion incorrectly states what has been said by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on behalf of the Government over the past week. At no stage has the Prime Minister or anybody else on behalf of the Government said or conceded that the money referred to by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) belongs to the States or that it is money of which the States have been deprived.
If that is a proposition that members on the other side of the House contest, let me take them to the ultimate source of authority on the subject of tax sharing between the Commonwealth and the States, namely, the existing States (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976, the legislation which was introduced after the tax sharing arrangements were made between the Commonwealth and the States and which has constantly been referred to by those who criticise the position of the Government. Let me read to those people section 13 of the Act. This is the total answer to those who claim that there is an entitlement to additional money by the States. This is the total answer to those who claim that Standing Orders should be suspended. Section 13 of that Act reads--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr HOWARD-Of course members of the Opposition do not want to hear this because it happens to be relevan t to the subject. Section 13 states:
(1) The Government of the Commonwealth shall. before 30 June 1981, consult with the Governments of the States with a view to determining whether any change is desirable in

2242 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Fundingfor the States

the provisions of this Act and submitting to the Parliament legislation to give effect to any changes that the Government of the Commonwealth considers to be desirable as a result of the consultation.

terms of the legislation which governs tax sharing arrangements between the Commonwealth and the States it is a matter, after the processes of con-

So there can be no doubt that under the legislation that it is ultimately, after consultation, a matter for the Commonwealth Government to decide whether any amendment of the income tax sharing legislation is desired. The fact of the matter is that on the basis of that the whole proposition advanced by the Leader of the Opposition

sultation, for the Commonwealth Government and for the Commonwealth Government alone-to decide what arrangements should be made. This legislation talks about changes that the Commonwealth considers to be desirable as a result of those consultations.
Let there be no doubt that the Premiers Confer-

in aid of a--

ence held last week was a Premiers Conference

Mr Young-I take a point of order. Mr Deputy Speaker, I think that you will agree with me that decency necessitates that the Prime Minister should be here to answer these charges.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order.

held as a result of the urgings of the States. Let there be no doubt that the States wanted further discussions and wanted a review of the tax sharing arrangements. Let there be no doubt that that consultation was held not only in consequence of the terms of the existing legislation and particularly in terms of the section which I have just read,

Mr Young-The Prime Minister should be but also in terms of the points of understanding

here, not the Treasurer.

which govern the financial arrangements between

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Orde:f! The honourable member will resume his seat.
Mr Young-Let him tell us whether the State Premiers want to come.

the Commonwealth and the States. It was as a result of matters raised by the States at the meeting of the Premiers Conference in 1980 and as a result of meetings that were held separately from the Commonwealth by the States between the Prem-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The iers Conference in June 1980 and the conference

honourable member will resume his seat.

which took place last week and the formulation of

Mr HOWARD-I think what I have just said is singularly relevant to the terms of the motion

a point of view by the States that was presented to the Commonwealth, that that meeting took place.

moved by the Leader of the Opposition. The But, ultimately, as in all cases in which one

motion says that the States have been deprived of party has to make a decision on how much money

$70m to which they are entitled. How can they be is to be provided and other parti;;:s have to make

entitled in circumstances where the Act of this decisions on how that money is to be spent, there

Parliament which governs the actions of the Comhas to be a point at which a decision is made by

monwealth Government says it is a matter for the the Government to provide the money and that,

Commonwealth Government, not the governof course, is what has happened in this case. That

ments of the States, to present recommendations decision was taken by the Commonwealth

to the Parliament. So, on that count, the motion Government in the circumstances that have been

of the Leader of the Opposition is irrelevant. He is described last week, during debate in this Parlia-

trying to establish a case for the suspension of ment and in response to media inquiries over the

Standing Orders which is also irrelevant.

past week. So it is incorrect to suggest that there is

It is little wonder, therefore, that it took eight minutes of the 15 minutes allocated to the proposer of a matter of public importance for the Leader of the Opposition even to reach the question of tax sharing with the States. It was not until the last three minutes of his remarks that he even got on to the specifics of the Premiers Conference of the last week. No charge is more insubstantial, no charge is more inaccurate and no charge is more irrelevant than that the money we are talk-

any substance in a proposition that there was a legal entitlement to a particular amount of money after 1 July. That is what is implied in the words of the Leader of the Opposition; that is what has been implied by some of the Premiers in their statements around Australia over the past week. We are told that in some way there was a legal entitlement to a sum of money after 1 July other than the sum of money which came out of the Premiers Conference last week.

ing about belongs to other than the taxpayers of Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (4.29)-Rarely

Australia. The proposition that in some way this have we heard so much drivel from a Treasurer as

money belongs either to the Commonwealth we just heard. The Treasurer (Mr Howard)

Government or to the State governments is a talked about an Act of Parliament. Of course the

totally incorrect assumption. That money belongs Commonwealth has the final say. No one disputes

to the Australian taxpayers. Under the clear that. But the issue is: What were the agreements

Fundingfor the States

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2243

made with the Premiers and what were the arConference. The Treasurer talks about there

rangements entered into under the new federalism being consultation. Every Premier rejected out of

proposals? The truth of the situation is that the hand the arrangements with the Commonwealth.

States were guaranteed that there would be no There was no consultation. The Treasurer told

real reduction for the current financial year. An the Premiers that that was all the Commonwealth

agreement was made in terms of the promises that could pay and all the Commonwealth was pre-

were made on federalism back in 1976. The whole pared to give. The Treasurer told a lie because

basis for this move is to try to get the States to levy Cabinet had given him authority to go to at least

a second income tax; it is as simple as that. The another $70m. That is a long way short of the

Commonwealth is trying to offload these respon- $385m which the Treasurer should have gone. At

sibilities on to the States. The contention of the least the Treasurer should have gone to the $70m.

Australian Labor Party in all the years since fedThe Treasurer told the Premiers that that was as

eralism has been talked about on the other side of far as the Commonwealth would negotiate. The

the House is that it is simply a way of offloading Treasurer has not got a leg to stand on.

responsibilities. The Fraser Government is turning the clock back to a confederation-not a federation-of individual States where the Commonwealth looks after currency, defence and a few other charges and nothing else. That is where the Fraser Government is heading.

We saw the Treasurer's little boy act on television last week. He put on a Uriah Heep act, saying: 'Oh, yes, we know we made a mistake. Yes, in hindsight we erred'. The Treasurer erred all right. He did a Uriah Heep act. He was contrite and going on with his little boy act while Charlie

After the Treasurer had given certain promises Court was kicking him all around the country and

to the States he indicated to journalists that Bjelke-Petersen was saying that the Treasurer was

another $70m could have been made available to a fraud. The Premier of Queensland said: 'It is a

the States under these arrangements. For him to crook deal'. When it comes to a crooked deal the

hold up an Act of Parliament with some clause on Premier of Queensland would recognise one if he

the back of it about how the Commonwealth insaw one. He knows that it was a crook deal and he

troduces legislation is just bunkum and the knows damn well that the Treasurer cheated the

Treasurer knows it. The States are now very much States. The Treasurer has taken $385m from

worse off simply because of the fact that this them. It is no wonder the Premier of New South

money is for recurrent expenses. As the honourWales asks: 'Where are the tax cuts?' It is no

able member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) pointed wonder the Prime Minister (Mr MalColm Fraser)

out the other day, the government deflator is 13.3 risked all the questions last week about Sir

per cent for this year, not 9 per cent. It is not a Charles Court to answer the Premier of New

matter of goods; it is a matter of employees. These South Wales on the question of tax cuts. Honour-

people were awarded a 14 per cent pay increase in able members opposite are supposedly members

1980. This is why the government deflator is 4 of a party for small government but there has

percentage points higher than the ordinary deflabeen no return to the public. All the Government

tor for goods. So the States are not down 0.5 per is doing is slashing real government services.

cent-that is, the difference between 9.5 per cent Another sleight of hand occurred in regard to

and 9 per cent. They are down from 13.3 per cent specific purpose money for urban transport and

to 9 per cent.

soil conservation. It is included as well. I support

-If we also include the 1.2 per cent increase in the motion and ask the House to support it.

the popUlation of the States over that period and look at the grant on a per head basis we find that the States are down 5.5 per cent; the real cut is 5.5 per cent. One per cent is equivalent to $70m and

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

5.5 per cent is equivalent to $385m. That is a Sir WILLIAM McMAHON (Lowe)

massive am0unt of money. For the States to con- (4.35)-I am glad the honourable .member for

tract this money-this has nothing to do with Blaxland (Mr Keating) supports the motion.

capital; it is only recurrent expenditure-really means that they will have to contract on employment because the money goes to employees. .The money is for recurrent expenditure. It goes to wages and salaries. How would one go about retracting $385m worth of employment? Imagine

Mr Young-Mr Deputy Speaker, J take a point of order. The Government is getting its Prime Ministers mixed up. We have the wrong one. We have the one with the phenomenal memory, not the one with the phenomenal truth.

the slashing of State services which will apply as a Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The

result of the measures introduced at the Premiers honourable member will resume his seat.

2244 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Fundingfor the States

Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-Mr Deputy Speaker, I am not even blushing. I cannot support the word 'improper' in the matter of public importance. I do admit that the public relations were not good. If the Opposition will listen to me, I think that I can prove beyond any doubt at all that if the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) had been in the position of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) he would have done exactly the same thing. I wish to put a case fairly, honestly and accurately. In 1975 a certain gentleman whom I regarded as a pretty good economist became the Treasurer and he had immediately to turti around and totally reverse the economic policy of the government of that day. That gentleman had to try to cut back the deficit of $3,500m. In my day if the deficit had been $300m I would not have slept for nights, even if there were other people around the place.
Opposition members interjectingSir WILLIAM McMAHON-I had hoped that Opposition members would not laugh at that. I will quote from the report in the Optimism magazine of Milton Friedman's visit to Australia whhth said that it was intereSting to note that the Hayden budget of that year was at least an attempt to haul back the extravagances of the irresponsible Budgets of the previous years between 1972 and 1975. In trying to do that, that gentleman got a reputation for being a very good treasurer. He has lost it today. Opposition members interjectingSir WILLIAM McMAHON-I can blot my copybook but I can easily wipe the blots out when I choose to do so. This afternoon we have to examine the differences between the circumstances applying a year ago and those applying today. No one with any wisdom can, apply Keynesian economics today. Keynesian eQonomics relate only to situations when there is a big gap between supply and demand, greater unemployment, falling gross domestic production and everything else associated with it. I think that today we have an economy that is over fullyemployed. Keynesianism applies here too but in a reverse direction. Government expenditure must be reduced. Opposition members interjectingSir WILLIAM McMAHON-The laughter of honourable members opposite displays their total economic ignorance. Retail sales have expanded and are now at least 3 per cent higher than they were last year. Consumption expenditure is rising at more than 11 per cent-the highest for four years. Total domestic demand is estimated at 4.8

per cent. New private capital expenditure rose in seasonally adjusted terms by 24.1 per cent.
I think that the facts I am about to mention ought to be listened to with caution because it is about a great moral and social problem that this country is now working to overcome. In April 377,500 people were looking for full time work compared with 404,000 people last year. This represented the biggest drop in unemployment since the Australian Bureau of Statistics started--
Mr Hayden-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. This debate is about the suspension of Standing Orders, not about some recondite if not fantastic interpretation of what is happening in the labour force.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-That statement shows the Leader of the Opposition obviously knows nothing about economics today because it is the change in circumstances--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Orderl The right honourable gentleman should address himself to the question.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-I am trying to show the vast difference that exists between what applied a year ago and what is happening today. There has been a remarkable transformation in the economy. The economy is fully employed. It must not be stimulated anymore. As the Leader of the Opposition said: 'We cannot have unlimited funding'. If I had been in the position of the Prime Minister I would never have gone as high as 10 per cent. I would have gone to 8.5 per cent and no more.
The money belongs to the people, together with the $100m that might have been given. If the grant had been 8.5 per cent it would have been $150m less. The sum of $250m would have gone back into the pockets of the people themselves. Does any honourable member opposite not want that $250m to go back to the people? Who would prefer it to be allotted to the States? I would. I congratulate the Government for having the guts to do so. I hope that it will have the resolution and the courage to keep up that restraint on further expenditure and give the people the right to live their own lives in the way chosen by them and not by the Labor Opposition of this country.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Orderl The time allotted for the debate has expired.
Question put.
That the motion (Mr Hayden's) be agreed to.
The House divided.

Fundingfor the States

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

47

Noes

66

Majority

19

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E, Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R.V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A, C.
Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (TeUer) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. O. Scholes, O. G. D.
Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C.
Ureo, T. West,S.J. WiIlis,R. Young,M.J.

NOES
Baume,M.E.
Birney. R. J. BOllrchier, J. W. Bradfield,J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown.N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. O. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Groom,R. J. Hall,Steele Harris, O. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M.

Jarman, A. W.
Jull,D.F. Killen,D.I. Lloyd,B.
Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. I. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L.
Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian
Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, J. McC. Spender. J. M. Street,A.A. Tambling, G. E. J.
Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C. W.
VinertR.I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B.C.

PAIRS

Wallis,L.O. McLeay,Leo

Anthony, J. D. Drummond,P. H.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put: That the business of the day be called on.

The House divided.

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2245

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

68

Noes

47

Majority

21

AYES
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. O. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean, A. G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P.,D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. 1. Groomt R.l. Hall,Steele Harris, O. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M.

Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J.
McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir WiHiam
McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, I. M. Moorc,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L.
Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair. I. McC. Spender, J. M.
Street, A. A. Tarnbling,G. E.J.
Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
Viner.R. I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, J. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brownt Robert Campbell,O. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. O. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Jacobi,R. Jenkins. H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L.
Kerin,J.e. KlUgman, R. D. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P, F. Morrison, W, L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Uren, T.
West,S. J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

Anthony, J. D. Drummond, P. H.

PAIRS

Wallis, L. G. McLeaYt Leo

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

2246 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Beef Industry Amendment Bill

BEEF INDUSTRY (INCENTIVE PAYMENTS) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading Debate resumed from 30 April, on motion by MrNixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (4.55)-The Opposition does not oppose the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Bill. At the outset, I would like to say that the Bill does reflect on the opportunism of the Government at an earlier time, namely in 1977, when the beef industry had been in a state of crisis for some three or four years and the Government decided to have yet another early election. Sir John Kerr was very happy to oblige in that regard and so a cooked-up scheme was introduced. This scheme was investigated by the Parliamentary Joint Committee of Public Accounts after the Auditor-General had pointed to certain deficiences in it. I congratulate the government of that day. At least it made some response to the industry at that time. That is very unlike the situation which exists today. The situation today is that the Government is rapidly abdicating its responsibility for Australia's great rural industries. It is doing that at a very rapid rate of knots. What we have now is a sort of razor gang approach to every area of policy in this country, even agricultural policy. What we are getting is ideology, not an analysis of the industry issues and problems. What we are getting is a foisting of functions on to the States and not an examination of the functions of the industries.
Let us go back to 1975-76-1974 even-when the beef industry first started to get into trouble. That was in the day of the Labor Government. Some $19.6m in carry-on finance provided jointly by the Commonwealth and the States was allocated for assistance to the beef industry. In 1975 the Labor Government allocated some $28m to the Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia to assist the beef industry. The Labor Government of the day also made a reference to the Industries Assistance Commission for short term assistance to be provided to the beef industry. That assistance was provided in the Budget which was rejected by the Liberal Opposition at the time, with a little assistance from the Senate and Sir John Kerr. There was a response in that Budget to the beef industry. The Australian Labor Party, when in government, was developing a policy response. It was assisting the beef industry because it was in dire trouble at that time. In the first Budget which the present Government brought down-incidentally, the then Opposition accepted our Budget figure of $19.6m that was allocated jointly by the Commonwealth and the

States to assist the beef industry-some $11.3m was taken up. By that time the Industries Assistance Commission's short term report had been brought in. By and large the report advocated that a continuation of short term assistance by way of loans be extended to the beef industry. The then Government said that it would allocate another $15m in 1976-77. That was a sort of response to the lAC short term report which was printed on 23 October 1975. If one looks at the Budget documents at that time one will see that by 1977-78 all we had was some reference to the fact that assistance to the specialist beef producers was now merged with the rural adjustment schemes. As I said, it was about this time that the Government felt another early election coming on; so it cooked up this scheme. Having hammered the ALP right through 1975 and after, doing nothing through 1977 and 1978 but only carrying on in a half hearted manner with the schemes that the Labor Government had set in train-there was no improvement-it decided it had to do something very quickly.
The Beef Industry Incentive Payments Scheme was to provide assistance to beef producers between the period from 23 September 1977 to 22 September 1978. By and large the Bill which we have before us now is to tidy up that scheme. We are talking about a scheme which originated three or four years ago. We are still trying to tidy it up. The scheme set out an eligibility rate of $10 per head of cattle for producers with a minimum of 50 cows up to a maximum of 200 cows. Supposedly one had to engage in some sort of treatment of the animal to get the $10. Basically, all one had to do was slap a cow on the bum to get the $10, but at least it was a response. The scheme was attempting to find a way of putting some money into the hands of beef producers. Part of the problem, in terms of interpreting the way in which the Department of Primary Industry had to process the claims, was because the legislation was regarded as beneficial legislation, in other words, welfare legislation.
If we look at the time scales and the problems the Department faced at that time-here I refer to the report of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts of which I was a member-we find the following statement in the report of the Public Accounts Committee:
Throughout this inquiry, the Committee--
That is, the Public Accounts Committee-
recognised the short time scale given to the Department to implement the Scheme. The Committee concurred with the Department's attributing much of the blame for the subsequent difficulties to the urgency of introducing the Scheme. The Committee was advised of the chronology of events leading to

Beef Industry Amendment Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2247

the initial payments made under the Act. This timetable appears at Appendix 4A. Seven weeks elapsed from 44 the initial Cabinet Decision that there should be a scheme until enabling legislation was assented to, and a further three weeks until the first payments were made. The Committee agrees with the Department that the Scheme was conceived in undue haste and led to administrative difficulties.
The Government should not place the blame on the Department. If we look at page 66 of the report of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts, Parliamentary Paper No. 277/1979, we see the rapid haste with which the Government introduced this half-baked scheme.
At the time the Government came down with a great song and dance about this proposal. Forms were circulated throughout the country; a lot of money was spent on publicity; and away the scheme went. Even though the Government carried on in a half-hearted way, at least it was a response to the industry's problems at that time. The Australian Labor Party measures of assistance to the beef industry were at least a response to the industry. Today we do not have any such responses by the Government to the problems of the beef industry. Today the problems of the beef industry do not concern price but drought, stocking levels, abattoirs, and the processing industry. The beef herd is down to about 25.5 million head and the eastern States are experiencing a great drought.
What has the Government done for the beef industry in recent years? After removing export inspection charges it brought them back in 1978-79. It has all but abdicated national responsibility for dtought relief. Let us set out what this Government has done. This Liberal-National Country Party Government has refused again to accept its proper share of drought costs. Until 1978, the New South Wales Government, if we are just to take an example, agreed to pay the first $5m for drought relief and the Commonwealth undertook to pick up the rest of the tab. in June 1978, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony), in his capacity as Acting Prime Minister, took a decision to change the formula. It was typical of the sleight of hand which characterises this Government in all of its dealings so notoriously exemplified at the Premiers Conference the other day. Without any consultation, the Deputy Prime Minister changed the formula so that that State would have to pay the first $lOm and $1 for every $4 thereafter each financial y~ar.
With the drought continuing with all its severity into its third winter, the consequences of this sort of scheme promise to be ruinous for the farmers in New South Wales and the finances of

New South Wales and other States affected by the drought. We should have none of this nonsense about the so-called National Country Parly protecting the rural community from the worst ravages of Fraserism and the new federalism. They are up to their neck in it. The New South Wales Government has developed the most comprehensive package of drought relief' measures in the history of New South Wales. Despite severe financial restraints-I draw attention to the action of the New South Wales Government because it has copped a caning in this House the New South Wales Government increased the limit for carry on loans from $5,000 to $10,000 in April 1980, from $10,000 to $15,000 in September, and from $15,000 to $20,000 in October 1980. The maximum loan for farmers entering their second year of drought is $40,000. The limit for restocking loans was raised from $12,000 to $30,000 in December 1980 by the New South Wales Government. In October 1980, the New South Wales Government increased the rail freight subsidies from 50 per cent to 60 per cent. From I May 1980, the rebate applicable for owner-carriers under the drought water cartage subsidy scheme was substantially increased. At present in New South Wales road transport subsidies are available in respect of movements of stock to agistment, stock to further agistment, stock returning from agistment, restocking and fodder movements. Stockowners in drought declared areas are being paid $15 a head compensation. L could go on. The New South Wales drought scheme is most favourable when compared with others. In my view the abuse that has been heaped on the New South Wales Government with respect to drought measures has been rather misdirected.
In addition to the drought problems being experienced by the beef industry, we have big problems in the processing industries. Hundreds, if not thousands, of abattoir workers are out of work. Abattoirs are being shut down throughout the country. The New South Wales Government, for example, has had to make available assistance worth $5.lm which will apply from 1 January this year. It has paid out $8.25m since 1975 and all of that mainly since 1 January 1981. The figures to which I am referring are for local government abattoirs. The indebtedness of abattoirs in New South Wales is at present at least $50m. The private abattoirs are in a like situation. The end of the drought will make this situation worse for the abattoir industry because there simply will be no beasts for a considerable period. At the same time the abattoirs are paying something in the order of $16m for the meat processing export inspection levy of $1.80 alone. I realise that this Government

2248 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Beef Industry Amendment Bill

will not entertain any reallocation of the $5.82 being paid by the industry which cannot be inbuilt into prices or costs.
I think the Government needs to give some attention. to problems being faced by State governments with respect to the abattoirs that have had to shut down or are being financed. It should give some consideration also to the beef industry by way of taking on some of these costs. The industry cannot pay these costs. If the drought ends, the situation will get even worse. I point out to the House that the Federal and State governments guaranteed a $9m loan to the Consolidated Farmers and Graziers abattoir in Victoria but they are not prepared to do anything about the industry as a whole. If I were less charitable I would ask: Whose mate is involved down therein Victoria? It seems to me that the Government is prepared to respond sometimes but only for individuals, whereas it is not prepared to do anything at present for the industry as a whole.
This is in keeping with the general direction the Federal Government has taken with respect to assistance to the rural sector and its policies to the rural sector. It is trying to get out of program or commodity assistance. This Federal Government-there is a lot of evidence for what I am about to say-seems to be trying to transform rural policy into guarantees for statutory authorities and it is hopeful of achieving a system whereby taxation deductions satisfy for everything else. If one looks at the razor gang report and some of the actions of the Government over the past year or two, one sees that it has consistently been trying to get out of quarantine, forestry, soil conservation and meat inspection. From the report of the Kelly Committee of Inquiry to Examine Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection Systems-I know that this report is still under consideration by the Government and State Ministers.. -it appears to me that the Government is indifferent as to whether the Commonwealth should continue with meat inspections. The Government is trying to get out ofrural research and extension. It is trying to get out of reconstruction. It is even trying to get out of dealing with the locust problem. Somehow it believes that if it sacks the 18 people on the Australian Plague Locust Commission, locusts, grasshoppers and whatever one wishes to call them, will no longer cross State borders. One does not need to go on.
In the rural area the Government is very consistently trying to get out of program or commodity assistance. It is trying to foist functions on to the States. It is backing up the statutory marketing authorities. It is trying to solve a few other problems by taxation deduction measures. I do

not think the Government is concerned about the needs of Australia's primary industries any more. The National Country Party has become a miners' party. I am not talking about miners at the mine face but about owners of the mines in the boardrooms in New York, London and Tokyo. The rest of the time the National Country Party seems to spend fighting with the Liberal Party for some of the provincial parliamentary seats. It is no longer a national party. It is no longer a country party. It has said nothing about the 5.2 per cent revaluation in the last year or so. It is saying nothing about what the impact of the so called resources boom will be on the rural sector in terms of access to finance or the infrastructure costs that will be imposed on the States. Nothing has been said about the fact that a lot of money that used to go to local government in the country areas will not now go to it due to the mining boom. The National Country Party is saying nothing about these things.
The Bill sets out simply to remove an anomaly which affected the amounts that could be paid in partnership payments. The Opposition offers no objections to it. However, we take the opportunity validly to criticise the Government because it is not doing anything much for the beef industry. The scheme is really a device to give beef farmers money and nothing more. As I have said, the application forms were given to every post office, bank and pastoral agency prior to the 1977 election. The scheme had a large advertising budget. Of course, much of the motivation to introduce it was to save the seat of Capricornia, but subsequently it was lost. Due to the haste with which the scheme was concocted, administrative bungles quickly appeared. The Auditor-General's report of 1978-79 pointed to overpayments which subsequently totalled $432,000. The scheme overall cost $118m. The present amendment is designed to legitimise $700,000 worth of what could be regarded technically as overpayments. The scheme was designed in haste as an electoral bribe and, as a result, hundreds of thousands of dollars of taxpayers' money was overpaid. We do not know how many people had their hands in the till or how many fiddles were perpetrated.
Most importantly, the scheme was pretty useless in terms of helping the beef industry. After all, $2,000-that was the maximum-is about the price of eight or nine head of beyf in a good year. It is well below the poverty line in terms of supplementing the incomes of producers. It was a scheme cooked up in haste. I appreciate the need for the Government to correct some of the existing remaining anomalies in it, but I hope that it will not entertain taking on such a scheme again

Beef Industry Amendment Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2249

simply for electoral purposes, designing it in so much haste and requiring the Department of Primary Industry to institute administrative procedures with no time to think them through, to look at the structure of the industry or to work out all the problems that could be faced. It was a most unfair task to give to the Department. At least, as I said, it was a response to an industry's problem at that time. The Government today does not seem to be willing to respond to any element of Australia's great rural industries. It is not prepared to respond in a proper way to the drought in the eastern States at present, particularly in New South Wales. It is not prepared to respond in any way to calls by the Australian Meat Council, the abattoirs and the processors of meat. It is not prepared to look at the real issues.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (5.13)-1 support the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Bill 1981 which is to validate the existing procedures under which the Department of Primary Industry makes payments to beef producers under the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act of 1977. The Beef Industry Incentive Scheme was introduced by this Government in 1977 to assist the beef industry which at that time faced serious difficulties. It indicated the interest of the Liberal and National Country parties in the beef industry, which is one of our great primary industries. Cattle producers were assisted with a payment of $10 per head for cattle receiving approved husbandry treatments during the 12 months from September 1977. Payments under this scheme were limited to 200 head of cattle with a maximum payment of $2,000.
The scheme was aimed at providing a cash flow for cattle producers. The Government provided $118m under the scheme. It was well received by producers and, as I have mentioned, it indicated the Government's concern for the industry, which is so important to Australia, both internally and in terms of exports. Beef exports have been amongst the three top agricultural exports of this country. Wool, wheat and beef are the backbone of Australia's primary industries and, indeed, our total exports. This Bill removes an anomaly in the 1977 Act which affected amounts which lawfully could be paid to certain claimants. Under the principal Act producers may be eligible for incentive payments in their own right or as members of groups of joint cattle owners nominated to receive and distribute the payments. It was made quite clear, however, that payment to one owner could not be made for more than 200 cattle or exceed $2,000.
The anomaly which the Bill sets out to correct concerns groups of producers who between them

own more than one cattle herd. As the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) stated in his second reading speech, an example is the case of two producers who each have cattle of their own and who, as partners, also own a herd. As the 1977 Act stands, a payment of $2,000 to a partnership disqualifies the partners for any future payment in respect of their own individual herds. Conversely, when claims were first lodged and paid in respect of the individual herds, each of the owners could receive $2,000 or a total of $4,000 between them, but if this occurred the partnership would not qualify for any payment.
Other anomalies could occur, depending on the order in which claims were presented. Apparently it was the intention of the Act and the practice of the Department of Primary Industry to treat two or more claims by a person so as to maximise the payments to that person by ignoring the order in which claims were made. Clause 3 of the Bill validates the procedure of the Department of Primary Industry by making the necessary amendment, which is back dated to the commencement of the principal Act. Provision is also made under the amendment to increase past payments to the maximum payable where this has not already occurred. The amendment provides a safeguard to ensure that no legally made past payments become overpayments as a result of this legislation.
In the first instance the Department of Primary Industry assessed claims made by sole proprietors separately from claims submitted by partnerships. This resulted in overpayments and, as the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) has said, these totalled $432,000 on 300 claims. It is very interesting to note that 83 per cent of those overpayments has since been recovered. There is no doubt that efforts will be made to recover the outstanding 17 per cent. The recovery of overpaid funds has been a successful achievement. Honourable members may recall that these matters were commented on by the Auditor-General in his 1978-79 report to the Parliament. There is no doubt that the urgency of the occasion demanded that the Government immediately bring down legislation to assist beef producers who were in dire straits because of drought throughout Australia. Many beef producers did not have sufficient funds to carryon their normal everyday life. This Government saw to it that cash payments were made to them.
Country abattoirs have been mentioned in the debate. There is no doubt that the abattoirs in the State which I represent are in serious trouble. From observations and experience in the beef industry I have no doubt that it is over-serviced. We have too many abattoirs in New South Wales.

22S0 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Beef Industry Amendment Bill

When we have a rundown in cattle numbers and sheep numbers, what is the result? These abattoirs are in financial trouble and they run immediately to government for assistance. It is known that a number of them are local government abattoirs. Of course, they are being supported financially by a State government, so they run to that government for financial support. If the abattoir situation in New South Wales had been properly planned by the New South Wales Government the abattoirs would not be experiencing the trouble that they are experiencing today.
It is good to see the Minister for Primary Industry at the table. Dual meat inspection has been a great problem in this industry for very many years. It is good to know that the Minister will make every effort to iron out this situation at the August meeting with the various State Ministers for Agriculture. Dual meat inspection is costing huge sums of money. It is affecting the prices paid by the housewives to the butcher shops. The honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) would know all about that because he has considerable dealings with housewives concerning the supply of quality meat. If we get rid of the system of dual inspection of beef it will be of great benefit not only to the honourable member for Parramatta but also to the industry right throughout Australia.
Cattle numbers in this country are down; there is no doubt about that. Several years ago these numbers were to the order of 32 million. As has been stated tonight, they are down to approximately 26 million. Most of those cattle are in Queensland. New South Wales is experiencing the worst drought it has ever experienced. If we go into the winter without any water and with a shortage of feed we will witness a devastating scene. That will happen if we do not get substantial rain within the next few weeks. The meat industry is in dire straits in New South Wales. This is, of course, affecting employment in our country towns. A country abattoir of any size employs from 3S0 to 400 men, and if those men lose their jobs it is a disaster for the financial and economic situation of the town in which it is located. The works with which I am connected has been reasonably fortunate. It has been able to maintain its work force and to kill something like 1,SOO head of cattle, 10,000 head of sheep and 1,000 head of pigs. It is not a profitable operation but it is fortunate that it is in a status quo situation.
The honourable member for Werriwa mentioned the investigation of the scheme by the Joint Parliamentary Committee of Public Accounts. He was a member of the Committee, and at the time so was I. The honourable member mentioned that

there was undue haste in the bringing in of the 1977 legislation to assist the cattle producers. That legislation had to be brought in hastily because of the situation in which these people found themselves. It is not unusual under those circumstances to find some anomalies. The Bill with which we are dealing eliminates those anomalies and creates a splendid situation as far as the industry is concerned. It was said that the New South Wales Government is providing great assistance as far as drought relief is concerned. What a lot of rubbish! Here we have a situation where funds are available, as the Minister for Primary Industry has informed us, to the State Government for drought relief if it asks for them. Of course, the situation is that these funds are available after the State Government has spent $lOm. The Minister knows only too well that we have taken this matter up with him from time to time and he has informed us that no efforts have been made by the State Government to apply for additional funds which are available to us. The State Government ought to be more appreciative of the drought situation in New South Wales and approach the Federal Minister for funds which, we understand, will be readily available.
With regard to the export of our beef, it was a great tragedy when we lost the European Economic Community market. A market for 80,000 tonnes of beef was lost just through the stroke of a pen. It appears that it will be very difficult for us to get back into that market, as the Community is dumping cattle on the market for $300 a carcass. That makes it terribly difficult for Australia's beef industry to enter the European Economic Community. So we have to find other markets for our beef. The Department of Primary Industry and the Department of Trade and Commerce are doing just that. The beef industry is one of the greatest primary industries in this country and we should be looking after it. I have no doubt that the Minister for Primary Industry is doing that.
J support this legislation in its entirety. I have no doubt that it will go through here today because members of the Opposition are not going to oppose it. They have had a few pertinent remarks to make about it. Just the same, the Opposition knows that it provides for a good scheme. It knows that anomalies will be eliminated from the 1977 legislation and that that will be good for the cattle industry and those associated with it. The legislation has my full support.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (S.27)-In rising to support the Beef Industry (Incentive
Payments) Amendment Bill, r will make just a
few comments. Before I get on to the Bill, I will cover some of the points raised by the honourabIe

Beef Industry Amendment Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2251

member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe), who covered Commonwealth assistance were available to the

a fairly wide range of subjects to do with agriculbeef industry to alleviate the depression which

ture. He mentioned the drought assistance prohad gripped the world trading economy at that

vided in New South Wales and condemned the time. These measures included appropriations of

New South Wales Government for not doing $20m to the Commonwealth Development Bank

enough for drought relief. He said that that the of Australia in 1974 by the then Labor Govern-

Federal Government stood ready to assist. Anyment. There was a further $8m in 1975 to be lent

body who realises the situation would know that to viable beef cattle producers under the schemes

the States are requested to spend $X before the keeping those farmers in business. The States

Federal Government makes any move at all. But, Grants (Beef Industry) Act 1975 provided for the

from the evidence presented to this House in the beef carry-on loans scheme.

last few days and the actions of this Government in the way it treated the States, I do not think there would be anything stopping this Government, if it really were serious about assisting the primary producers in New South Wales, from making money available. From what we have seen, the Government is quite capable of pushing the States around in any way it likes. I do not think that there would be anything stopping the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) or the Government from making funds available.

This Government has been preaching of the need for less Government expenditure ever since it engineered its return to the Treasury benches. In this context it is interesting to relate how this Government used the Act, the amendment to which we are debating today, to assist many wealthy supporters of the Government. When we look at the numbers of farmers with 50 or more beef cattle-85,900 beef producers-we see that many of those farmers are very wealthy, with assets by the million and with no need whatever

Mr O'Keefe-The State governments have to for a hand out of $2,000 from the public purse.

ask for it.

With the assistance that the Commonwealth

Mr CUNNINGHAM-The honourable member for Paterson says that the States have to ask for it. For the last week we have heard them asking for the $70m they are entitled to. Yet supporters of the Government stand up in this House

Bank had in train it could have quite easily done the job that this Bill sets out to do three years later. But instead the Government took the approach of handing out $2,000 willy-nilly, whether the people require it or not.

and say that the States have to ask for the money Mr Nixonou try to tell the beef growers

before it can be put across. The Government has that.

the money and is refusing to give it to them. The States should not need to ask the Federal government for the money; it should just give it to them and they will spend it in the right places.
In 1977 this Government introduced a scheme to assist the beef industry. At that time the industry was in the middle of a world-wide slump-we all admit that-brought about by an excessive supply and a slump in demand. The slump was brought about by economic factors which had a lot of their roots in the dramatic increase in the price of crude oil. Many sectors of primary indus-

Mr CUNNINGHAM-The Minister can tell it to the beef grower who never received the funds. He can tell it to the one who got $2,000 and who did not need it. The Government wasted the money where it could have given $4,000 to the fellow who perhaps went broke because he could not get that extra $2,000. Where is the means test in the way the Government approaches things? It gives money across the board to anybody. It is also handing out public funds.
Mr Nixon-You are not talking sense.

try were affected by the downturn in the world Mr CUNNINGHAM-The Minister says that

economy at that time. Whilst all clear-thinking 1am not talking sense. On what basis, in any other

people are well aware of the necessity to assist schemes, does the Government hand money

those primary producers in need, the actions of across the board to those who do not need it? It

the Fraser Government in 1977 when it has a means test on pensioners. Where public pub-

introduced the Beef Industry (Incentive Paylic funds are accounted for in other departments,

ments) Bill were actions of that Government at its it is always done on the basis of need. Education

cynical best. At that time there were 85,900 beef grants are given on the basis of need. The Govern-

producers with 50 or more head of beef cattle and ment does not just hand the money across the

32,390-odd of them who owned 200 or more head. board to people who do not need it. The Minister

To put this whole debate into perspective we have preaches that the Government must cut its expen-

to assess what was being provided by government diture, yet it went ahead and spent something like

at that time, why there was this need for this $1l8m to $120m. That is money that could have

money to be available in this matter. Measures of been spent on much more worthwhile efforts in

2252 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Beef Industry Amendment Bill

the last couple of years. We had a debate in the there is a massive over-supply of abattoirs and

House last week on quarantine and surveillance they are in trouble allover the country. It will be

of the coast of this country. We have no money to many years before there is a rebuilding of the

do that, yet the Minister wasted money on herds to overcome that problem. I just say to the

wealthy people. In relation to this Bill the' Minister that we hope we do not see this type of

Government is not concerned with cutting back Bill introduced and this type of method used to

expenditure when it comes to handing across support a section of the community where public

money to its own supporters, but it is very savage funds are sent right across the board and are not

on government expenditure wbeFi it deals with accounted for. In this case a lot of the funds went

people who are really in need of funds.

to waste. This is the sort of thing that govern-

The Auditor-General looked at this matter and found gross over-payments. What sort of a Bill was it? Would the Commonwealth Bank's approach have allowed that sort of thitig to happen? I have dealt with that type of approach, and there is no wayan organisation liki the Commonwealth Bank would waste money t4~' way this Government wastes it. The honourable member for Paterson said that the Government had got 83 per cent of the money back. What about the other 17

ments should not be dabbling in and it is the sort of thing we would not expect a responsible government to do, but apparently it has been done. We have the Bill before us now to rectify some of the anomalies in the Act and to make sure that there are no further overpayments. I stress that the Minister should make every effort he can to recover the money that is outstanding. It is public money and that should not be owing on a scheme such as this one.

per cent? Are we ever going to see that again or Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden)

has it gone down the gurgler, as they say? What a (5.35)-1 had not intended to enter this debate

great way of running the country, is it not? Maybe but the rather provocative approach of the

some beef producers were very happy to get the honourable member for McMillan (Mr

$2,000 but I do not think I know of anybody who, Cunningham), has caused me to rise. When the

if they were handed $2,000, would not say, original Bill came through this House about four

'Thank you very much' and take it.l am not arguyears ago the Australian Labor Party supported it

ing the point that those people were not appreciin to to. This afternoon we have a newly arrived

ative that they got their money. They probably honourable member trying to make his mark by

bought a slightly better car than they normally standing up, going over ground, which is simply an

would have. Needless to say, an election for amendment, trying to indicate that there are gross

Capricornia was going on at the time. I would say injustices and that there is foul play because the

that was probably the main reason for the haste to party of the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr

get the message across to the people at that time Nixon) is supposedly looking after its own lot.

that money was available to those who supported Furthermore, he refers to the chaos in the beef in-

the Country Party.

dustry. One remembers that between 1972 and

Mr Nixon-Very generous of you.

1975, when the Whitlam Labor Government so upset those who purchased our beef, that we had

Mr CUNNINGHAM-The Minister intera complete downturn in the market. The honour-

jects, but the Bill is just one of those Bills that able member for McMillan should not drop his

every now and again we see the Country Party head back; he should drop it down in shame.

and this Government bringing into this House, rushing it through and getting it passed to help its own supporters. It is not so anxious today to bring in legislation that will really help the Australian public. It puts away millions of dollars and sends it, as 1 said before, down the gurgler. We will never see any benefit whatever from it.

In my electorate of Fadden in southern Queensland there are lots of cattle producers. The honourable member for McMillan might have this airy-fairy idea that because a man has a cattle property, he is a very wealthy person. That is not the case. [ have seen producers in my electorate going through bad times during drought periods,

1 do not intend to speak for a long time in this when there are downturns in the export market

debate but I refer to a few more of the points and when the honourable member for McMillan

which were raised by the honourable member for has been infinitely better off. Certainly the

Paterson. He referred to the fact that the abattoirs farmers have their good days, but they need those

are in trouble. They are in trouble all over the good days to ensure that that balance gives them a

country, not just in his State. Even though this living and makes it attractive for them to turn to

Government spent some $118m over a short time the land. I could not sit here and listen to the com-

in the beef industry, the numbers of beef cattle ments of the honourable member for McMillan

have continued to decline to the stage now where without putting my point of view. As a member of

Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2253

the Liberal Party I am also hurt when the honourable member for McMillan keeps saying that all the beef producers support the National Party, because in my electorate I have their support 100 percent.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
PIG SLAUGHTER LEVY AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading Debate resumed from 30 April, on motion by MrNixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (5.38)-The Opposition does not oppose this very simple Bill. The purpose is to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act 1971 to raise the maximum permissible rate of levy for promotion purposes from 20c to $1 per pig. The amendment relates only to the maximum rate of levy, not to the operative rate of levy paid by producers. It is set by regulation. A levy has been paid by pig producers since 1975 to provide funds for the promotion of pig meat. The promotion is funded entirely by the industry and expenditure has been increasing because of the expanding activities at wholesale, retail and consumer levels and because of rising media costs. My colleague the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) will speak about the success of these promotional activities.
The request for an increase in the maximum rate of levy has been made by the national body of the pig industry, the Australian Commercial Pig Producers' Federation. The Federation sought this amendment as increases in the operative rate have taken the levy to 20c which is the maximum levy currently permitted under the Act. Without this amendment there is no scope to raise the levy further and expand promotional expenditure in the future. Any subsequent increase to the operative rate requires a recommendation from the Pig Meat Promotion Advisory Committee to the Minister for Primary Industry. The Committee consults with the industry before making its recommendation to the Minister.

The Opposition welcomes this Bill. We cannot possibly oppose it as the request for it comes from the industry. I want to say a few words about the pig industry. It is largely a self-help industry which does not want handouts. It rarely approaches government. It has been disappointed with the Government's response to the pig classification issue, the meat inspection issue and other things. By and large it is an industry that has been adjusting itself to the demands being put on it. It has a particular structure. It is largely an integrated industry. It is closely related to the processing part of the industry. As I said, it is a self-help industry and one that has been going along very well indeed. If we look at the problems the pig industry has been facing in recent times, we must refer to the importation of canned ham. The Industries Assistance Commission report on this matter was tabled on 6 May. The Government received the same report on 2 February 1981. The Opposition and I made the case that the Government had plenty of information on which to make up its mind on this issue. For the life of me, I do not understand why the Government put the pig industry through so much trauma by not making a decision on this matter. I, as did many other honourable members, received letters and complaints and well-documented cases from the Australian Commercial Pig Producers' Federation, the Queensland Pork Producers' State Council, the Federated Millers and Mill Employees' Association and the National Meat Canners' Association expressing great concern about the problems being faced by the industry.
The amount of canned ham coming into this country is minimal but it is affecting the industry in more than a proportionate way. That well known pig farmer, the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) announced that he was going to discuss restraint arrangements. I do not know what that means-I will not canvass what I think it might mean-but it would have the effect of limiting imports to around 14 per cent of the Australian market. That is a level of about 800 tonnes a year in respect of the canned ham market in Australia. Overall, the canned ham market represents only a small portion of the total processed pig market in Australia. But the Government does have a long term report on prepared meat products due to be presented to it late this year and again this question will arise. In the meantime, we have this restraint arrangement. The Deputy Prime Minister said, in his Press release of I May, that the Government had finally decided to make up its mind about this matter, after it had abundant evidence to make up its mind. He said:

2254 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill

Although the Industries Assistance Commission recommended no short-term assistance, the Government considers that circumstances have changed since 'the lAC inquiry and that action should be taken to preserve market stability pending the Government's decision on the lAC's long-term report--
I wish the Deputy Prime Minister had told us exactly what the circumstances were' that had
changed. Jt is my view that the circumstances that
have changed have been very much those whereby the processors, particularly the multinationals, Mayfair Hams and Bacon Co. and. Plumrose (Aust.) Ltd, were virtually holding a gun at the Government's head because they were saying that they would get impOI:t licences and bring in supplies from overseas affiliates. For example, one of the companies which wrote to me stated:
Australian Bacon Ltd, an Adelaide based company; will be most adversely affected if the Government decision is' to accept the lAC recommendation because the company is one of the largest pig suppliers to the two leading canners, Plumrose and Mayfair. These manufacturers have stated that they will import from overseas affiliates so as to remain competitive with duty free imports from Romania and Yugoslavia if no short-term assistance is provided to the industry.
The company made appropriate representations on the matter at State and Federal levels. Senator Flo Bjelke-Petersen, in her maiden question, in another place, referred to the wicked communist countries, Romania and Yugoslavia, from which we are importing canned ham. It was an issue that was causing the industry a lot of concern. The Government responded eventually, baving before it all the facts. I wish to goodness the Government would tell us what the changed circumstances are and if there is a particular problem in this industry in relation to its integrated nature and whether the major processors are multinationals. If that were so a lot of the rationality of bodies stich as the lAC would tend to fiy out the door.
I have gathered a background to the industry. Something like 216,000 tonnes of pig meat is slaughtered in Australia each year. An amount of 10,000 tonnes of bone-in-meat is used to produce about 4,500 tonnes of canned boneless ham.-The dimension of this issue is such that in 1979, 450 tonnes were imported. That is equivalent to abo.ut 1,000 tonnes of bone-in-meat; as I am sure you have calculated, Mr Deputy Speaker. About 800 tonnes was imported in 1980. Very little has been imported this year. The explanation for that could be that the retailers stockpiled lower priced ham during 1980. But imports this year could reach 1,000 tonnes. There has been about a four per cent increase in production in canned ham in 1979-80. There has been a 13 per cent increase in production in early 1980-81. Canned ham is only part of the canned meat industry which has

expanded production in recent years. What I am trying to explain with these figures is that the canned ham part of the industry was the part that was expanding and was the one which, at the same time, was subjected to the threat of imports,
if! may put it that way.
About 80 per cent of Australia's canned ham is produced in Victoria. The area from the northern New South Wales coast up to Toowoomba in Queensland also includes major producing centres. The pig producers, the local canners and the unions waged a very active campaign in opposition to the one importing firm, C. R. Lawrence Pty Ltd. They have also lobbied hard. I can understand why the Government was reticent to act in the face of all the lobbying that was going on. But if it had the facts before it all the time, if it had the lAC report' and knew what the parameters of the issue were, there is no real reason for it not making a decision. I make no further comment except to say that the Opposition supports the Bill that is
before the House.
MrIAN CAMERON (Maranoa) (5.48)-It gives me great pleasure to support the Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill 1981. This Bill has been introduced to help the pork industry increase the maximum amount it can levy up to a maximum of $1 per kilo. The scheme for promotion was established in 1975. At that time, the Pig Meat Promotion Advisory Committee was established. I wish to quote from the fifth annual report of that Committee. It consists of a representative from the Department of Primary Industry, two representatives from the Australian Commercial Pig Producers' Federation and a marketing specialist. That Committee has been very successful in its endeavours to promote the pork industry throughout Australia. Production of pig meat reached 216,000 tonnes in 1979-80. The gross value of pig slaughterings during that time is estimated at $310 million. So this industry which we are debating is no small industry. I believe that the Bill is most important because promotion is an, important facet of any industry if it is to survive in our ever-competing world. The expenditure on pig meat promotion in that time was $452,000 which is an increase of $117,000 from the previous year. We can see from those figures that the industry is making a tremendous endeavour to sell
all of its product.
I think it is important again to remind the
House that the Commonwealth makes no contribution to the promotion fund. The industry has seen fit to stand on its own feet and establish such a fund. I believe that, as far as current Government thinking is concerned, that has been excellent for the industry because it has not had to

Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2255

suffer any cuts. In actual fact this Bill seeks to Honourable members should have no doubt

allow the industry to impose a promotion levy of from these figures that an increase in promotion

up to $1. The Act established the Pig Meat Profunds is more than compensated for by an in-

motion Advisory Committee whose function is to crease in sales. I think that this is an important

recommend the rate of slaughter levy. I think it is point in respect of promotion. There is no point in

important to remember that the $1 levy that this spending a lot of money if we do not get an in-

Bill seeks to allow is not necessarily spent or colcrease in sales. I believe that television is an excel-

lected in full until the industry itself decides how lent medium for promotion and should be

much is needed for the industry to function propencouraged especially if enough funds are avail-

erly as far as promotion is concerned. The initial able. We have seen what other industries, particu-

levy was 5c in 1975. The levy was increased to 20c larly the beef industry, are doing in this respect.

in 1978. This Bill now seeks to increase the levy to $1.

Before commending the Bill to the House, I congratulate the Government for the recommen-

The request to increase the levy has come from the national body of the pig industry. I think it is important that the Government adopts most of the recommendations from the industry in respect of management and follows that practice. A recommendation to fix the levy comes from the Australian Commercial Pig Producers Federation. The Federation recommends to the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) the exact amount that it feels is needed adequately to promote its product. The information that I have from the industry is that it is seeking to increase the levy by 40c to 60c. This will allow another 40c to be spent in the future. I think that the proposal in the Bill

dation that there be a voluntary quota of 800 tonnes impost on imported processed pork products. The import of canned ham has been of great concern to pork producers throughout Australia. In reply to the remarks of the honourable member for Werriwa(Mr Kerin), I point out that the Government is not bound by any Indllcstries Assistance Commission report. The Commissi<;>n is an independent body set up to give reports to government and government does not necessarily have to do what it recommends. The textile industry gives recent example of a recommendation of which the Government has not necessarily taken complete note.

to take the levy to $1 is good in that the legislation will not have to be amended in the foreseeable future. The proposed $1 levy ought to see the industry through for a number of years. The industry will recommend to the Minister that it be al-

Mr FiSher-Unfortunately.
Mr IAN CAMERON-Perhaps unfortunately. But I would say in this case that it is fortunate for the pork producers of Australia that the Govern-

lowed to collect 60c of the upper limit of $1.

ment has not taken note of the lAC report and

that it has recommended that a voluntary quota

The pork industry has done a great deal of adbe imposed. I believe that this is excellent for the vertising, most of which has been through chain industry.

stores. The industry conducted a study last year in Adelaide which indicated that the sale of pork products in Adelaide stores jumped by 239 per cent. So I think that goes to show just what a good job money collected from the levy is doing for the industry. The overall increase in sales was 96 per cent. The Pig Meat Promotion Advisory Committee has concluded that the result was so good that it should seek the increase proposed in the Bill we are now considering. The Committee intends to conduct another nationwide television program this winter. Most of the capital cities as

I also say to the honourable member for Werriwa that not all processors in Australia are multinationals. The canning facility at K. R. Darling Downs, which borders my electorate of Maranoa, is one of the biggest co-operative pork processing operations in Australia. I think it must be understood that Australian companies, as well as the odd multinational, are involved. I believe that applies to any industry one looks at in this country, particularly as Australia is a comparatively new industrialised nation.

well as the Gold Coast and Toowoomba will be' Imports have been increasing from Yugoslavia

included in the program. It is hoped the televisiqn and Romania and have built up to 920 tonnes this

program, will cover 47 per cent of households last 12 months. Danish and Canadian hams were

throughout Australia. If that can be achieved, the ready to be imported to Australia; unfortunately

program again will have be,en excellent. The 1982 the quota will see that stopped. These imports

program, with an increase in funds, is expected to have caused prices ofpigs at auction to drop from

cover 72 per cent of households throughout the $1.55 a kilo to $1.25 a kilo. The canning facility at

nation. So we can see that the industry is hoping K.R. Darling Downs has also closed down. The

to do an excellent job in this regard.

quota allowed was higher than I was seeking for

2256 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill

the industry but it was in the form I believe the incan be produced to meet the market. It is for that dustry deserved. An efficient pork industry in ' reason that I give on behalf of my Government Australia should not be subject to the dumping of full support to increase the funds that can be colimports. The industry has suffered the burden of lected for pork promotion.

high grain prices and cannot withstand the competition of cheap imports. I warn all primary pro-
ducers that these are the consequences of trading with communist nations.

Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m. SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS

Mr John Brown-Turn it up.

Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (8.0)-1 move:

Mr IAN CAMERON-They are consequences of trading with communist nations.
Mr John Brown-You don't mind selling them our beef. Thas is how it happened. You sold wool to Romania and Yugoslavia.

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the member for Lilley moving forthwith notice of motion No. 75, General Business, standing in her name, namely, 'That this House condemns any attempt by the Federal Government to hold a gun at the head of the Queensland Government by compelling it to abandon Queensland's long standing, efficient free hospital system'.

Mr IAN CAMERON-The sale of wheat and I find it essential to bring this motion before the

beef was made to Yugoslavia in times of depressed House in this way because the Australian Labor'

beef prices.

Party members--

Mr Kerin-What about Russia?

Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:

Mr IAN CAMERON-And to Russia. But unfortunately for us in the long term these are the sorts of things that happen. If we sell a product to the communists obviously we have to trade with them. They want to sell us some of their products.
Mr John Brown-Why don't we stop selling all our wheat to Russia? Why don't you tell the Prime Minister about wool?
Mr IAN CAMERON-I am suggesting to the honourable member that we ought to be careful in our trading negotiations, that these are the consequences. I have told the pork producers that these are the consequences when we are prepared to trade with Russia. Unfortunately this is something that we have to do. The Yugoslavs and the Russians produce most goods far cheaper than Australia can and are ruthless in dumping surplus products on our markets to earn foreign currency, in particular United States dollars, so that they can purchase strategic material which they do not possess. Therefore I give a legitimate warning to both sides that we have to be very careful in our trade negotiations with communist countries. It is important for government and industry that the producers still seek to reopen inquiries into the dumping of pork products in Australia. They are endeavouring to raise the price of the imported product so that the locally produced product will sell in competition with them. In other words, the industry is still trying to increase the price of the imported products to that it can compete. I urge the producers to put a good case in respect of the lAC report for long term assistance that will be brought down at the end of the year. The pork industry must have some form of promotion. I would suggest that the best form of protection is to sell at the best price possible as much pork as

That the honourable member be not further heard.
Mrs DARLING-The Labor Party members are the only members of this--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member will resume her seat.
Mrs DARLING-House who care about Queensland's free hospital system.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume her seat.
Mrs DARLING-But, Mr Deputy Speaker, how can we retain Queensland's free hospital scheme-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! If the honourable member does not resume her seat, I will be obliged to deal with her.
Mrs DARLING-If you do not allow me to put the matter before the House in this way--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I warned the honourable member for Lilley about resuming her seat. The honourable member leaves me with no alternative-I am very much aware that I am apparently accommodating her ambition-but to name her.
Mr Hayden-With respect, Mr Deputy Speaker, I would like to know why you have named the honourable member. You warned the honourable member and your warning was in terms of impliedly requesting her to desist from commenting. The honourable member for Lilley has done exactly that but she is still on her feet. It is not an offence to remain on one's feet, especially while you, Mr Deputy Speaker are seated. I ask you, in the circumstances, to recognise that in the heat of the moment you-

Suspension ofStanding Orders

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2257

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There was no heat of the moment. I require the Leader of the Opposition to resume his seat.
Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
That the honourable member for Lilley be suspended from the service of the House.
Mr Hayden-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to raise a point of order. I would like to know the substantial grounds upon which you decided to name the honourable member for Lilley in view of the fact that the honourable member for Lilley, whilst admittedly still on her feet, had ceased making any comment at all. It is not an offence to stand silently on one's feet in this House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-OrderI There is no point of order. To satisfy the honourable gentleman's inquiry, the Chair required the honourable member for Lilley to resume her seat. She refrained from doing so. The chair then rose, at which point the honourable member was obliged to resu~e her seat. As she further refused so to do, the Chair was left with no option but to conclude that the honourable member was seeking what resulted.
Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek your indulgence.
MR DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Reid has the indulgence of the Chair to speak briefly.
Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Speaker, the honourable member for Lilley is only a new member of this House. She has intense feelings about certain events in her State of Queensland. I ask you to consider her case leniently if she apologises and permit her to remain in the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I would like the House to understand that it is the firm view of the Chair that it has been more than tolerant of the honourable member for Lilley's behaviour. I think that would indicate to the House that the Chair had no enthusiasm for taking the action it was required to take. The other thought to bear in mind, I suggest, is that these times might be termed extraordinary times and the Chair could not disallow the possibility that the honourable member for Lilley was engaged in some stratogem that sought the result that occurred.
Mr Hayden-Oh, come on!
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I ask the honourable member to be tolerant. The Chair heard the Leader of the Opposition reassure it that the honourable member for Lilley was acting in innocence or out of inexperience. I would countenance an apology if the Minister for Education felt inclined to withdraw his motion.

Mr Nixon-Mr Deputy Speaker, because of the circumstances explained by the Leader of the Opposition, I suggest that we give the honourable member for Lilley an opportunity to apologise for her discourtesy to the Chair in not sitting down when requested. Perhaps the House will then reconsider the position.
Mrs Darling-Mr Deputy Speaker, I would certainly apologise for any discourtesy to you. I did not intend such. I wished to speak on the free hospital system in Queensland and thought this was the only way possible to do that in this frustrating chamber.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member is now going too far. She sought to explore the device open to her and the Minister took quite appropriate action. The matter was then in the hands of the House. The apology is accepted.
Mr Fife-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek leave of the House to withdraw the motion.
Leave granted.
Motion-by leave-withdrawn.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The question is that the honourable member for Lilley be not further heard. Those of that opinion say aye; to the contrary no. I think the noes have it. No, the ayes have it. I will put the question again.
Mr Hayden-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. You did acknowledge that the noes had it. I would like to know on what grounds you are able to change that decision.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I have not changed my decision. I called that the noes had it.
Mr Hayden-Exactly, you said that the noes had it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I will leave it to the House to decide whether a division is required. Is a division required?
Mr Nixon-Yes.
Mr Fife-Yes.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The House will divide. Ring the bells.
Question put-
That the honourable member be not further heard.

2258 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Suspension ofStanding Orders

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

59

Noes

45

Majority

14

AYES
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, I. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.I. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. CowantD.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. (TeUer) Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F.

Katter,R.C. Killen,D.J. Lioyd,B.
Lusher, S. A.
MacKenzie, A. 1. McLean, R. M.
McMahon, Sir \Villiam McYeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.C. Newman,K.E. Nixon,P.J.
O'Keeffe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R.
Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F. Spender, J. M.
Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J.
Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R. I. White,P.N.D.
Wilson,I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charies, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Jacobi,R.

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Los Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C.
Uren, T. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Anthony, J. D. Drummond, P. H.

Wallis,L.G, Cross,M.D.

Questions so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-- Is there a seconder to the motion"!

Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith) (8.12)-1 second the motion. Queensland has been sold out once again by this Government.

Motion (by Mr Fife) put:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

60

Noes

45

Majority

15

AYES
Baumc,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman,H.G.P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M, Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M.

Jarman, A. \V. Jull. D. F. Katter, R. C.
KilIcn,D.J. Lloyd, B.
Lusher, S. A. MacKenzie, A. J.
McLean,R.M.
McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.I, O'Keefe,F.L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock,P.M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D.
Spender, 1. M.
Street, A. A. Tambling. G. E. J.
Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Yiner, R. L White, P. N. D.
\Vilson, 1. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T, Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J, Innes, U.E. Jacobi,R.

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Le, (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charle, Keating, P. J.
Kelly,R. J.
Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Los Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P.
Morris,P.P.
Morrison, W. L
Mountford, J. O.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C.
Uren, T. West, S. J. WilIis,R.
Young,M.J.

Anthony, J. D. Drummond, P. H.

PAIRS

Wallis,L.O. Cross,M.D.

Suspension ofStanding Orders

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2259

Question so resolved in the affirmative.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The question now is that the motion for the suspension of Standing Orders be agreed to. Those of that opinion say aye, to the contrary no.
Mr Hayden-Mr Deputy Speaker-- Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
That the question be now put.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the Leader of the Opposition wish to raise a point of order?
Mr Hayden-No, I was seeking--Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Very well. The question is-Mr Hayden-It is a point of order now. I was on my feet seeking the opportunity to speak when you were putting the question. You had no right to do so, with respect. !fyou will allow me-Mr Bourchier-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. You have called for a division. Mr Hayden-Mr Deputy Speaker, my point of order is that you were putting the question while I was on my feet seeking to speak and at a time when no Minister had proposed that the question be put. In the circumstances, it gives every impression that you were-' trying to determine a course of events favourable to the Government. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition goes too far. I will deal with the point of order. The question was being put to the House in the ordinary course of events. It had been moved and seconded. Questions were put that the mover and seconder respectively be not further heard. When those questions were resolved, it was incumbent on the Chair to put the question to the House for further attention. I put the question in that fashion. The Leader of the Opposition was free to rise to speak to the question, as he did. The Minister for Education, quite properly, rose to move that the question be put. Mr Hayden-Mr Deputy Speaker, I do not want to delay the House but, with respect, I was on my feet, seeking the opportunity to speak, before the Minister for Education put the question. You were then proposing that we proceed to debate the question. There is no point in delaying the House further on the matter but I.make the point that you are proceeding with too much enthusiasm tonight in a way that suggests you are seeking to favour the Government in order to protect it from embarrassment. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the' Opposition demeans himself by reflecting on the Chair in that manner. The Chair insists

that the processes adopted were strictly in accordance with the Standing Orders. The question is that the question be now put.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

61

Noes

45

Majority

16

AYES
Baumc,M.E. Birney. R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield. 1. M. Braithwaite. R. A. Brown.N.A.
Cadman. A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton. J. J. Chapman. H. G. P. Coleman, \V, p. Cowan,D. B. Dcan,A,G. Dobie, J. D, M.
Edwards, H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fife.W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele
Harris, G. McD. Hicks.N.J. Hodges. J. C. (Teller) Hodgman. W. M. Howard, I. W. Hunt. R. I. D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman,A. A.

Iull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Killen,D.].
Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean. R. M,
McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T,
Macphee, I. M. Moore,], C.
Newman, K. E, Nixon, P. J.
O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.
Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack, P.D. Shipton, R. F. Spender, I. M. Street, A. A. Tambling. G. E, I, Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage. J. L. Beazley. K. C. Blewett.N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell.G. Charles, D. E, Child, J, Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J.
Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L.
Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Humphreys. B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E.
JacobiJ R.

Jenkins, H. AT Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, I. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, I. G. Scholes, G. G, D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Ureo, T. West,S. J. WiIlis,R.
Young.M.J.

Anthony, J. D. Drummond, P. H.

PAIRS

Wallis,L.G, Cross,M.D.

2260 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Suspension ofStanding Orders

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question put:

That the motion (Mrs Darling's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-MrP. C. Millar)

Ayes

45

Noes

61

Majority

16

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkin., J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Frec,R.V. Fry,KL. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding. A. C. Humphreys, B. C. (TeUer) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E. Jacobi.R.

Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Le. (Teller) Joncs, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J.
Kent,L. Kerin,J. C.
Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Lea Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren. T.
West,S.J. Willis,R.
Young.M.J.

NOES
Baume,M.E. Birney,R.J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.C. Fisher;P. S. (TeUer) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck,B.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M. Jannan, A, W.

Jull,D.F.
Katter, R. C.
Killen,D.J.
Lloyd. B. Lusher, S. A. MacKenzie, A. J.
McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William
McVeigh,D. T.
Macphee, I. M. Moore, J. C. Newman, K. E.
Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Spender, J. M.
Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D.
Wilson, I. B. C.

PAIRS

Wallis. L. G. Cross,M.D.

Anthony, J. D. Drummond,P.H.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Suspension ofStanding Orders

Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (8.32)-1 move:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the House calling upon-

(I) the Prime Minister to explain to the House why he misled the Parliament at Question Time in indicating that the Commonwealth had exhausted its financial responsibilities to the States, while at the very same time he was concluding a private arrangement with the Premier of Queensland to provide that State with a further $16m, while ignoring the needs of the other States;

(2) the Government to end the increasingly farcical decision-making process in the hospital field. and to abandon its present ill-conceived hospital funding proposals.

1 think that the decisions made this afternoon reduce the hospital funding-

Motion (by Mr Fife) put:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

62

Noes

46

Majority

16

AYES
Baume,M.E. Birney,R.J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A.
Bungey, M. H. cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian carlton,J.J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P.
Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G.
Dobie,J.D.M. Edwards. H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (TeUer) Giles, G. O'H. Goodluek,B.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,LM.

Jannan, A.W.
Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. KilIen,D.l.
Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean. R. M.
McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, 1. M. Moorc, J. C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L.
Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.
Sainsbury, M. B.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Spender, J. M.
Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
Viner, R.I.
White,P.N.D.
Wilson, I. B. C.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, KC.
Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G.

NOES

Jacohi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Lea (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Keating, P. J.
Kelly,R.J.

Suspension ofStanding Orders

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2261

NOES
Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K. L. Hawke,R.J.L Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E.

Kent,L.

Kerin,J.C.

Klugman, R E.

McMahon, Les

Mildren, J. B.

Milton,P.

Morris, P. E.

Morrison, W. L.

Mountford, J. G.

Scholes, G. G. D.

Scott, J. L.

Theophanous, A. C.

UreD, T:

.

West,S. I.

Willi',R.

Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Anthony, J. D. Drummond, P. H.

Wallis, L. G. Cross,M.D,

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the motion seconded?

Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (8.38)-1 second the motion. This is the sleaziest--

Motion (by Mr Fife) put:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

61

Noes

46

Majority

15

AYES
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. I. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, I. M. Braithwaite, R A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J.]. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O-H. Good luck, B. I. HaU,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (TeUer) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt,R.l.D. Hyde,J.M.

Jarman, A. W. JuU,D.F.
Kauer,RC. Killen,D.I.
Lloyd,B.
Lusher, S. A. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M.
McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore, J. C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe,F. L.
Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian
Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. L White, P. N. D.
Wilson,I.B.C.

Armitage, J. L.

NOES

Jacobi,R.

NOES
Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Browfl,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Child,]. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys,B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Jenkins, H. A. lohnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry
Jones, Charles
Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L.
Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon,Les MildreD, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. West,S.].
White, P. N. D. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Anthony, J. D. Drummond,P.H.

Wallis,I..G. Cross,M. D.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (8.45)-Mr Deputy Speaker, this whole deal stinks and---

Mr Fife-Mr Deputy Speaker, I move:

That the question be now put.

Mr YOUNG-All the States should receive the same consideration as Queensland received this afternoon.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member for Port Adelaide will resume his seat.

Mr YOUNG-South Australia, Western Australia, New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania and the Northern Territory should all receive the same deal.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The

honourable member for Port Adelaide will re-

sume his seat.

.

Mr Hodgman-Why do you hate Tasmania?

Question put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

61

Noes

46

Majority

15

Baume,M.E.
Birney, R J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H.

AYES

Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. MacKenzie, A. J.

2262 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Suspension ofStanding Orders

AYES
Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, \V. P. Cowan,D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S, (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J, Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hogdman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt,R,J.D. Hyde,J.M.

Mclean, R. M. McMahon, Sir \Villiam McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, D. T. Moore,]. C. Newman, K. E, O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, 1. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. 1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, l. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E, Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S, Duffy,M.J, Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry,K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E.

Jacobi, R.
Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry
Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.e. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Le..'i Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, p, F.
Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Thcophanous, A. C, tJren, T. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young, 1-1. J.

Anthony, J. D. Drummond, P. H.

PAIRS

Wallis, L.G. Cross,M. D.

In division-

Mr Armitage-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. The four heavies, Fraser, Anthony, Lynch and Sinclair, obviously are doing over the dissidents, from the information I get from those people who are not in the division.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question put-

That the motion (Dr Blewett's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

46

Noes

61

Majority

15

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Fre.,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E.

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J.
Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris, P. F. Morrison. W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D.
Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Ureo, T. West, S. J. Willis,R. Young, M. J.

NOES
Baume,M.E. Birney! R. J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A. G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. Creller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J.W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W.

Jull,D.F. Katter,Rc' . Killen,D.J.
Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T.
Macphee, I. M. Moore,I.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, 'A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson) Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F.
Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S,
Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R 1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

PAIRS

Wallis, L. G. Cross,M.D.

Anthony, J. D. Drummond, P. H.

Question so resolved in the negative.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation,

Pig Slaugh ter Levy Amendment Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2263

Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
My YOUNG-Yes, I do. During the debate a few minutes ago I mentioned in passing that all the States wanted the same arrangements as the arrangements that had been made privately this afternoon between the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Premier of Queensland regarding hospital funding. There was a quite audible interjection, which I am sure, will be recorded in Hansard, from the Minister for Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) asking me why I hate Tasmania. I mentioned Tasmania as being one of the States affected and one of the States that certainly need looking at in the same way as Queensland was looked at. I wish to remind the House that I mentioned Tasmania in my statement. I would like the House to know that Tasmania now has had the largest cut-a 23 per cent cut-in its hospital funding. Certainly Mr Lowe will be here like Mr Bjelke-Petersen-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member is arguing the point.
PIG SLAUGHTER LEVY AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (8.58)- Having just sated myself in the dining room with a magnificent serving of roast pork, I feel it is only reasonable that I should address myself to the Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill. 1 would like to take a few minutes of the House to-
Mr Baume-How was the crackling?
Mr JOHN BROWN-Mr Speaker, the honourable member for Macarthur is interrupting. Kosher pork is served in the dining room if the honourable member is anxious to partake of it. I would just like to take a minute or two of the time of this House congratulating the Pig Meat Promotion Committee on its success in actually promoting pork on to the table and thereby, of course, increasing the number of pigs that are produced in Australia. The concept of the superporker is a rather new concept.
Government supporters interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Honourable gentlemen on my right will cease their noise.
Mr JOHN BROWN-Sometimes I feel that pigs are better behaved.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member forParrmatta is only inviting further interjections.I ask him to proceed with his speech to the motion.

Mr JOHN BROWN-If I have insulted the pigs, Mr Speaker, I apologise.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Parramatta knows that his second response was worse than the first. Furthermore, it does not have any novelty. His words have been used in Parliaments successively for 200 years. I ask him to proceed with his speech to the motion.
Ml' JOHN BROWN-In that case, I will speak about the new concept of pork which is the super-porker concept. This has been promoted very successfully by the Pig Meat Promotion Committee to the extent that in Adelaide as the honourable member for Maranoa (Mr Ian Cameron) suggested, the proportion of superpork which is sold in the shops has increased something like 230 per cent. When the Pig Meat Promotion Committee started to promote pork in a concentrated fashion, as it did, pork accounted for something like only 4 per cent of meat sales in Australia, but the advancement, in the time that the Committee has been promoting, is incredible. So I congratulate the Committee for that. I suggest to the House that the reason the levy is sought to be increased from 20 cents to 60 cents is to enable that promotion to go on all over Australia. I can only wish it success with that. One of the reasons the Committee had great success in South Australia was because of a great concentration of advertising on television. In fact, Miss Piggy was not the only pig to star on television where, of course, she is the sex symbol of the The Muppets. It appeared that the whole promotion of pork on television was an enormous success. I suggest to people that the generally held concept of pigs being dirty animals is wrong and that pigs are in fact the cleanest of all domesticated animals. Some of the misconceptions about pork meat should also be cleared up.
Mr Kerin-Not very clean on Anthony's farm.
Mr JOHN BROWN-J do not know that that is altogether correct. J was reading a report in the Sydney Morning Herald headed: 'All pigs want is love'. It suggested that, because of some survey that had been conducted in the Netherlands, the Dutch had worked out that pigs love a little affection. The report said:
Where there was a good relationship between the stockman and the pigs the average number of pigs born per sow was significantly higher than on farms where the pigs were wary of humans.
The extent of affection meted out has not been determined yet-Dr Hemsworth said that a daily friendly pat on the snout may be sufficient.
That might well be the way for Kermit to win Miss Piggy's heart. I would like to make an observation or two about the value of pork as a culinary

2264 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Companies Bill

item. We all know that pork is one of the oldest foods known to man and also one of the tastiest and best loved of all meats.
Mr Barry Jones-Charles Lamb wrote an essay on it.
Mr JOHN BROWN-That is right, a dissertation on roast pork. I have no doubt that the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones), who has the reputation of being the greatest trencher-man in this House, would know about that. The concept of super-pork has enabled the housewife to buy a whole new range of pork cuts such as schnitzel, steaks, spare ribs, chops, roast, diced and minced pork which are all now very available, all delicious and all able to be prepared with other meats. In recent days it has been quite firmly established that today's pork, while being tender and full of protein, has larger amounts of thiamine-that is vitamin B-than any other meats, poultry or fish. Contrary to popular belief
there is even a place for pork on special dishes.
One hundred grams of lean pork contains fewer kilojoules than beef or lamb and the small amount of fat is more easily digested because it is less saturated than other animal fats. May I suggest to all housewives, who mayor may not be listening, that if they really want to have their families healthy, well satisfied and totally appreciative of their culinary art, try a little pork.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
COMPANIES BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 30 April, on motion by MrMoore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)--Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill, the Companies (Fees) Bill, the Companies (Transitional Provisions) Bill, the Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill, the Crown Debts Priority) Bill, the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Bill (No.2), the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Bill, the Securities Industry Amendment Bill (No.2), the Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Bill and the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and

Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Bill (No. 2), as they are associated measures. Of course, separate questions will be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these ten measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (9.6)-At the outset the Opposition proposes to move an amendment to the motion that the Companies Bill be read a second time. I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing the Bill, the House:
(1) expresses its concern(a) at the Government's abdication of its responsibility to make national laws forcompanies and securities pur-suant to the Commonwealth's own constitutional powers, and in accordance with the recommendations of the St:nate Select Committee on Securities an.' Exchange in 1974 (the Rae Report); (b) at the lack of effective accountability of the National Companies and Securities Commission to either the Government or Parliament of the Commonwealth, or to any other single elected Government or Parliament, and (c) that despite the inordinate delay in introducing the legislation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth has not been given an opportunity effectively to scrutinise this Bill and associated Bills and will not be able effectively to determine company law in the future under the Co-operative Companies and Securities Scheme;
(2) calls upon the Government in the event of the breakdown for any reason of the scheme, of which the Bill is a part, immediately to proceed to the introduction of Commonwealth legislation for the national regulation of companies;
(3) notes that this Bill places uniformity before reform in deference to powerful vested interest groups and represents a retreat to the lowest common denominator standard of company law;
(4) calls upon the Government to expedite the establishment of an Accounting Standards Review Board,and
(5) calls upon the Government immediately to pursue a fundamental reform of company law, including: (a) the abolition of the category of 'exempt proprietary company' and the privileges associated with it; (b) the provision of statutory directions and powers to the National Companies and Securities Commission and the courts to look behind the corporate entity in appropriate circumstances, to ascertain those who control it or hold shares in it, and, having regard to the purpose of the creation of the

Companies Bill

12 May L981 REPRESENTATIVES 2265

corporate entity and the manner of its control, to affix personal liability and adjudicate personal rights where it is just and equitable to do so;
(c) the extension of the powers of inspection of the National Companies and Securities Commission to ensure the fullest reasonable access of the Commission to books;
(d) the amendment of any provision which enables questionable practices to be hidden by means of legal professional privilege;
(e) the requirement for all companies to raise and maintain a prescribed minimum nominal and paid up capital;
(f) rationalisation of the cumbersome provisions in respect of company names on the basis of single nationwide registration;
(g) a requirement that companies disclose all donations for political purposes;
(h) a requirement that dividends be paid only from the genuine profits of a company;
(i) full review of the provisions relating to fund-raising and prospectuses to ensure maximum disclosure and to require independent valuation of assets exchanged for isssued shares;
(j) reform of the provisions relating to companies financing dealings in their own shares, including the removal of the exemption given to financial assistance to salaried directors;
(k) provision for a higher required standard of competence, care and diligence for directors and officers of companies;
(I) a requirement that more frequent accounts be lodged by companies listed on the stock exchanges;
(m) in order to protect creditors and to assist the prevention of tax avoidance, the imposition of stringent disclosure requirements upon companies acting as trustees of trading trusts, in relation to their capacity as trustees and the accounts of the relevant trusts, and the imposition of heavy penalties for non-compliance;
(n) full disclosure to the public of the beneficial ownership of all shares in companies;
(0) published accounts to include full details of each director's and officer's remuneration and right of inspection for employees and shareholders of director's service contracts;
(p) adequate remedies for oppresive conduct, including extension of the concept of oppression to single and anticipated acts unfairly prejudicial to a shareholder; and provision of further means such as a 'Shareholders' Tribunal' to protect the interests of minority shareholders, and
(q) complete reform of the winding up provisions, including greater protection for unsecured creditors, following a reference on insolvency to the Australian Law Reform Commission'.
The Opposition has moved this amendment because it remains convinced that the co-operative companies and securities scheme is unsatisfactory and because the Companies Bill which forms a

part of the scheme is deplorably inadequate. We have chosen, however, not to seek formal amendments to the Bill because to do so would, under the tedious arrangements of the co-operative scheme, lead to further delays in the establishment of a uniform companies code. Already, the delays have been incredible, and the passage of these Bills will not be the end of that. The States still have to enact their application legislation, so that there is no prospect for the code to be commenced before January 1982. In this context, it must be remembered that the proposal to establish a uniform companies code was first agreed to by a meeting of State and Commonwealth Attorneys-General in 1959. Moreover, it has been seven years since the Australian Labor Party sought to establish through its National Companies Bill a realistic national companies code.
Why have we waited and wasted these past seven years? Certainly, it has not resulted in a more modern, more comprehensive, or a more effective law being developed. This Bill shys away from virtually every conceivable area of reform. Its weaknesses in that respect will be dealt with in more detail later in these remarks, and also in the Committee stage. It is sufficient to record at this point that the Opposition considers this Bill to be a disgrace, all the more so for the many years that we have waited for it. But the Bill must also be considered in the context of the co-operative scheme of which it is only a part. If there could be any justification for our waiting seven years, it would be that a co-operative scheme proves to be constitutionally and practically more effective than a single national law exclusively the responsibility of this Parliament. Yet already, as the Opposition has consistently held and argued, the co-operative approach has no such superiority. The inordinate delays, for example, waiting for seven governments to reach agreement, are already testimony to one of the scheme's weaknesses. The fact that this Bill, as we have indicated in our amendment, represents the lowest common denominator of company law, is further evidence.
In previous debates on the other elements of the companies and securities package, the Opposition has clearly established that the constitutional authority, and more importantly the constitutional responsibility, for companies and securities law rests firmly with the Commonwealth. We have maintained consistently that placitum 20 of section 51 of the Constitution, which gives this Parliament power to legislate with respect to foreign corporations and trading or financial corporations formed within the limits

2266 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Companies Bill

of the Commonwealth, is a clear-cut power prothat. Equally, as our amendment indicates, we

vided to the Commonwealth. We have enunciated consider that it is lamentable that the Parliament

the many decisions of the High Court of Australia has had no role during these seven years of delay

which have clarified this power. Yet this Governin effectively scrutinising this Bill and the

ment, in keeping with its crippled ideology, has associated Bills. This is particularly regrettable

sought to avoid any extension of Commonwealth given that the Parliament had such an important

powers and responsibility. It has sought instead role, through the Rae Senate Select Committee on

this strange hybrid, the co-operative scheme, Securities and Exchange, in promoting the need

whereby all seven governments have some say in for reform and national law in these areas.

the law, but no one of them has full responsibility for it. The excuse the Government has given for the creation of this complex mess is that, in fact, it does not have constitutional power. But that, of course, is clearly and quite demonstrably nonsense.

I turn now to consider directly the Companies Bill and the associated Bills. Because this is a cognate debate, I must begin by indicating that the Opposition supports all of these Bills, except that we intend to oppose Part III of the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Bill (No.2)

But what of the constitutional position of the 1981. I will give further details of our objections

co-operative scheme itself? Already before any of to this part during the Committee stages, except

the substantive legislative codes are in operation that I should indicate here that it is a further

under the scheme, a question mark hangs over it. demonstration of the extraordinary contempt

It is like a sword of DamocIes. The takeover battle that the Government has for the parliamentary

by Elder Smith Goldsbrough Mort Ltd earlier this process. This is because there is no intention to

year led the South Australian Corporate Affairs proclaim Part nI, which effectively lifts the pro-

Commission to seek the assistance of the New hibition on crossings, until the Ministerial Council

South Wales Corporate Affairs Commission to for Companies and Securities unanimously agrees

obtain information from certain merchant banks. to do so, after investigating whether stock

The response from the banks when the New exchange rules adequately deal with possible

South Wales body sought to comply was that conflicts of interest. That is to say, the Govern-

it-the New South Wales CAC-was not acting ment is asking the Parliament to pass a law which

in pursuit of the peace, order and good governmayor may not ever be proclaimed, because

ment of that State. What a farcical situation it is neither the Government nor the Parliament yet

that a line drawn on a map of Australia by some know how adequate are the alternative means of

ill-advised founding father could be such an imcontrol. This is a preposterous insult to the Parlia-

pediment to the proper conduct of companies in ment and to pass a law in such circumstances

Australia. So there we have it. Under this federal would be a complete abrogation of the Parlia-

scheme there is, already, considerable uncertainty ment's responsibilities. So, I have foreshadowed

as to the rights and powers of one State to initiate what our action will be in that regard.

action in another. We do not know how such a challenge would hold up in a court but, nonetheless, we have in actual experience, reason to question the constitutional validity of the scheme. Yet these seven years of delay are justified by the Government as avoiding constitutional problems. What ar~ant nonsense! All that the Government has avoided is its proper constitutional responsibilities.

The other Bill which requires some comment before we turn to the companies code itself, is the Crown Debts (Priority) Bill 1981. I foreshadowed that the Opposition will also be moving an amendment the motion for the second reading of this Bill. The amendment expresses our concern at the fact that the whole area of priority for the Crown remains unsatisfactory. We note that the Commonwealth, contrary to the report entitled 'Pri-

I have dealt briefly with the problems of delay ority of Crown Debts' tabled in the Senate by the

and the abdication of responsibility by the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional

Govermnent. I stress that of equal importance, is and Legal Affairs in 1978, has chosen to retain the

the contemptuous way with which the Governprerogative priority of the Crown in relation to

ment deals with the Parliament. As I have already tax instalment deductions, withholding tax on

indicated, no single Parliament is responsible for dividends and interest remitted overseas. We

this co-operative law, and the National understand that because the Commonwealth has

Companies and Securities Commission is not reretained its priority to this extent-a priority re-

sponsible to anyone parliament. The Opposition lating to about one-half of the total tax liability of

considers this deplorable. I am sure, in his more bankrupts or companies in liquidation-the

rational moments that the Minister for Business States have chosen to refuse to abrogate their own

and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) agrees with priority status.

Companies Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2267

We in the Opposition consider these actions of principles. We regret that that opportunity was

the Commonwealth and the States to be regretnot undertaken.

table. We further believe that in situations of bankruptcy or liquidation, the highest priority should be afforded to the ordinary employees of the businesses concerned. I think that that is a moral judgment with which everybody should agree, not just the Opposition. Invariably, employees and those to whom compensation payments are owed are placed in the greatest hardship by business failures. The business is usually their only source of income, while most creditors and certainly the Crown have a greater spread of income sources and risks. The Opposition urges the Commonwealth Government and the States to re-examine urgently the issue of debt priorities which arise in the distribution of the assets of business in liquidation or bankruptcy.

The importance of the corporate entity in our society cannot be overstated. More and more, companies and trusts are being formed to conduct business and, regrettably, for other purposes including the avoidance of tax. So it is vitally important that in framing companies laws we keep
in mind the objectives which we have. l suspect that the present Government's only objective has been uniformity, which in itself is worthwhile, but it does not in any way go to the heart of the issue. For instance, why should anyone be given the privilege of conducting business under circumstances of limited liability? Can anyone answer that with a positive response? The answer, surely, is that the modern corporation and the modern small business company provide an efficient ve-

I now turn to the Companies Bill which is the main Bill and Tguess the linchpin to the whole operation. I intend to deal with particular provisions

hicle for the mobilisation of risk capital. This modilisation has been a vital engine of economic development in the Western world.

during the Committee stage and confine my reThis role of the privileges of limited liability in

marks at this time to some general observations the corporate form carries with it a responsibility

which reflect the attitudes of the Opposition to which must be exercised and be seen to be exer-

company law. First of all, it must be observed that cised. In the modern era, where corporations can

this Bill is a retreat to the lowest common denomibe vast and where there are hundreds of thou-

nator of attitudes to company law. It has achieved sands of small companies, the rules of the game

the objective of uniformity, as any Bill under the must be uniform, clear and comprehensive. This

scheme does, but it has totally ignored the need Bill fails miserably on everyone of those descrip-

for reform. [ think any independent observer of tions. The essential requirements include the im-

the corporate scene in Australia would agree that position of a standard of skill, care and diligence

this area of corporate concern is in great need of appropriate to the high degree of responsibility

reform. This is so, not only against a high standard which directors and other officers must accept.

of modern corporate rule but also against the This Bill fails in this respect because it essentially

standard set in earlier drafts of this legislation and reproduces the requirement which has long

against the standard reached in 1974 in the Labor proven to be inadequate in the antiquated laws

Government's National Companies Bill.

which we have inherited. I regret the fact that

there was some evidence of reform in this area in

The only substantial changes-I hesitate to the draft exposure Bill of some months ago which

refer to them as 'reforms'-are the substantial rehas now disappeared.

vision of the structure and level of penalties and completely new provisions in relation to the registration of priority of charges. These are supplemented by various minor changes which are generally worthwhile but, in relation to most areas in need of reform, a giant step backwards from previous drafts is evidenced. This backward step, I might say, appears to have been the result of pressure from powerful but minority vested interest groups. It certainly has not resulted from pressure from the thousands of small shareholders, small creditors and employees whose lives and livelihoods are so significantly affected by company law. The establishment of a new

Another essential requirement is disclosure; but, once again, this Bill fails because it has constrained the powers of the NCSC. It retains such categories as 'exempt proprietary companies' with their lesser disclosure requirements and retreated from the urgent need to impose disclosure requirements on companies acting as trustees of trading trusts. I am sure that my colleague the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) has some very pointed observations to make on that subject. But these are just some of the failures of this Bill. Several others are referred to in the amendment that I have moved.

administration and a new law in relation to To take the example of trading trusts, we have

companies should have been seen as an opporhere a classic instance of a tail-tax avoidance by

tunity to assess the role of company law from first private business-wagging a dog, that is, carrying

2268 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Companies Bill

on a business with a proper legal structure. Typically we have in these cases the complete abrogation of all of the fundamental responsibilities which should be imposed in circumstances of limited liability. Formally, management of the business is vested not in the directors, but in the company itself. The directors avoid their responsibilities; the companies are typical1y undercapitalised; and creditors and employees are left virtually without protection. The only beneficiaries are the sharp operators who seek tax benefits in company-trust combinations. This is a clear example of what I mean when I say that, in framing company law, we must have our objectives in mind. Where a business structure does not serve our objectives, it should not be allowed to form. At a very minimum, full public disclosure of the facts of each case should be required. Disclosure, if it is to be effective, must also be in such a form that it can be trusted and interpreted. Everyone knows that companies can often decide each year what profits they wiII disclose. Accounting standards in Australia are entirely inadequate.
Mr Spender-What utter nonsense.
Mr JOHN BROWN-The honourable member for North Sydney thinks that is nonsense. I would suggest that the silk from Northern Sydney should go and have a look at the list of bankruptcies that litter the history of corporations in Australia and the enormous disasters that have been foist upon innocent people, be they shareholders, creditors or employees. The Opposition has repeatedly called for the establishment of a statutory body to review accounting standards. The proposal is resisted by those who work the current system. Obviously, of course they would resist it. It has been tossed about between the Ministerial Council and the National Companies and Securities Commission but, if anything, the signs are that it will never be implemented. Here again the Government is an abject failure. It is not having a very good fortnight.
Finally, in the time that remains, I mention that the Bill also fails to deal with some of the more important new concerns which have emerged in relation to company law. Small shareholders regrettably have not been given any significant new roles in the management of companies, despite the continuation of nineteenth century concepts of the duties of directors. The divorcement of small shareholders from the affairs of companies remains total and complete. Employees continue to be ignored. There is no legislative recognition of the rights or responsibilities of employees insofar as company management is concerned. Provisions relating to employees gaining shareholdings in

companies as part of their remuneration package are inadequately dealt with. There is not only no consideration of these aspects but also there is no protection afforded employees through disclosure requirements appropriate to them-despite the fact, and I will admit this, that some more progressive companies have voluntarily chosen to prepare reports to employees-and there is virtually no limit on the allocation of 'perks' to directors and others irrespective of the position of workers. The Government has ignored the employee in this Bill and shows no sign of ever waking up to the fact that social awareness and economc conditions increasingly require that employees be taken into account.
[n conclusion, the Opposition will support the passage of these Bills but only because it is concerned that they be no further delayed-the Government has made a high art form of delaying these things; there has been a 22 year delay between 1959 and 1981-and because the uniformity of law which they offer is preferable to the costly inefficiencies of the current system. We believe that the Bills presented to this Parliament are utterly inadequate. Whilst the current Minister is the fourth to have had responsibility for them, he must be ashamed to have been the one who had to introduce them. The Opposition hopes that the National Companies and Securities Commission will prove more diligent and more effective in promoting company law reform than the four Ministers of this Government have proven so far to be.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)~-Order! Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Jacohi---I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak.
Mr DEAN (Herbert) (9.30)-The amendment moved by the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) is unacceptable because it is really based on one concept, that is, that this Parliament should be unilaterally making laws relating to corporations for application throughout the whole of Australia rather than adopting a cooperative approach, which the Government has done in the package of legislation before us this evening and in legislation already passed. Really, it comes down to this: Does the national Parliament ride rough-shod over the States? Does it ignore the fact that practically and constitutionally the States have had the carriage of company law since Federation? Does it ignore the fact that not all wisdom resides with the Commonwealth or that there ought, indeed, to be true co-operation as between the Commonwealth and the States on such important pieces of legislation?

Companies Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2269

Honourable members on this side of the House adopt the view that there ought to be a cooperative approach and that the Commonwealth ought not to ride rough-shod over the rights of the States, including the State of New South Wales. We adopt the view that this Parliament ought to take account of and, where necessary, learn from the experience of the States, which practically and constitutionally have had the carriage of corporate legislation since Federation. The amendment moved by the honourable member for Parramatta is unacceptabble because he does not want to take that into account. He wants this Parliament to ride rough-shod over the States. That is not something that honourable members on this side of the House will countenance. We will even take account of what Mr Wran and his colleagues have to say and go ahead with the co-operative package accordingly.
The honourable member for Parramatta made great reference to delays. Of course, if it is decided as a matter of principle that there ought to be cooperation with the States, regrettably some delays will be unavoidable. Nevertheless, we have already passed some parts of the total package of companies legislation. We have before us this evening the Companies Bill and its associated legislation, all of which brings to a climax a cooperative approach bringing about real uniformity in this area for Australia for the first time. That is in fact a monumental piece of progress. This package of legislation is a major feat of all governments in this nation. It involves probably some 50 Bills being passed by the parliaments of Australia. It is the largest legislative undertaking ever taken on by a Commonwealth government. It certainly represents a major step forward in providing uniform legislation through which much of Australia's commerce and business can be carried on. It is also worth noting that some of the delays referred to by the honourable member for Parramatta have been caused by the fact that the legislation has been given out for public exposure. I think that it is rather a good thing that the government of the day not only co-operates with the States in framing this legislation but also exposes draft legislation to the public at large so as to get back comment on it and tries to improve and amend the legislation as a result of that.
The final point that we should come to in talking about the legislation is that in future amendments between the Commonwealth and the States will be done on a majority basis. Now that uniform agreement has been achieved with the States we are in a situation where the foundation has been laid for continued uniformity and cooperation in the companies area as between the

Commonwealth and the States. In other words, the package we have this evening and the packaging already passed by this Parliament lay the foundation-a very firm foundation-for continued reform in the companies area. The honourable member for Parramatta referred to a lot of problems that he sees in the Bill. The problems are either real-there may well be some that are real-or imaginary. The honourable member has a very fertile imagination. Whatever happens in practice, at least we now have the foundation whereby we can learn from experience. On the foundation of this co-operative package of legislation we can consider amendments and cooperatively the nation will continue, where necessary, to reform companies legislation. To say, therefore, that in this package of legislation the Government has shied away from real reform or has abrogated its constitutional responsibility is to ignore the fact that reform has been undertaken and that the foundation has now been laid in co-operation with the States for further reform as we gain experience from the enactment of this legislative package.
My further comments this evening will be related to the Companies Bill itself. Whilst I do not ignore the fact that there are important matters in all the other Bills in this package, for the remainder of my comments I will address myself to the Companies Bill because it is probably the major piece of legislation in the package before us tonight. Probably the most important concept that the new Companies Bill incorporates is the provision for one place registration within Australia for companies. Before going on to that in further detail it is probably worthwhile to go back a little in history to give an understanding of precisely what we have before us this evening and where it comes from. In December 1978 the Commonwealth and all six States executed a formal agreement to proceed with the preparation and enactment of uniform legislation in the companies area. That formal agreement contained four essential elements. Firstly, it formalised the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities comprised of one Minister representing each State and the Commonwealth. The Council was to reach unanimous agreement on all initial legislation, as we have it before us this evening. Subsequent amendments require only majority approval. The second element--
Mr J acobi-I am with you old son. Mr DEAN-I am glad to hear it. The second element is agreement to establish the National Companies and Securities Commission. The NCSC is subject to the direction of the Ministerial Council established by the formal agreement. The

2270 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Companies Bill

NCSC, subject to that direction, will administer the legislation under the scheme. It has various powers including powers to hold hearings, summon witnesses and delegate most of its powers and functions to the State and Territory corporate affairs officers. Thirdly, the formal agreement provides for maximum use of existing State and Territory corporate affairs officers. Although the legislation gives all powers and functions to the NCSC, the use of existing officers will ensure a decentralised administration of the scheme. The fourth element concerns a legislative framework which involves the States adopting the scheme legislation when it is placed in the Australian Capital Territory. The Australian Capital Territory will be the first to pass. all this legislation, which is then to be adopted by the States and the Territory. Subsequent amendments to the legislation passed by this Parliament will automatically apply in the other jurisdictions. Therefore, we have a Companies Bill coming before us as part of that total framework established by the formal agreement.
One place registration of companies has fairly obvious advantages as far as companies and all professions associated with them are concerned. A company can achieve nationwide recognition without the need to lodge 'company documents in other States or Territories. Overseas corporations will similarly have to seek registration in only one place. ,Associated with that measure is the fact that incorporated in the Companies Bill is a national system of registration for auditors and liquidators al!d, indeed, one winding-up of any corporation in all parti,?ipating jurisdictions. In that respect, I refer the House to clause 420 of the Bill. That is one but probably the most significant of the modifications or innovations incorporated within this Companies Bill, but there are others. This Bill contains a rationalisation of penalties and sanctions. A close examination of those penalties and sanctions will show that the Comp!!,nies Bill has teeth which are not so blunt, as is sometimes made out. The new Companies Bill has new powers of inspection which represent a,dramatic improvement in the present position of companies Acts within the States themselves.
I refer the House to the explanatory memorandum which has been circulated 1:?ythe Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore). The powers of inspection are referred to in some detail on page 52. The limited powers of inspection in the preseJ?t main States companies Acts are not expressed in a way that enables them to be
a used to investigate suspected criminal activity. In
addition, they do not enable corporate affairs office to obtain the information and explanations

needed to explain the records inspected. If inquiries do not produce voluntary co-operation a corporate affairs office either has to abandon the case Ot request a special investigation, with all the ramifications that that entails. It was considered in the formulation of this Companies Bill that those powers were inadequate. Therefore the Bill contains new powers of inspection which address themselves to some of the weaknesses that I have mentioned.
Significant reform is contained in the new Companies Bill in relation to pre-incorporation contracts. There has been some criticism that clause 81 of the Companies Bill does not effect any significant reform relating to contracts entered into prior to a company's formation. The question might have been asked: Why does the Bill not make personally liable, in the absence of an express agreement to the contrary, a person who purportedly entered into a contract in the name of or on behalf of the company, as might be seen in other codes? The object of clause 81 is certainly to modify the existing highly unsatisfactory common law position relating to preincorporation contracts. Under present law a company cannot effectively ratify preincorporation contracts so as to sue or to be sued on them. Under present law it is difficult to attach legal obligations of pre-incorporation contracts to promoters or other individuals purporting to act for companies. Clause 81 provides that a company, not formed at the time a cqntract was entered into, will be able later to ratify the contract so as to be bound by and entitled to the benefit of it. Under sub-clause 4 ~ person purporting to contract for the non-existent company will be personally liable in damages in some circumstances. There is a good basis for the modification tp be expressed in this way, based largely on a 1979 report of the Victorian Law Reform Commjssioner.
The new Companies Bill contains substantial modifications to the provisions in general about shareholdings. I will not have time this evening to go into those matters in detail. Perhaps my colleague, the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender), will be able to do so. In relation to priority of charges, the new Bill ensures that there is a system ofpriorities in accordance with the recommendations of the Eggleston report. That system of priorities has been included as a substitute for earlier requirements that charges be registered within a certain time of creation, usually 30 days. In addition, the present Bill seeks to refine those priority provisions beyond those contained in the August 1980 draft. Another major change from

Companies Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2271

the August draft is the removal of the sixth Scheddifferent skills. The test imposed unrealistic bur-

ule. That Schedule, which related to companies' dens on outside directors. Practice might show

accounts and group accounts, was similar to the that those provisions are not severe or extensive

old ninth Schedule in the Interstate Corporate enough. But surely it is desirable, having estab-

Affairs Commission Companies Acts. The prolished this co-operative framework and having

vision now is for the sixth Schedule requirements arrived <+t the terms of this co-operative Bill, to get

relating to accounts and group accounts to be it moving, to see it work and then to decide

made into regulations.

whether weaknesses need to be corrected or

changes ought to be made. To imagine what may

Some critics have said that this is unreasonable not in real trading practice come about is folly. I

in that it might permit draconian amendments to intended to spend a little time on the trading trust

be the regulations at a later time. But, on the other provisions and the excitement stirred up by one

hand, by ensuring that these requirements can be national newspaper recently when it suggested

enacted in regulation, the Parliament retains that the so-called tax lobby had won a major con-

flexibility so that where deficiencies arise and cession by having them removed. From all my in-

where changes are found to be necessary they can quiries I found that newspaper report to be quite

be made more speedily and effectively thanif an erroneous. The changes were not the result of any

amendment to a Schedule were to be enshrined in so-called tax lobby; rather they were the result of

an Act. It should be borne in mind also that the further consideration by the Ministerial Council. I

regulations are intended to take the same form hope that my colleague the honourable member

substantially as the draft Schedule 6 or the old for North Sydney will have time to address him-

Schedule 9. To this date they contain no sigself more fully to that aspect of the matter.

nificant departure from the present law. As I said at the beginning, it should be remembered that this is a foundation for the future administration of company law in this nation. Where deficiencies arise and where changes are required the Ministerial Council and the parliaments of this nation should be prepared swiftly and effectively to make the changes necessary.

Finally, I refer to some Press criticism that the disclosure provisions in this Bill as they might relate to Australian operations or the operations within Australia of overseas corporations do not go far enough. I simply draw the attention of the House to the provisions of clauses 561 and 540 and the appeal provisions of 537. The legislative package that we have before us is but a foun-

Some concern has been expressed about provisions relating to the duties of directors. Such provisions in the August Bill appear to have been removed. Questions have been raised as to why there are not more significant changes relating to directors' duties. The principal provision relating to directors' duties is clause 229, and it is certainly wider than the existing main States legislation. It applies to all officers of a company, not just directors. Directors and other officers are required to exercise a reasonable degree of care in performing their duties, in addition to the present requirement of reasonable diligence. The requirement that officers do not make improper use of information obtained by virtue of their position has been extended to cover former officers and employees. Provision has been made also for more severe penalties, involving terms of imprisonment. But, certainly, the present Bill does not impose a duty of skill on directors as was done in an earlier draft of the Bill. This change has been made in the light of public submissions received.

dation for the future advanced and uniform administration of company law in this nation. It is a tremendous step forward. It is a monumental feat of government and it ought to be enacted without any further delay. It is to be applauded by Australian business.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (9.50)-Whilst I support this companies legislation, it is with pleasure that I second the amendment. This package of Bills that purports to regulate business corporations can be bluntly described as law by the privileged for the privileged and of the privileged. It does nothirig more than perpetuate the existing inadequate regulation of business corporations. If the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) were honest, the appropriate title of the Companies Bill would be the Companies' Directors Protection Bill. I repeat what I said in regard to earlier legislation: This legislation can be summed up in two brief sentences-if one is an honest investor, beware; if one is a market or company shark, it will be business as usual.

Those submissions are to the effect that, firstly, it I challenge the Minister to indicate"the corpor-

is not appropriate to impose an objective standard ate reforms that are so clearly needed to ensure se-

of skill on directors since they are employed in curity and protection to both corporations and

different capacities, for different purposes and the community. Where is the embodiment of the

with the expectation that they will contribute so-called complete reappraisal of the role of the

2272 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Companies Bill

company in society? Companies, institutions and have been incurred in the immediately preceding

organisations must be responsive to the comyear. There is not a word about it. What a fraud

munity. This has become important, although it is the legislation is. In Australia the law-.:this legis-

difficult because of rapid political, economic, lation perpetuates it-permits a limited liability

technological and social changes. The community company to be formed with a share capital of 2c.

has developed new and obviously greater expecPublic companies must have a share capital of at

tations. Business corporations have suffered a least 5c. One may well ask whether this is a ridicu-

considerable downturn in credibility over the last lously low price to pay for the advantage of cor-

two decades, for a variety of reasons.

porate status and limited liability. Certainly the

Company law must establish a solid framework which defines a company's responsibility to its shareholders, creditors and the society. Beyond quesion the coming decade will bring ever increasing pressure to bear; it will test these laws to the limit. Regrettably, these Bills fail to meet the test. They will be inadequate and, as a consequence, ineffective. One can only describe them as

plethora of $2 companies that the public all too frequently hears about tends to breed cynicism and contempt towards the corporate sector. It is scandalous. In short, limited liability status is not a privilege to be earned but a licence to be abused. The fact that most companies may not abuse the licence is no answer to the claim that our laws are recklessly permissive.

completely outmoded. Even worse, they serve as nothing more than a charter for the unscrupulous. This so-called revamped companies law is almost the same as that in the laissez-faire Britain of the nineteenth century. Where are the profound and meaningful changes? Members of companies, particularly large companies, take little part in company affairs. Those members are poorly placed, and the provisions in these bills make sure that shareholders do not receive the information about their companies which would enable them to act as watchdogs on management. A classic example of that is the collapse of Associated Securities Ltd. Nothing in this legislation will remedy that situation. It is an indictment of all those who claim responsibility for these Bills.

I refer to some of the appalling deficiencies in the legislation. Firstly, there is a lack of creditor protection, an absence of minimum issue capital requirements, failure to regulate non-cash consideration share issues, failure to designate properly the funds from which dividends may be paid, failure to require all limited liability companies to make public audited annual accounts and failure to abolish exempt proprietary companies, which was done in Britain in 1967. I ask honourable members to contrast that with the Australian position, and to consider the situation in West European countries such as West Germany, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the European Economic Community countries. Secondly, there is failure to provide adequate protection to share-

There are no real changes to the legislation; holders and failure to regulate new share issues so

changes which are so necessary if the corporate that existing shareholders are treated fairly. There

sector is to fulfil its responsibility in our complex is not a word in the legislation about pro rata

society. For instance, it is essential that proxy issues and issues for non-cash consideration.

voting be used for shareholders unable to attend There is also failure to remove the manifest weak-

meetings. I hope the honourable member for ness in the current section 186 of the Companies

North Sydney (Mr Spender), who is to follow me Act which in limited circumstances allows share-

in this debate, will explain where that is provided holders to seek judicial relief from the unfair con-

for in the Companies Bill. There should be duct of the company's management or controlling

mandatory use of two-way proxies for important shareholders. The honourable member for North

resolutions to provide a means for shareholders' Sydney agrees with that. I refer him to section

participation and protection. There is not a word 75 (1) of the United Kingdom Act of 1980.

about that in the Bill. Why not? There are good Thirdly, our companies laws have failed to deal

reasons for it. We will come to that at the Comwith the fundamental weaknesses, which have

mittee stage. Creditors of limited liability been an affront for decades and there are separate

companies will receive little protection from these State laws. There are problems for pacesetter

laws. Unlike companies in Europe, Australian States. Taking the lead to reform legislation could

companies do not have to have a prescribed miniresult in companies setting up operations in other

mum paid up capital. There is no stringent regujurisdictions. It has been done time after time.

lation of the issue of shares for non-cash considerThat could lead to a possible loss of State revenue

ation. In that respect the legislation is utterly and employment. Is this good company law? It is

defective. There is no prohibition on the payment defective company law. Contrast that with the

of dividends to shareholders if some or all of the sensible positions that apply throughout the laws

share capital has been lost or the revenue losses of the EEC countries. It is bad, lowest common

Companies Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2273

denominator legislation. We are locking ourselves into a structure which by its very nature can only create weak and ineffective laws when clearly strong laws are needed.
A number of examples of that include the situation of exempt propriety companies. Most Australian limited liability companies are, within the existing Companies Act, defined as exempt propriety companies. Essentially, such a company is a propriety company in which no member of the public has direct or indirect interest in its shareholding. At least 90 per cent of Australian limited liability companies come within that definition. Such a company does not have to have its accounts audited annually. Its accounts can be audited but a copy of its audited balance sheet does not have to be filed with the Corporate Affairs Commission. Consequently, a creditor of such a company cannot search any public file for evidence of the credit worthiness of the company concerned. It is a scandal. The company does not have to pay for the privilege of limited liability by making adequate public disclosures of its financial position. If such a company does not have its accounts audited each year it must file a copy of its unaudited balance sheet with the Corporate Affairs Commission. Obviously, creditors rely on unaudited statements at their peril. The exempt propriety company concept was derived from the United Kingdom. In 1962 the English Jenkins committee on company law reform recommended that the concept be abolished and rightly so. Why did it do that? It took the view that such companies should have their accounts and balance sheets audited professionally each year, and for such accounts and balance sheets to be made public. They ought to be. Creditors of all such companies have a right to accurate information concerning their credit worthiness. The 1967 United Kingdom Companies Act abolished such companies, without creating any significant practical problems. Nothing better illustrates the gross inadequacy of Australian company law than the fact that the vast majority of such limited companies are entitled to secrecy in regard to their financial affairs.
I now turn to dividends out of profits, which is referred to in clause 565 of the Companies Bill and section 376 of the current Act. Neither the current Act nor the Bill defines profits. That is a scandal. Consequently, as under the existing section 376 (1), a company could lose most of its share capital through trading losses and then in a particular accounting period make a profit. That profit could be used for dividend purposes under this clause without the previous losses first being made good. It is scandalous. It is ironic that the

United Kingdom has adopted a more stringent definition of profits. Section 39 (1) of the United Kingdom Act states:
(I) A company shall not make a distribution . . . except out of profits available for the purposes . . .
(2) For the purpose of this part . . . a company's profit available for distribution, are its accumulated realised profits, so far as not previously utilised by distribution or capitalisation, less its accumulative or realised losses, so far as not previously written off in a reduction or re-organisation of capital duly made.
Section 40 of the United Kingdom Act states:
A public company may only make a distribution at any time:
(a) if at that time the amount of its net assets is not less than the aggregate of the companies called up share capital and its undistributable reserves; and
(b) if, and to the extent that, the distribution does not reduce the amount of those assets to less than that aggregate.
Let us look at this Bill and what it does not do. It fails to make it difficult for a limited company to be formed. There are no minimum issued capital requirements-for instance, the requirement of a minimum of $50,000 in issued capital for public companies as is the case in the United Kingdom. That requirement is contained in the 1980 Act. The Australian Bill fails to strengthen the extraordinarily weak regulation of share issues for noncash consideration. I will take up that matter with the sick at the back, the honourable member for North Sydney, in Committee. There is no requirement in the Bill that non-cash consideration should be expertly and independently valued and reported upon as is the case in the United Kingdom Companies Act, thus off-setting State cash transaction techniques for avoiding the limited disclosure of non-cash issues under proposed section 113 of the new legislation. This opening has not been closed off are recommended by the Eggleston Committee in 1970. Under this Bill the position remains exactly as it was.
There is no early warning device should there be a significant loss of share capital. Again, such a provision is contained in section 34 of the United Kingdom Act. There is no attempt to ensure that shareholders should receive equal and fair entitlements to new shares issued by companies. They ought to be protected. There is no attempt to enlarge the opportunities for minority shareholders to challenge the validity of acts of the board of directors or the general meeting. There is not a word on this matter in the Bill. I now read section 75 of the United Kingdom companies Act.
(I) A member of a company may apply to the Court by petition for an order under this section on the ground that the affairs of the company are being or have been conducted in a manner which is unfairly prejudicial to the interests of some part of the members (including at least himself) or that some

2274 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Companies Bill

actual or proposed act or omission . . . is or would be prejudicial."
Perhaps the honourable member for North Sydney would be kind enough to explain to me where there is a provision in the Bill that gives protection. I challenge him to show me. In contrast to these necessary provisions which are operative throughout Western Europe, this Bill provides for a small privileged section-that is, company directions-the protection they neither warrant nor deserve. All other needs and protection are subjugated to these privileged few.
Why is the Bill so weak? The contents of the Bill were supposed to reflect closely the existing Interstate Corporate Affairs Commision legislation. That legislation was weak, for a number of obvious reasons. To add to the problem, the weak laws were not even uniform. The new StateCommonwealth co-operative venture may in the short term solve the uniformity problems, but it certainly will not result in significantly stronger laws. It is highly questionable whether uniform weak laws are better than divergent laws, some of which are progressive. Let me repeat that: It is highly questionable whether uniform weak laws are better than divergent laws, some of which are progressive.
The reasons strong new laws are unlikely are: Firstly, the initial legislation requires unanimous consent by all members of the Ministerial Council; and, secondly, the amendments are unlikely unless they are acceptable to the Ministerial Council. The agreement provides for amendmentJ being approved by a mere majority vote. However, any dissenting member or members may threaten to leave the scheme unilaterally should these amendments be pressed home. Such action would ruin the scheme. Such a threat would be taken seriously with the result that planned majority reforms will be either jettisoned or watered down. This sort of compromise legislation is not what this country needs to lift its companies legislation out of the backwaters of the advanced Western world.
What is the answer? The dual goals of, firstly, uniform legislation and, secondly, strong legislation can be achieved only by the Commonwealth Government using its constitutional powers to pass laws relating to the formation of trading and financial corporations. Such laws would apply uniformly throughout Australia. They must be stronger laws thlln those contained in this package of Bills because the Commonwealth Government would not have to satisfy State governments. It would have the power to pass legislation thought necessary. It would be politically accountable for its legislation in a way

that is completely absent from this co-operative venture. There is no direct political accountability in this legislation. This is admitted on both sides of the chamber. Rather, it is defused between all the members of the Ministerial Council. Surely strong uniform law is preferable to uniform but compromise law. If strong uniform law can be achieved by Commonwealth legislation, the onus is on those supporting the alternative approach to demonstrate clearly that it will work in practice. The evidence so far available suggests it will not.
Australia cannot afford to play around with company law for another decade as it has done over the last decade. Time will not permit that leeway. We all agree on the desperate need to maximise Australian investment and to minimise the appalling escalation of foreign investment. If we are to maintain that which is rightfully ours, such laws must be effective. They must provide the atmosphere to induce people to invest with security. They must be just to all, not selective as this legislation clearly is.
If we place on the statute book laws that are weak, fragmented and inadequate, laws that fail to give shareholders and creditors in the community the protection and the security needed, laws which fail to make directors and auditors both responsible and accountable, that give one section immunity and leave the rest vulnerable, we have failed to meet the test. We have failed to provide the strong framework which is so necessary if business corporations and the investing public are to operate in a secure and expanding market.
These Bills will provide laws which will do nothing more than has been done since the inception of legislation in this area. They will provide a breeding ground for the spiv, the charlatan and the corporate crook. They were eliminated in Europe a decade ago. It is a scandal that the so called law makers of this country perpetuate ineffective law. But then, after all, we do not put gentlemen in gaol.
Mr Spender-Ha, hal
Mr JACOBI-That is no joke. I ask the honourable member for North Sydney to tell me how many knights of the realm of Associated Securities Ltd the Government has put in gaol. It is not likely to do so. I ask the honourable member to tell me also in the Committee stage of the Bill where the provision is in this legislation which will put those gentlemen behind bars? The legislation does not provide for that. What is needed is strong, uniform and national laws passed by the Commonwealth which are accountable to the

Companies Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2275

people in exactly the same way as our taxation Mr John Brown-It was not enough; he should

laws.

have got more.

I trust that before the debate is concluded toMI' SPENDER Those are exceedingly long

night we will have a chance to deal extensively prison terms, gentlemen; you cannot avoid that.

with a number of issues that have been raised by This is an illustration of the effective use of the

the honourable member for Parramatta (Mf John powers of special investigations.

Brown) and that I wish to raise at the Committee stage. It will be an outrage if the Government attempts to gag the debate of this Bill at 10.30 this evening. That is what it intends to do. It is with pleasure that I support the amendment.

I wish to deal now with one or two other matters which were raised in this amendment. Paragraph (5) sub-paragraph (g) states:
a requirement that companies disclose all donations for political purposes;

Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (lO.9)-On a subject which is as complex as this, it is very easy for people to have differing views about certain aspects. We are, after all, talking about the most comprehensive and complex single package of legislation ever to be put before this House. If the differing views were genuine, one would think they would be expressed in terms of some reasoned argument rather than as assertions which have at the bottom of them that sort of whining, latent hatred of anything that has to do with business. Let us look for one or two minutes

Of course, that is the old call no doubt inspired by instructions from the Premier of New South Wales. Does that have anything to do with company law? Of course it does not! It has something to do with politics and the political objectives of those on the other side of the House. [ turn now to another provision which was referred to in paragraph (5) (c) of the amendment which states:
the extension of the powers of inspection of the National Companies and Securities Commission to ensure the fullest reasonable access of the Commission to books;

at some of the matters raised in the motion which has been moved by the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) and seconded by the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi). If they were genuine--

If honourable gentlemen had examined the provisions in the Act relating to special investigations, and, as 1 have, had conducted two major special investigations, if they had seen that the provisions that now appear are in fact wider than

Mr Barry J ones-We call it an amendment.

they have ever been, and if they understood the

Mr SPENDER-I thank the honourable
gentleman. If they were genuine in what they were saying, we would see some serious matters in their amendment to the motion. However, let us look at one or two of the things which were said

truly draconic nature of a special investigation, they would not be putting to this House a proposition which either they know to be false or they do not really care whether it is true or false because it expresses a point of view-which is their

and consider, firstly, whether they are serious and, point of view-that businessmen are the manipusecondly, whether they have any support at all. lators. We heard honourable members say tonight Reference is made in paragraph (5) (b) of the that businessmen manipulate company accounts.

amendment, in the convoluted language which is We heard it said that those directors are a small

employed, to some power in the Commission to privileged sector, the people who bring the

ascertain those who control or own shares in the country down, whereas the truth of the matter is

company. The paragraph states further:

that they are the people who have built the

. . . having regard to the purpose of the creation of the country up.

corporate entity and the manner of its control, to affix personalliability and adjudicate personal rights where it is just and equitable to do so;

Mr John Brown-What about the workers? Have they done anything?

That is what courts have been doing for a long time. The honourable member raised the question at the end of his peroration: 'Tell me about any crooks in effect who have gone to gaol?' I will tell

Mr SPENDER-The honourable member asks: 'What about the workers?' The workers from that side of the fence do not do very much around here.

the honourable member about two such persons Let us look at some of the other Alice in Won-

who went to gaol as a result of an investigation derland assertions that have been made by some

into an organisation called Gollan Holdings honourable members on the other side of the

which, until its crash, was the largest trading chamber. Firstly, we are told that there has been a

company in Australia. I carried out that investidelay of seven years and two of those years they

gation and, as a consequence, the managing direcwere in power. Then we are told that there has

tor went to gaol for 13 years 9.nd the financial dibeen a delay from 1959 to 1981 during which they

rector went to gaol for 12 years.

had a period in power. Lastly we get a period of 10

2276 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Companies Bill

years. That complete overlooking and that desire to put to one side anything which is against them, illustrate the genuineness of the complaints that they have made.
The honourable member for Herbert (Mr Dean) stated that this was a most comprehensive package of legislation. Indeed, it certainly is. I said earlier that in legislation which was as wide, as complex and as embracing as this legislation is, unquestionably there are areas where one can differ. But what is not conceded by the Opposition is that there is anything good in this legislation whereas in truth it represents a most revolutionary attempt in this country to put forward legislation relying upon a joint Federal-State scheme and co-operation-between the States and the Federal Government in the knowledge that, if one does not engage in that kind of an exercise, one will put forward legislation which more likely than not will be struck down in parts because it would not have constitutional power to uphold it. The honourable member for Parramatta said that the Australian Labor Party asserted that there was a certain way to construe the Constitution. No doubt the Labor Party would go ahead and make that assertion to the High Court and it would lose because it is perfectly plain that it cannot maintain such a wide and comprehensive collection of legislative proposals simply under the constitutional powers which, in a divided federal system, are granted to this Government.
Let us look at some of the revolutionary aspects of this legislation. For the first time, we have a legislative scheme which embraces the entire area of companies and securities. All of this has been brought forward in one package. This is the first time this has ever taken place in this country. For the first time we find built into the legislation provision for automatic uniformity of amendments. Once they are passed by this Parliament, they flow on to the other States. This was something which was sadly lacking in the 1960 Uniform Companies Act. For the first time we find a permanent ministerial council for companies and securities which will act as a watchdog body with the task of ongoing review of legislation and general oversight and control of the implementation of this legislative scheme. For the first time we find uniform administration of a scheme and general superintendence by the National Companies and Securities Commission.
These elements are well known although the revolutionary nature of the proposals has not really been appreciated perhaps by the arguments that have been put in this House by those honourable gentlemen on the other side of the chamber. They amount in short to a fundamental change of

approach to legislation in this field. The attainment of uniformity of laws and their administration, whilst in itself of great benefit, is not all that is offered by the scheme. Very much more is offered by considerable and detailed alterations that have been made to the code which is before the House. Not a great deal of public attention has been focused upon these matters. Where public attention has been focused on the Companies Act and other legislation, more often than not it has centred on those matters which are thought to be newsworthy rather than noteworthy.
I will name just four of those matters, one of which has been referred to already by the honourable member for Herbert. For the first time we have a single system of registration of companies, that is, a single incorporation concept. Once a person registers in one State, that person is not concerned with repeating the filing of accounts year in and year out in other States. Secondly, there is a capacity to transfer domiciles of companies. That is a most advantageous capacity for any businessman to have. I will give one example of why this can be deemed to be so. Assume, for example, that one has a business. One carries on that business in the State of New South Wales, through a company structure set up in that State. Let us say that one wishes to transfer that business to the sunnier climes of Queensland. Until now it has been impossible to do that. Once this Bill becomes an Act it will be possible to transfer the domicile of one's company from one State to the other so that once one transfers to the new State one is, for all purposes, regarded as domiciled in that State and the company is accepted in that State.
Let us look at something else. There is provision here for the first time for a multi-State scheme of arrangements. That is something to which neither of the Opposition members referred. What does that involve? A scheme of arrangement is simply an arrangement which is entered into between a company and its creditors. It is an arrangement which is supervised by the court. It is made pursuant to court convened meetings. Before the legislation which is presently before the House, if there were assets of a company in more than one State it was necessary to go to each State to have a separate scheme of arrangement. Not only was this highly technical, highly expensive and highly wasteful of funds that otherwise would go to creditors but also it was fraught with risk for the very simple reason that in one State the scheme might be accepted, in the next State the scheme might be accepted but in the third State it might be rejected with the consequence that the whole

Companies Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2277

scheme would fail. It is now necessary to implement the scheme only in the State of incorporation; that is, the State in which the company has its home.
Lastly, I touch upon another of the improvements that have been made. I have referred to certain improvements in relation to the conduct of specal investigations. Let us look at two items there. First of all, if one looks at clause 296 (l2)-honourable members opposite supposedly are interested in improvements but they seemed to be able to find none-one will find that there is a provision there which empowers the inspector, the person who is running the special investigation, to control the conduct of legal advisers appearing in front of him. This is very necessary because at times what takes place is that the legal adviser appearing on behalf of somebody who has been questioned will, by objections or by seeking to advise his client before questions are answered by his client, in effect entirely disrupts the conduct of the investigation. That is something to be avoided and it has been avoided.
In the same set of provisions we have provisions now for conditions in respect of confidentiality of the transcript of examination of witnesses. That, of course, is very necessary so that witnesses cannot pass round transcripts amongst themselves and get their stories together before they come to the inspector or before they come back to be reexamined. These are areas where the content has been altered, where the law has been improved. There are unquestionable areas where improvement can still be made. This will always be so in an area as complex as this.
Let me conclude in the time that I have left by correcting something which has been said in the Australian Financial Review and which has been referred to today in passing by the honourable member for Hawker and the honourable member for Parramatta. On 6 May 1981 on the front page of the Australian Financial Review appeared the headline 'Tax Avoidance Lobby's Big Win'. The course of the article went on to refer to trading trusts. The article stated:
The tax avoidance lobby has had a big win against the new companies legislation with a vital provision making avoidance more difficult being quietly dropped by the Federal Government.
There are two answers to that. First of all, the history of this Government has been that it has tried at all times and with considerable success to plug tax avoidance loopholes. Indeed, I would think that these could never be called tax avoidance loopholes in any event because trading trusts do not in any way facilitate avoidance in any

different aspect to the way in which any other corporate vehicle works. The first point is that this Government has had a record in avoidance which is very hard to beat because it has closed the avoidance schemes. Secondly, the article entirely misconceives the history of the legislation now before the House. The exposure draft of April 1980 contained some provisions concerning trading trusts. They were complex, they were lengthy and they were dropped unanimously-I emphasise the word 'unanimously'-in August 1980. The then Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs in his second reading speech stated:
A considerable number of submissions were received on these provisions-
That is to say, the trading trust provisions-
many of them critical and many raising new issues that had not been dealt with in the exposure draft. After reviewing the submissions, the Ministers unanimously agreed that further work was required to be done on this matter before any legislation could be prepared.
Mr Dean-I referred to that, too.
Mr SPENDER--The honourable member for Herbert did in fact refer to that. That should be made perfectly clear to this House. The article unfortunately and, no doubt, inadvertently proceeds upon a complete misapprehension of the basis on which the trading trust provisions were dropped from the legislation and the time when those provisions were dropped from the legislation. This was in August of last year, not just a few weeks ago.
As I have said, the remarks made by honourable members on the other side of the House reveal a certain point of view. That point of view is that businessmen are never right, that businessmen are always wrong, that businessmen are crooks, and that businessmen seek to take advantage of people. That is implicit in everything that was said. It was admitted in passing that there might be some honest businessmen and it was said: 'We would like to see you build up a proper and decent capital market'. But the whole gist of the complaints was to the effect that we cannot trust them, that they will manipulate accounts, that they will manipulate people, that they will run shell companies and take benefits out of those companies, and that they will rob the poor. That seems to be what was being said. That reveals the difference in approach to this legislation between this side of the House and the other side of the House. We would certainly agree that change will have to be made as this legislation evolves. That will always be the case. The situation will have to change in order to meet circumstances as they arise, as new commercial situations have to be met and dealt with. But we proceed upon the basis

2278 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Companies Bill

that businessmen are usually responsible people. We have imposed in this Bill a wide variety of obligations upon businessmen to maintain confidentiality, to exercise diligence, not to take advantage of information that comes to them in confidence and otherwise. We have enclosed them with a variety of obligations which are there for one purpose and one purpose only-the protection of the investing public together with the protection of those who invest in the companies.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (10.29)-The Companies Bill and the package of nine accompanying Bills are a disappointment and an insult to all who have worked for the past 20 years for effective and uniform companies legislation in Australia. They represent the worst aspects of cooperative federalism-legislation based on the lowest common denominator. All the States and the Federal Government have had to agree to the details of this legislation before us today plus the total package of legislation which go to make up the four substantive codes to regulate companies and securities in Australia.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr Moore-Mr Deputy Speaker, I require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
COMPANIES BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mrs KELLY-What was needed was a truly effective national scheme based on strong, uniform legislation to regulate the companies and securities area throughout Australia into the 1980s. But what we have before us tonight is a weak excuse for the regulation of companies in Australia. It is a great pity that so little has come from so much talk, so much time and so much effort. Whilst the Opposition does not oppose this legislation, we are nevertheless reluctant to support these Bills which do not enact substantial reform. Clearly there has been a great need for effective reform in the areas of companies legislation and the Australian securities markets from the time of the Poseidon boom in the 1960s. If we are to believe the optimistic economic assessments of the Fraser Governinent that Australia is on the

brink of a new resources boom in the 1980s then it should be even more important at this time to ensure that effective reform has been implemented. The general public has a right to be protected from the shady practices that we saw in the 1960s and the 1970s. The greatest need in relation to companies and the securities industry is for provisions which ensure effective public accountability.
The Rae report of the Senate Select Committee on Securities and Exchanges in 1974 has provided us with detailed evidellce of som~ of the worst features of company practice. It also provided us with very strong recommendations on the need for a national scheme to regulate the activities of the Australian securities market and the related activities of companies and their directors. It is worth recalling some of the Committee's findings to remind ourselves of the importance Of effective reform to overcome the massive abuses which were uncovered. Volume 1, Part 1, Section 15.1 of that report states:
We discovered numerous instances of improper practices in the making of new issues and in the distribution. There has been considerable evidence -of insider trading, manipulation and other abuse in the stock markets . . .
In addition to our concern with abuses within the securities market, we are alarmed by evidence of improper, reckless and incompetent behaviour on the part of some of those in control of public companies and investment funds. The investor has too often been exploited by controllers of listed public companies and by managers of investment funds: We are alarmed by the frequency and serious nature of failures to meet appropriate standards of full accurate and timely disclosure . . .
That is what the Opposition wants reformed and that is what is not happening in this legislation. This Committee recommended the establishment of effective national regulation to overcome the glaring deficiencies uncovered during this investigation. Seven years later we are still waiting for such legislation to be developed. The Commonwealth has the constitutional power to enact legislation for this purpose. Several State governments have initiated some reforms. The general publicthe small investors of Australia-have waited patiently. After all this delay one could be fqrgiven for expecting that the legislation presented" would address itself seriously to the provisions of effective reform measures. Instead we find that we have been presented with ineffective, watereddown legislation that will be administratively very difficult to implement. This legislation relies on the concept of co-operative federalism which is a most cumbersome mechanism for implementing effective reforms. What is it, after all, we are trying to deal with? We are trying to deal with a national Australia-wide industry. There is, of course, some doubt that this Government is even

Companies Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2279

interested in implementing effective reform. As at this stage-for example, the question of dealers

the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs who are members of a stock exchange being

(Mr Moore) said in his second reading speech, prohibited from being directors of public

this was a matter of 'fine .tuning rather than companies, public companies being required to

reform'.

lodge quarterly reports on profit and loss and

The formal agreement of December 1978 provided complicated machinery to introduce co- .operative regulation of the companies and the securities industry-a Ministerial Council, a National Companies and Securities Commission, use of State administrations for implementation

turnover, an accounting standards review board, and provision of a statutory remedy for shareholders. The list goes on and on. These are all areas of great concern if we are serious about protecting the public from unscrupulous wheelers and dealers.

of the new arrangements and provision of uniform The Opposition has suggested a detailed list of

legislation. Uniform legislation is to be provided amendments which would greatly improve this

by the constitutional device of, firstly, enacting package of legislation, and I turn briefly to some

legislation for the Australian Capital Territory of them. Amendment 5 (b) calls for the provision

and then having that legislation adopted in each of statutory powers to the courts to enable the lift-

State. The problems associated with synchronising of the corporate veil in circumstances such as

ation of this whole unnecessary exercise have that where a holding and subsidiary company acts

already contributed to considerable delay. Not as a unit, and where a private company acts as

only is this legislation extremely limited in terms trustee for a trading trust. An earlier draft of the

of providing effective protection for the public, Bill in April 1980 contained clauses 167A to 1670

but also it relies for its implementation on the which ensured that the public knew the entity

achievement of consensus among other States-a with which they were dealing. These clauses set

task likely to be more difflcult than passing the out the extent to which nominee company

proverbial camel through the eye of a needle. It is accounts had to disclose assets and liabilities of

clear that any commitment to effective reform has the trust, and provided penalty provisions for

been shelved by this Government. By delegating non-compliance. As honourable members are all

responsibility to individual State bodies for the aware, the setting up of $2 nominee companies

day to day administration matters-receipt of which act as trustees for trading trusts means that

documents and so on-a complicated bureauthe persons shown on the register as shareholders

cratic procedure has been duplicated in each State or directors are merely nominees or puppets of

whereby the interests of the general public have the persons who operate the trading trust. This

been largely ignored. So much for the Governmeans that the real assets in the operation belong

ment's commitment to streamlining and efficiency to the trading trust and cannot be reached by

as espoused in the razor gang's review. A far more creditors of the company. Creditors are therefore

~ensible approach would be to establish a single misled as to the actual ownership of assets stand-

national scheme with effective powers and reform ing in the name of the company. Moreover, the

I'rovisions.

concept of directors' duties and responsibilities is

The package of legislation we have before us has been modified heavily and indicates the success of the powerful lobbying campaigns against the reform provisions. We can see how effective the reform provisions now are by the attitude of the Confederation of Australian Industry, which,

eroded by this arrangement. Also, there is doubt as to whether defaulting officers' provisions can apply to officers of a nominee company when its business fails. Again, it is the unsuspecting public which pays the penalty because of inadequate legislative protection.

as has been reported in the Australian Financial Clauses 167D to 167G of the April draft have

Review today, urged speedy enactment of this now been dropped from this legislation. This

modified legislation after having strongly opposed leaves room for considerable speculation as to

earlier drafts last year. There will clearly be a whose interests are being protected by the present

great deal of work ahead of the Companies and companies law package. Clause 261 of the Bill

Securities Law Review Committee which was estackles to a small degree part of the problem

tablished to assist the Ministerial Council. If this outlined in the trading trust situation to which I

legislation is to provide national regulation of have referred. It gives a company power to re-

companies and securities, then it is vital that an quire information from persons holding voting

ongoing commitment to reform be made publicly shares in the company in relation to the beneficial

and that the work of the Review Committee be ownership of those shares. The company must

encouraged. There are many areas for potential enter in its register whether someone other than

reform that have been deferred by the Ministers the holder of the share has a relevant interest, but

2280 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Companies Bill

only after it has obtained this information. However, the clause is limited in its application b~~ cause it is dependent on the company's seeking information. There is no way in which a member of the public wishing to deal with the company can find out who is the beneficial owner of shares upless the company has already sought this information from its shareholders and published it in the register. Of course, there is no obligation for the company to seek this information, and it is unlikely that many will avail themselves of the opportunity. Thus, this clause is an inadequate substitute for substantial provisions which would regulate the activities of trading trusts.
Many other modifications and much watering down of the provisions have taken place as a result of pressure and lobbying from many groups with a vested interest in preventing greater regulation and control of their activities. The small investor is no match for the corporate giants in this legal jungle. We cannot rely on the companies and securities industry to regulate itself. This Parliament has a duty and an obligation to the people of Australia to ensure that effective public accountability provisions are implemented. The provision of a shareholders tribunal to provide a legal remedy in the protection of the interests of minority shareholders would be very much welcomed by small investors, but we do not find any provision for that. When we look at the modifications to the director's duty of care that are contained in this Bill we see that this Government appears to have little interest in the small investor. These provisions have been steadily eroded. The earlier draft imposed stiff maximum penalties. Now these have been replaced by a sliding scale providing for the higher penalties to apply only where dishonesty or fraud is proven. This implies that the Government regards the duty of care owed by directors of companies in their management of other people's money as not being of great importance. Most Australians, I believe, would disagree with that.
In the coming decade many people expect increased economic activity as a result of the resources boom. Now is the time to establish the machinery to create an effective national system for the regulation of the companies and securities industry. The Companies Bill before the House tonight represents too little, too late, and will be a big disappointment for all those Australians who expect a reliable national schem~. This wa~ ~ great opportunity to enact substantml compamcs reform measures, which were obviously needed in the past and which will be even more necessary in the 1980s. It is a pity that this Government has

put the interests of narrow s~ctiona1 groups ahead of the interests of all Austrahans.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (10.44)-1 wish to thank the various speakers who have taken part in the debate. It has made a significant contribution towards Australian commercia1law, and I hope that those who to date have not really paid much attention to the Bills will inform themselves about what has taken place. I have been somewhat appalled at the approach taken by some newspapers and magazines in the financial area. They have not really done much to report on the contents of the Bill and its introduction. I can onlyhope that, following this debate, they will do something to report in the Press on the matter. This is a significant move. It is certainly the first time we have been able to hope for uniform companies legislation in ~ustralia,. and the benefits flowing from that wIll be consIderable. I certainly endorse the remarks of speakers in the debate tonight that this legislation represnts the initial stage. I hope, in my time as Minister, to be able to bring forward some amendments to these Acts. It will be necessary for those amendments to be approved by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities.
Mr J acobi-You will be retired by then.
Mr MOORE-The honourable member for Hawker would know of the difficulty of getting States to agree to anyone thing. In the futu~e ~e will be able to achieve amendments by a maJonty decision of the Ministerial Council. In doing so, we will be able to achieve some of the reforms that not only honourable members have spoken about but also many people look forward to seeing. I particularly thank the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender), the honourable member for Herbert (Mr Dean), the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown), the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) and the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) for their contributions. They have obviously taken some time out to inform.themselves of what is contained in the complex senes of Acts.
I will refer to some issues that came to light during the debate. I do not wish to canvass the question of trading trusts which seems to have been adequatelyhandled. I do not wish t~ get on to the question of reforms and so forth. I wIll refer to three simple matters. There is no doubt that the accounts of public companies in Australia vary in standard. I sent for and received in the mail today the report of Conzinc Riotinto of Australia Ltd. That company provides an enormous ran~e of information in its report. This contrasts WIth a

Companies Bill

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2281

number of other public companies whose annual does not know much about it does not improve it.

reports are scanty and certainly do not refer to I take that stand in that respect.

any of the basic facts which are generally required. It is regrettable that many people who receive these reports do not even read them. Only last Friday I attended an accounting convention at which a very prominent company director said that he felt that many of the glossy reports put out by public companies were nothing less than an ego trip containing photographs about what the companies were doing. He said that the real relevance of the reports was lost. I can only endorse those remarks. I recommend to honourable members that, rather than look at the glossy pictures which is the easy part and therefore the least informative, they look at the notes on the accountsthe small print. This is highly recommended also in regard to prospectuses. The report to which I have referred contains some real information on the company's credit and general

The honourable member for Parramatta raised the question of employee reports. I commend that practice to companies. Far too infrequently is the dialogue between management and employee adequate. In the corporations that I have had association with, the relationship between management and employees has had a very big effect on the performance of those organisations. Certainly, the general efficiency and, certainly, profitability of those bodies have been contributed to by the high level of co-operation and co-ordination between management and employees. I have seen one or two companies put out what I would have thought were pretty reasonable reports to employees. By doing that they contributed to their employees' welfare and certainly their own. I hope more companies adopt that practice.

standing and shows its contract positions. It also The honourable member for Hawker made an

alludes to the remunerations of directors and, impassioned speech mainly on strong laws and the

more importantly-this brings me to another need to set those off against, presumably, weak

point which the honourable member for laws. My commercial experience attests that, no

Parramatta raised-the question of small matter how hard the laws are, we cannot protect a

shareholders.

person from himself. It is a question, therefore, of

This company, which is one of our largest and most significant, has 40,655 shareholders. Some 38,466, or just on 95 per cent, have a shareholding of less than 5,000 shares. As a consequence, we need to look at the shareholdings of directors. This is contained in the small print. I have to take issue with respect to this aspect. One thing which becomes very apparent to me when looking at

seeing how relatively effective the laws are and to look at the consequences of those laws. The regulation of an industry is done mainly in ignorance. People do not understand an industry and therefore it is regulated. That is the first thing that is done. Bureaucrats have said to me on numerous occasions that the first thing one does when one does not understand an industry is to regulate it.

corporate accounts in Australia is the very small I am a strong believer in the concept of self-

shareholding of most directors and particularly regulation. I have been proved to be wrong in cer-

executive directors. The report shows that Sir tain areas where it has not worked out. I happen

Russel Madigan has 1,030 shares, L. J. Carden has to think that that is regrettable because I do not

2,396, Sir Frank Espei, a former executive, has believe that people coming from outside know

533 and J. T. Ralph has 587 shares. Those people what goes on within certain technical areas. I

were all executive directors. On the other hand, apply my remarks particularly to the capital mar-

one of the non-executive directors had 102,000 ket. I have seen people, whose names are well

shares and another 1,067. Relatively small known publicly, appointed from outside to com-

numbers of shares are held by executive directors mittees of stock exchanges and, to be realistic,

these days. That is fairly common.

they have not made a major contribution towards

Mr Jacobi-Is there anything about the

number of nominees?

.

Mr MOORE-They are certified as beneficial shareholdings. I, therefore, assume that that must be their holding.

the running of those shows. So much for the competence of people from these outside bodies! It would have been better, in my view, if something had been done to upgrade those bodies and enforce what was sought on the participants in the stock exchange or the capital market than to

Mr Jacobi-Ha, hal

appoint a well known outsider and say: 'We will

Mr MOORE-I cannot do more than accept fix it this way'. It does not work out that way.

the man's word and I recommend that course to The honourable member for Hawker made a

most other people unless proved otherwise. I say most valid point when he asked: 'What is profit?' I

to those honourable members who are trying to recommend the consideration of this question to

interject that decrying people's honesty when one the Ministerial Council. The question of what is

2282 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Companies Bill

profit has implications far beyond, I think, what the honourable member envisages. It also raises in that context the whole question of current cost accounting and exactly what a company has within its books. This influences where one takes a profit in historical terms, current terms, cash-flow terms, depreciated terms or other terms. This has an enormous impact on the balance of a company. This leads me to another point raised by the honourable member in relation to proprietary companies and the fact that, therefore, they are a credit risk.

ratings. I am sure that we are all 'conscious of credit ratings around here. My final point before I conclude my remarks tonight concerns that honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly), who has made some generalised rather than technical comments about this matter. Therefore, I think it might be an appropriate time to adjourn this debate. I seek leave to continue my remarks at a later stage.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.
ADJOURNMENT

Mr Jacobi-They are a credit risk.

Department of Veterans' Affairs

Mr MOORE-They are, to a certain degree.

Motion (by Mr Moore) proposed:

Mr Jacobi-Very much so.

That the House do now adjourn.

Mr MOORE-But I put it to the honourable member for Hawker that anybody making credit arrangements with him as an individual, as a proprietary company or as a corporate company will first of all look for security; secondly, if he does not advance money to the honourable member on the basis of security, he will advance money on the basis of some guarantee; and, thirdly, he will deal with the honourable member in an unsecured--
Mr Jacobi-What is wrong with exempt companies? They are not obliged to.
Mr MOORE-Wait a moment. He would be obliged to, otherwise he would certainly be lending at risk to the honourable member and would deserve to lose his money.
Mr Jacobi-Let us argue that 1 Mr MOORE-He might not l days one has to be quick. The thi one deals with a corporation ( company unsecured, one is deaTh fore, if one deals at risk one mw accept the higher return that g< liability that goes with failure. Mr Jacobi-They should not --_. ___ outrage.
Mr John Brown-There is no need for it. That is our point.
Mr MOORE-There is always an element of risk.

Mr ARMITAGE (Chifley) (10.57)-ln the few minutes available to me I wish to refer to the great problem of the extraordinary delays in hearing veterans' appeals by the Department of Veterans' Affairs. I refer particularly to cases of veterans without standing service during the Second World War. The relevant legislation, as it now stands, was introduced in 1979. It has resulted in a great deal more work for the Department of Veterans' Affairs and also for the Repatriation Commission. The work has to be carried out by the same number of employees with the result that the appeals are slipping further and further behind.
All an example I should like to refer to the case llworth of Blacktown who was Illy and permanently incapaci- .e Repatriation Board cancelled i 17 April 1980 and increased the cent pension to the intermediate il1980. That decision was made O. He appealed to the President on Review Tribunal on 19 April Ig was on 12 March 1981. The
ltisfied that the additional eviUQl1'-''' P""""_" __ ~ by the Australian Legal Aid Office were relevant to the case and the matter was referred to the Repatriation Commission in accordance with section 107vI (2) of the Repatriation Act. This is as far as the case has gone to date. It is still awaiting a decision.

Mr Jacobi-There should not be a risk. Mr MOORE-There will always be a risk. It does not matter whether there ought not to be-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Minister will address his remarks through the Chair. Mr MOORE-Please accept my apology, Mr Deputy Speaker. I was getting involved in credit

I wish to refer to another individual who had his case rejected by the Repatriation Commission on 27 November 1979. He lodged an appeal to the Repatriation Review Tribunal on 10 January 1980 in respect of his two disabilities. He was advised on 15 January 1980 that the matter had been referred to the Repatriation Review Tribunal. The case was to be heard on 9 June 1980 but on 19 May 1980 the Repatriation Review Tribunal decided that it would not consider any

Replies to Requests for Detailed Information

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2283

appeals on vascular disease until such time as the Esprud case had been considered by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
These two cases are examples of massive delays in the hearing of veterans' cases. Some of these cases go back years. It is simply due to the attitude of the Government which altered the legislation in 1979. It has made the whole procedure much more complicated but has not increased the staff numbers to cope with it. This is causing a great deal of undue concern and grief to a large number of veterans. Some of them will not even be alive by the time their cases are finally heard. I think it is well and truly time that the Government did something on this issue.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 11 p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 2.15 p.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 11 p.m.
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 12 May 1981, pursuant to statute:

Seat of Government (Administration) Act-Variation of plan of lay-out of City of Canberra and its environs, dated 7 May 1981.
Telecommunications Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 87.
REPLIES TO REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library On 1 Apri11981, Mr Milton asked MrSpeaker:
(1) Who is the current Parliamentary Fellow in Political Science in the Parliamentary Library.
(2) Is this a full-time position. (3) Is the Parliamentary Fellow readily available for consultation by Members of Parliament. (4) What office space is currently occupied by the Parliamentary Fellow and where is this located. (S) How many consultants are currently employed by the Parliamentary Library. (6) What are their subject specialities, in each case. (7) Who made the decision to employ these consultants, in each case, and were these positions filled by advertisement. (8) Was the Library Committee consulted about the employment of these consultants. (9) What hours do these consultants work, what office space do they occupy and where is this located, in each case.

Australian Capital Territory Representation (House of Representatives) Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 85.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1981, Nos. 99,100,101.

Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows';
(1) Dr John Uhr. (2) Yes.

Commonwealth Electoral Act and Referendum (Constitution Alteration) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, Nos. 80, 84. Customs Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1981, No. 86.
Defence Act-Determinations-1981No. 12-Trainee Leader's Allowance, Transport Allowance and Recreation Leave. No. 13-Senior Chaplain's Allowance. No. 14-Hard Lying Allowance. No. 15-FlightDutiesAllowance.
Defence Amendment Act-Interim DeterminationsStatutory Rules 1981, Nos. 92, 93, 94, 95.
National Health Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 97. Navigation Act-Regulation--Statutory Rules 1981, No. 91.
Northern Territory Representation Act and Commonwealth Electoral Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, Nos. 81, 82, 83.

(3) No. The purpose of the Fellowship is two fold: (a) to give practical experience to a political scientist
through a period of attachment to the Legislative Research Service: (b) to have the opportunity to study Parliament at work and to undertake a research project related to the interests of Parliament. During work on the research project, the Fellow would not normally be readily available for consultation by Members of Parliament. When attached to a Group of the Legislative Research Service, availability for consultation would depend on distribution of work-loads and the allocation of duties by the relevant Group Director. (4) The Fellow occupies shared Office accommodation located at the rear of the ground floor of the central library block. (5) Four. (6) (a) Political Science.

Nursing Homes Assistance Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules, 1981, Nos. 88,98.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1981,No. 89.
Remuneration Tribunals Act-Remuneration TribunalDetermination-1981 IS-Holders ofpubJic office on the Committee of Inquiry into the Income Tax Zone Allowances and another body.

(b) Science, Technology and Environment (c) Problems of disabled persons (d) Bicentennial pUblications. (7) Decisions to engage subject specialist consultants can only be taken by the Permanent Head. Such consultantcies are not normally advertised. (8) Yes

Science and Industry Research Act-Regulations-

(9) The hours of the present subject specialist consultants

Statutory Rules 1981, No. 90.

are:

2284 REPRESENTATIVES 12 May 1981

Replies to Requestsfor Detailed Information

(Sitting Days) Political Science
Science Technology and Environment Handicapped
Bicentennial Publications

Tuesday

Wednesday

2pm-6pm

lOam-lpm

8pm-lOpm

2pm-6pm

6pm-l0pm

3pm-6pm

2.3Opm-6pm

2.30pm-6pm

8pm-IOpm

8pm-lOpm

As required-one day per week on average.

Thursday lOam-1 pm 2pm-6pm 7pm-lOpm 1O.30am-12.30pm

Two of the consultants occupy shared office accommodation at the rear of the ground fioor, central library block; the third uses the small "inner" office in Room L65A; the fourth has an office in the Hotel Kurrajong when required.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 1 April, Mr Jacobi asked the Mr Speaker:
(1) Did Committee Report No. 727, prepared at the request of the Library Committee for submission to its meeting of Thursday, 27 March 1980 state inter alia that the motion by the Houses constituting the Committee gives it no powers.
(2) If so, what legitimate functions can the Library Committee perform.
(3) Are there any current proposals to give powers or added functions to the Library Committee; if so, what are these proposals.
(4) How many meetings of the Committee have been held in each of the last 2 years.
(5) What recommendations has the Committee made during the same years, how many of these recommendations have been (a) implemented and (b) rejected and what was the reason in each case.
(6) How many sub-committees of the Library Committee currently exist, who are their members and what are their respective terms of reference.

(vii) Adoption of an official Collection Development Policy.
(viii) Changes in the next edition of the Parliamentary Handbook.
(ix) Reduction of noise in Reading Room. (x) Provision of a reserved reading room area for the ex-
clusive use ofSenators/Members. (xi) The retention of the Reading Room to be one of the
top priorities when reallocation of Library staff is being considered. (xii) The use of portable study carrels in the Reading Room. (xiii) Access to Reading Room chairs and study carrels by Member's research staff. (xiv) The preparation of a paper to assist the Library Committee in the clarification of its functions. (xv) The publication of a series of volumes related to the Federal Parliament to mark the Bicentenary. (xvi) The holding of the 1980 Australasian Parliamentary Librarians' Conference in Canberra. (xvii) That an experienced consultant be retained to assist in the Bicentenary Publications Project. (xvii) That a small interim version of the Parliamentary Handbook be printed.
(a) All have been either implemented or commenced.
(b) None.

(7) Do members of the Library Committee receive payment for their attendance at Committee meetings.
(8) Are staff of the Department of the Parliamentary Library routinely called before the Committee to give information on proposals relating to their particular area of operation; if not, is there any proposal for this to occur.
(9) How many Committee meetings have staff attended in each of the last 2 years, who were those staff and in what capacity did attend.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes; see Odgers, J. R. Australian Senate Practice, 5th edition (1976) which states at page 516 inter alia 'The Standing Orders do no more than make provision for the appointment of the Library Committee, and the motion by the Houses constituting the committee gives it no powers. Thus the Library Committee has no specific powers. In practice it makes decisions and determinations on the many questions of Libary administration submitted to it, but it remains for the President and the Speaker, as joint controllers of the Parliamentary Library, to cause effect to be given to those decisions.'
(2) See (1) above.
(3) No.
(4) 1979-3,1980-4.
(5)(i) A management review of the Department. (ii) Consideration of demands on Library's resources
through activities of Political Science Fellow. (iii) Size of reading room in new Parliament House. (iv) Reconsideration of Rules of Access. (v) Distribution of Bills Digests. (vi) A cost/benefit study of ALERT and other client
services.

(6) Four.
1. Sub-Committee on Client ServicesSenator G. S. Davidson, CBE., (Convenor) Senator J. A. Mulvihill Senator B. Harradine Mr J. M. Hyde, M.P. Mr B. O. Jones, M.P. Mr F. L. O'Keefe, M.P. Dr A. Theophanous, M.P.
To advise the Joint Standing Committee on policy in relation to:
(a) Issues and matters (e.g. changes in the law of copyright) which may affect the provision of client services,
(b) Proposals for new client services or substantial changes to existing services,
(c) Access to services and the rules and conditions which may applied to different client groups, and
(d) The facilities associated with the provision of client services.
2. Sub-Committee on Publications-
Senator S. Walters (Convenor) Senator J. A. Mulvihill Dr N. Blewett, M.P. Mr H. G. P. Chapman, M.P.
In addition to the specific matters relating to the publishing program to mark the Bicentenary and the opening of the new Parliament House, to advise the Joint Standing Committee on policy in relation to:
(a) The development of the Parliamentary Handbook and its associated publications as an important record of each Parliament, and
(b) Proposals for significant new publications. 3. Sub-Committee on New Parliament House Library-
Mr H. G. P, Chapman, M.P. (Convenor) Mr B. O. Jones, M.P.

Replies to Requestsfor Detailed Information

12 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2285

Mr F. L. O'Keefe, M.P. Dr A. Theophanous, M.P. Senator S. Walters.
To advise the Joint Standing Committee on policy in relation to:
Proposals concerning the design, layout and facilities to be incorporated in the Department's areas within the new building. 4. Sub-Committee on Parliamentary Fellowships and Related Matters-
Senator G. S. Davidson, CBE. (Convenor) Senator M. A. Colston Senator B. Harradine Dr N. Blewett, M.P. Mr J. M. Hyde, M.P.
To advise the Joint Standing Committee on policy in relation to Parliamentary Fellowships, to participate in the

selection of Fellows and to liaise with representatives of academic bodies on matters of common concern.
(7) No.
(8) The Parliamentary Librarian as Head of the Department routinely attends meetings, accompanied by one or more Principal Officers. No change is proposed.
(9) In addition to the Head of the Department (Mr H. G. Weir) who attended all meetings the following staff attended the number of meetings shown.
Mr H. de S. C. MacLean, Deputy Parliamentary Librarian-7
Mr M. J. Brudenall, Assistant Parliamentary Librarian-6
Mr T. W. Lawton, Acting Senior Research Director-3 Mr G. Simmons, Acting Senior Research Director-2


