House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 124, 1981 Tuesday, 8 September 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Death a/the Han. Dame Enid Muriel Lyons 8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 971

Tuesday, 8 September 1981

Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.

DEATH OF THE HONOURABLE DAME ENID MURIEL LYONS, A.D., G.B.E.

Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Acting Prime Minister)-Mr Speaker, I move:

That this House expresses its deep regret at the death, on 2 September 1981, of the Honourable Dame Enid Muriel Lyons, A.D., G.B.E. a member of this House for the division
of Darwin from 1943 to 1951 and Vice-President of the
Executive Council from 1949 to 1951, and widow of the former Prime Minister, the Right Honourable J. A.- Lyons,
places on record its appreciation of her long and meritorious public service and tenders its profound sympathy to her fam-
ily in their bereavement.

Dame Enid Lyons was one of the great Australians of this century. She made a contribution to Australian life that was unique, and that contribution was sustained for more than six decades.
She was a legend in her own lifetime. She made a particularly significant mark in this Parliament. She was the first woman to become a member of this House and the first woman to become a Minister in the Federal Cabinet. Dame Enid was born in Tasmania and gave great service to that State; but through and beyond that service she gave inspiration and a sense of leadership to all Australians. She was born on 9 July 1897 in Duck River, Tasmania, the daughter of Mr and Mrs Charles Burnell. She received her education at the local school and then went on to the teachers training college in Hobart. At the age of 17 she married the Honourable Joseph Lyons, then Minister for Education and the Railways in the Tasmanian Parliament. It was this union which opened the way to Dame Enid's long public service.

I want to dwell for a few moments on Dame

Enid's parliamentary life for it is in that context

that sh!! will be long remembered by all of us in

this chamber. She became the first woman

member of this House through her election in

1943 as member for Darwin, now Braddon. She

was re-elected in the general elections of 1946 and

1949. On 19 December 1949 she was appointed

Vice-President of the Federal Executive Council

in the Menzies Ministry. It remains a matter for

great regret that she found it necessary to resign

her position in March 1951 because of ill health.

Throughout the eight years that she was a

member of this House she was respected for the

calibre of her contribution to its deliberations. She

was effective in debate, and this Parliament held

her in the highest regard. I might say that during

most of the years in which she sat in this House,

/. when
.,)

there-

were

only

76

members

and

two

members sat on each bench, she and my father shared a bench, so they shared a very close personal relationship. She concluded her maiden speech, which she made in this House on 29 September 1943~ with the following words:
I hope that I shall never forget that everything that takes place in this chamber goes out somewhere to strike a human heart, to influence the life of some fellow being, and I believe this, too, with all my heart, that the duty of every government, whether in this country or any other, is to see that no man, because of the condition of his life, shall ever need lose his vision in the city of God.
Dame Enid obviollsly retained a strong memory of her late husband, the Right Honourable Joe Lyons, who was Prime Minister of this country from 1932 to 1939. It is a matter of record that one of Dame Enid's greatest achievements was, in difficult times, to stand beside her husband as the Prime Minister's wife and at the same time raise a family of 11 children in the fashion in which she did. After she felt unable to serVe any longer in the Parliament, her service and dedication to this country were expressed in a great many other ways. She was a member of the Board of Control of the Australian Broadcasting Commission from 1951 to 1962; she was made an honorary fellow of the Australian College of Nursing in 1951 and in 1954 she was made the original Vice-President of the Australian Elizabethan National Theatre Trust. Dame Enid, as wife of the Prime Minister, naturally undertook many duties in Canberra, and many of the older residents still remember soine of those occasions.
I had great pleasure 18 years ago, when I became Minister for the Interior, in inviting Dame Enid to Canberra to open the first of the new community centres at Hughes, where I was living. I invited her because she was one of the few people who 'could recall Mr Billy Hughes, who had been a very famous Australian. She undertook this duty most graciously and I can recall the very wonderful speech she made. Quite frankly, she laid everybody in the aisles with her wonderful stories about Billy Hughes. Throughout Dame Enid's long career she showed a great interest in matters affecting women. Indeed, in her maiden speech in 1943 a central theme was her concern for women and for matters affecting the family. She continued to develop these interests throughout her life and made, her mark as one not afraid to speak her mind. I understand that in the time just before her death last week she was active in conservation matters affecting Tasmania.
Those who knew her wherever she made her home, be it in Middle Road, Devonport, Hobart, Melbourne or Canberra, will remember her as a woman of great ability. She was one for whom all people had great affection and great admiration.

972 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981 Death o/the Hon. Dame Enid Muriel Lyons

Dame Enid was made a Dame Grand Cross of the believer in equality of opportunity for women at a

Order of the British Empire in the Coronation time when that was hardly a fashionable cause.

List of King George VI in 1937 and subsequently She continued her interest in womens affairs after

she was created a Dame of the Order of Australia she left Parliament and she took an active part in

in the Australia Day Honours List in 1980. These the International Womens Year in the 1970s. She

honours, separated by almost 40 years, bear was the first woman Minister in an Australian

tremendous witness to the consistency and the Government, during the first Menzies Govern-

continuity of her ,contribution to this country's ment from 1949 to 1951, but in that year she had

well-being. We are fortunate that Dame Enid has to retire from Parliament for reasons of ill health.

set down so much of her thinking in a substantial number of memorable pUblications. Those of us who heard her in public broadcasts in the 1950s will still reflect on her great presence and charm. In her book Among the Carrion Crows published in 1972, Dame Enid wrote some words which are particularly apt for us to think about. She said:
I am not without hope for the future . . . I am convinced that when the history of this century comes to be wtitten, Australia will have little cause for shame among the nations of the world.

It is an interesting reflection of her attitude to the role of women that when approached by Sir Earle Page in 1943 to form and lead a breakaway group from Mr Robert Menzies, as he then was,
she refused when Sir Earle Page explained: 'You wouldn't have to do anything. You would only be a figurehead'. Despite her ill health, she remained a very active person. She was a fluent speaker and, as the Acting Prime Minister acknowledged, wrote extensively in verse and prose, and con-

Dame Enid's life and service helped to make Australia what it is today. History will indeed testify to that. Dame Enid's record of service to her country and countrymen was truly magnificent. From her attendance at a Premiers Conference during her honeymoon when she was 17 years of age, her dedication and public service were maintained to the end of her life. On behalf of the

tinued to write and broadcast commentaries on public affairs even after her period as a member of ,the Australian Broadcasting Commission from
1951 to 1952. I can think of no more fitting epitaph for Dame Enid Lyons than the words used by Margaret Whitlam in an article written about her on the day after her death. Margaret Whitlam wrote:

Government and the people of Australia. I express No matter what brand of politics persuades us, we all

my deepest sympathy to the Lyons family.

admire an undaunted woman, and here was one of the first

quality.

'

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the

Opposition)-The death of Dame Enid Lyons on On behalf of the Labor Party, I express our deep

2 September saw, the passing of a remarkable regrets at the passing of Dame Enid Lyons and ex-

woman. For the first half of her life, Dame Enid tend o.ur deep sympathies to her surviving family

was best known as the wife of Joe Lyons who left members.

the Australian Labor Party in 1929, in somewhat dramatic circumstances, to found the United Australia Party. Joe Lyons was Prime Minister from 1923 until his death in office in 1939. During the hectic years of her husband's political life, Dame Enid bore 12 children, despite continuing and painful ill health, and was active in support of many community, charitable and other causes.
After the death of her husband Dame Enid did not retire into obscurity, but built a new life in her own right. In 1943, as has been remarked by the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony), she became one of the first two women members of Parliament, but technically the first woman to enter this Parliament. The other was Dorothy Tangney, who was elected ~t the same election but, because of Senate processes, was not to take her place in \ the Senate until a little later. The late Dame Enid

Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-On behalf of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the ,Parliamentary
Liberal Party I wish also to add my tribute to the words we are speaking about Dame Enid Lyons. Yesterday the city of Devonport in Tasmania came to a standstill. Hundreds of Tasmanians, young and old, from all walks of life, lined the streets of that city to pay a final tribute to Dame Enid. That, I think, is one measure of the univer-' sal Jove and respect in' which Dame Enid was held. Her example as a wife, as a mother, as an author, as the wife of a Prime Minister and as a politician herself, as a great Tasmanian and a great Australian, should be an inspiration to all of us. It certainly has been a special inspiration to my family 'and me. Today we mourn a very greatlady.

Lyons did not, as popularly supposed, simply sucMr GROOM (Braddon)-Because I knew

ceed to her husband's seat of Wilmot, but won the Dame Enid very well personally and also because

seat of Darwin, now Braddon. Although fairly she represented my electorate in this House, I

conservative on many social issues, she was a firm wish to say some things in support of the motion

Death a/the Han. Dame Enid Muriel Lyons 8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 973

which has been moved by the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony). Dame Enid Lyons was a genuine product of the north-west coast of Tasmania. She was born at Duck River, now known as Smithton, in 1897. She was educated at Stowport, a little known town which is just behind Burnie, and later at Burnie itself. She married Joe Lyons at Wynyard in 1915 when she was only 17 years of age. Finally, they settled at Devonport. The north-west coast was always home for Dame Enid. She retained a great love for the coast, as we call it, and for its people. In return the people of the north-west coast loved and respected her, not merely because she had a long list of public achievements to her credit but also because of her outstanding personal qualities-her friendly, open charm, which she always displayed, her incredible courage and her amazing capacity for plain old-fashioned hard work.
Dame Enid made her life happy, busy and successful, but that does not mean it was easy. It certainly was not easy. There were many periods of great sorrow and of anguish. She suffered, as was mentioned, a number of serious illnesses. She also experienced tragedy, particularly with the death of her infant son and later the death of her husband. As well there were the ordinary pressures of political life as the wife of, firstly, a Premier and later a Prime Minister. Her large fa,mily of 11 children endured the suffering with her, as families of leading political figures so often do. Dame Enid handled all the problems with great serenity and calm. She was always cheerful' and pleasant to all she met. I believe this inner strength of character was instilled in her by her mother, Eliza, who was Australian-born of Cornish parents. Obviously she had a great part to play in all of Enid's successes. She was the one who first kindled in her an interest in public life.
As I mentioned, I knew Dame Enid very well personally. I had the pleasure of meeting heron many occasions at her home in Middle Road, Devonport, and at various public functions. I have also had the pleasure of friendship with members of her family-her children, her grandchildren and even her great grandchildren, and there are plenty of them. There are now 48 grandchildren and at the latest count there were, I think, 48 great grandchildren. She certainly had quite a family. Whenever I called at her home in Middle Road she would welcome me with open arms and give me a bowl of soup and later a cup of tea. She always had some cakes which she had baked. We would sit down and have a chat. She was a very charming hostess. She would express her views about many subjects-she always had strong views on most subjects-but strangely she

never talked about politics. During our many discussions she did not mention present-day political figures or express any views about the prospects of particular candidates or parties. She kept those things to herself.
As we all know, Dame Enid was a champion of women's rights. She had two views which she held very strongly and argued with great force and which she believed were totally compatible. The first was that women had a right to accept the traditional role of wife and mother and be respected for it, and the second was that women had a right to be actively involved in the wider community. How well Dame Enid Lyons exemplified both those roles. She loved Devonport. She was granted the freedom of the town soon after she retired from this House. Joe and Enid set up their house in Devonport in 1915, only six months after their marriage. She was still living there until the time of her death. She often said that it was easier to save one's soul in Devonport than in the larger cities, such as Sydney and Melbourne. Yesterday she was buried at the lawn cemetery in her favourite town.
It was fitting that at Dame Enid's last public appearance, on 19 August of this year, she opened the Devonport Eisteddfod. She had been its patron for 33 years. She told the audience on that evening that she had made her first public appearance in the same town hall 66 years previously. She was then the queen of a local carnival. She was quite a beauty. One of her page boys was nine-year-old Errol Flynn, who was later to become one of Tasmania's better known film stars. At the end of what was to be her final speech she received a spontaneous standing ovation from those present at that opening.
In 1964 Dame Enid was interviewed by the late Max Oldaker, a well known Australian, one of our most popular musical stars and an old Devonport boy. Max asked Dame Enid how she had managed in one lifetime to be a politician, to aid and care for her celebrated husband, bring up a large family, sit on advisory boards and give wise counsel to men and women on all matters concerning daily life. 'Well,' she answered, 'I have been always actively interested in many things and I have been prolific'. She was indeed a remarkably prolific woman.
As the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) mentioned, Tasmanians are very proud of Dame Enid Lyons and Joe Lyons and of their record. We are sad that both of them have now passed on. Dame Enid was certainly a very popular figure on the north-west coast. We always looked forward to seeing her at functions, which

974 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981 Death of the Hon. Dame EnirJMurie/ Lyons

she frequently attended there and at which she greater loved in my lifetime or indeed, as the Act-

made her excellent speeches. She was considered ing Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) has said, prob-

for many years to be our number one citizen. She ably at any time. We mourn her passing. Might 1

brought pleasure to many people-those of her close by expressing one hope-that an appropri-

own generation and younger people-through her ate memorial to her name will be established. 1

speeches, her mimy and varied community activireally do not believe that she would favour statues

ties and the example that she set. She will be sadly and things like that, but 1 hope that some appro-

missed by her large family and her very many priate memorial will be established in her name so

friends.

that future Australians and future Tasmanian

generations will recall with great pride the name

Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the of a very greatwoman, one of the finest Aus-

Capital Territory)-I would like to speak briefly tralians who ever lived.

in support of the motion moved. Yesterday after-

noon in Devonport I was a pall-bearer at the fuMr BURR (Wilmot)-Along with other

neral of the late Honourable Dame Enid Lyons honourable members. I would like to add my trib-

A.D., G.B.E. 1 also, Mr Speaker, had the honour ute to the late Dame Enid Lyons. As my colleague

to represent you officially as Speaker of the House the honourable member for Braddon (Mr

of Representatives at the conce1ebrated mass of Groom) has said, Dame Enid was a personal

Christian burial. We have lost, 1 believe, a great friend to all members from Tasmania. Like my

Tasmanian and a very great Australian, a person colleague from Braddon I, too, have shared many

who was wise, who was gentle and who was discussions with Dame Enid. 1 had a personal

gracious but who above all was very kind. Like the friendship with her and she always had common-

Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), 1 comsense advice to give to anybody who was prepared

mend to honourable members the excellent obituto have discussions with her. She was well loved in

ary article in last Thursday's Melbourne Age writDevonport-certainly she was Devonport's

ten by Margaret Whitlam.

number one citizen-and was respected by people

throughout Tasmania, and 1 believe throughout

Last year Dame Enid Lyons made her last Australia, as a great Australian. While much of

visit to this Parliament. Because my colleague the Dame Enid's life is well known and her public ca-

honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) reer has been well publicised, it also needs to be

was occupied on the front bench and could not recognised that Dame Enid was a devout Chris-

leave at Question Time, she sent a message into tian and a dedicated mother. She never lost sight

the chamber requesting me to go out to King's of her Christian beliefs or her belief in the family.

Hall and to bring her into this chamber. 1 readily She was able to combine her public life-

went to King's Hall. You will recall, Mr Speaker, supporting her husband who at one time was

that when she came into this chamber, on my arm, Prime Minister and later herself as a member of

you interrupted Question Time and announced Parliament-with her Christian beliefs and her

her presence, and there was a spontaneous greetdedication to her family.

ing of warmth from both sides of the chamber at

the reappearance in this chamber of this very It has been well said that Dame Enid paved the

wonderful lady. This very great occasion, was way for women to enter politics and make a

both moving and memorable. It is something that greater contribution to public life. However, she

1will never forget. She later met with a number of showed that it was not necessary, as we now

members from both sides of the Hotise, met with know, for a woman to be a radical feminist in

the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), took order to make a contribution to our political or

afternoon tea and left expressing the view that she community life. Dame Enid madethose contri-

had enjoyed her visit immensely. That was the last butions on a basis of common sense, care and

visit to this chamber and one which was indeedcompassion. She did not jump up on bandwagons;

memorable.

she used that common sense, care and com-

passion, as well as her involvement in the com-

I first had contact with her at the 1974 Federal munity, to get her ideals across and to make her

election, when I was defeated in Denison and she contribution to the Australian community. While

sent a short but cryptic telegram which stated: 'I other women may care to involve themselves in

salute a gallant loser, try again '. 1did and she gave political and community life today, following

me tremendous personal loyalty, tremendous Dame Enid's lead, perhaps they could look more

friendship and tremendous support. closely at the example which Dame Enid gave at

Unashamedly I loved her, as indeed did we all in that time and which she continued to give for the

Tasmania. I cannot think of any Tasmanian rest of her life. We have lost a great Australian

Death o/the Hon. Dame Enid Muriel Lyons 8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 975

but, whilst she may have passed from our presence; I believe we can still learn much from the example she has given us.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin)-I wish to add very briefly to the tributes already made. Dame Enid Lyons was a great Tasmanian and a great Australian, but most importantly she was a loving and caring mother. I searched for a proverb that would adequately sum up the feelings of Tasmanians today. I believe Proverbs 25, verse 11, does that. It states:
A word fitly spoken
Is like apples of gold in pictures of silver.
Question resolved in the affirmative, honourable members standing in their places.

DISTINGUISHED VISITORS

Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that we

have present in the gallery this afternoon

members of the Nigerian Senate's Committee on

Public Works, led by Senator Awyanwu, Chair-

man of the Committee. On behalf of the House I

extend a very warm welcome to the members of

the Committee.

.

Honourable members-Hear, hear!

PRIVILEGE
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas)-I raise a matter of privilege based on an article published in the Sydney Daily Mirror of Wednesday, 2 September, under the page one heading 'MPs bludgers, drunks', and the page nine heading, 'Bludgers on the back bench'. I produce a copy of the Daily Mirror, printed and published by Mirror Newspapers Ltd at the office of the company at 2-4 Holt Street, Surry Hills, New South Wales. I saw this article last week. I am not one who is normally sensitive to reasonable crit'icism, nor proper and perspicacious comments by well-informed journalists. However, I felt quite incensed at the nature of this article which reflected, I believe, on all members of this Parliament. I am one who genuinely could claim to be exempt from the comments because, although it is not a matter about which I skite, I happen to be a total abstainer from the use of alcohol. I believe, therefore, I can come to a more broadly based defence of my colleagues as a result of my informed observations over the eight years that I have been a member of parliament. I can say without any fear at all that I believe this is the most sober working place anywhere in this country.
I must say that whilst thejournalist who wrote this article endeavoured to divide members in some senses-he tried to suggest that some members in marginal seats might work harder

than others-the fact of the matter is that the article is written in such a form as to reflect upon all members of parliament. Even though in his judgment there are those members who warranted such criticism-I do not believe there are any-all members are lumbered with the tag he has used. I shall quote some of the comments which those members from interstate might not be aware were included in this article. He started his article by saying:
Most members of Federal Parliament are not-repeat not-in imminent danger of dying of hard work.
He went on to state:
The truth is that a majority of MHRs and senators do not have enough to do. At least not the kind of work that would challenge and interest them.
I am not sure what he means by that. He went on to state:
For much of the rest of the time they loaf, become frustrated and often frequent the members' bar at Parliament House.
He went on to add:
They sit around the members' bar boozing, complaining . . . and achieving very little.
There are quite a few members on the Government side who are little more than political time servers-bludging, in effect, on the taxpayers.
I will stop there with that reference to the members of the Government because I do not wish to repeat the even more scathing comments he made about members of the Opposition, which I believe also were totally and absolutely unjustified. I do not believe any journalists who have observed this Parliament and the conduct of members in and around this Parliament would support the remarks of their colleague. I thought of writing a letter to the newspaper concerned in the hope that it might be published and that it would correct some of the tremendous harm that this has done to my colleagues and, in a sense, all members of the Parliament. I have not done that but I have raised this matter as a matter of privilege in the hope that you will give consideration to it, Mr Speaker, and so that members of the Parliament can see for themselves the nature of the comments and perhaps can add their comments to mine.
It is not difficult, even for a total abstainer, to have formed a view about the use of the facilities around this Parliament. The bar, such as it is, I believe could quite satisfactorily be closed without affecting anyone. I cannot speak for the other bar in this place which is frequented by non-members, I am told, but I assume-I do not wish any comments of mine to endorse the mirth some of my colleagues have expressed:--that it is perhaps like the members' bar, empty on most occasions on

976 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Petitions

which it might otherwise be possible for it to be used. Mr Speaker, I hope that you will give proper consideration to this matter and I hope that my colleagues will note the ill-informed nature of this
jou~nalist.
Mr SPEAKER-The paper produced by the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) is the same as a copy that I had earlier seen. I formed an opinion then that, without any doubt, under the rules of privilege, this was a contempt of the Parliament and therefore clearly was a prima facie breach of privilege. Under the Standing Orders it is the requirement that a member raising a matter of privilege, if the Speaker finds that there is a prima facie breach of privilege, ought then to be prepared to move a motion for the reference of the breach to the Privileges Committee. I do not on this occasion propose to call upon the honourable member to so move at the moment because it may be that he will give consideration to tile form of the motion which may enable the matter to be disposed of on this day.
It has been the practice of the Parliament in the past not to deign to consider itself offended by those people who make allegations of a kind which they well know are a breach of privilege and may very well have been intended to acquire personal publicity, especially when they know that the allegations are not based on fact. Accordingly, I will exercise my discretion not to give this matter precedence at the moment. I will allow the honourable member for Dundas to consider, perhaps in consultation with other members of the House, a form of motion which may dispose of the matter today.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That a need exist~ within the community for the Community Youth Support Scheme.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government not remove any funds for the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And.your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling and Mr Millar.
Petition received.

Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The decision to dismantle the Community Youth Support Scheme be revoked; .
2. The unemployed youth of Australia need tile facility of the Support Scheme to advance their future employment prospects;
3. The Youth Support Scheme with more liberal guidelines would have created more work potential;
4. The proposed abandonment of the scheme wi,lI create further unemployment in the loss of Project Officers and Tutors; this is a retrograde step.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Good luck.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the decision of the Federal Governeent to discontinue the Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS) will further 'reduce the prospects of young Australians for employment, and place additional undue hardship on the unemployed.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government continue the CYSS program and support the voluntary Community Management Committees in their valuable work to assist the unemployed.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Les Johnson.,
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives Assembled. The, Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the closing down of CYSS could cause many problems in the home and on the streets. As the unemployed youth of Australia will have nowhere else to go. CYSS has played a valuable role in our community and ably assisted .our youth.
Your petitioners therefore pray:~
That the Community Youth Support Schemes be reinstated so as to help the unemployed youth of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lloyd.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the abolition of Community Youth Support Schemes show a callous indifference and lack of sensitivity to the needs of the unemployed youth of Australia.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government continue to fund the Community Youth Support Schemes throughout Australia and your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

Petitions

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 977

by Mr McLean.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned at the Federal Government's decision to abolish the Community Youth Support Scheme (C.Y.S.S). There is no other. agency to give the support and care which the participants .of the Community Youth Support Scheme require. Transitional Education schemes are suitable for only a small number of the unemployed.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament allocat!l the necessary funds to enable the continuation of the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament asembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth:
That the serious youth unemployment problem is a direct result of the community's failure to create sufficient jobs.
In these circumstances the decision to abolish Community Youth Support Schemes (CYSS) is a socially retrogressive step. The CYSS Projects provide valuable support services and work training for many young unemployed.
We the undersigned are concerned that the closure of CYSS Projects may lead young unemployed to become involved in anti-social behaviour such as crime, vandalism, prostitution, rebellious behaviour. and mob action. There is the even more frightening prospect that many more young people will give up hope of obtaining a job, become idle and even contemplate suicide.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government reverse its decision to abolish CYSS Projects and provide sufficient funds to enable the various CYSS Centres to continue theirvaluable work with the young unemployed in the future..
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lloyd-.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble p.etition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programs will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take al1 steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett, Mr Howe, Mr Mountford and Mr Scholes.
Petitions received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade postal and mail services throughout Australia will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
downgrading a large number of official post offices reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period reducing the number of street posting boxes delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices . downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham, Mr Fisher and Mr Nixon.
Petitions received,

Postal Services

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Moreton respectfully showeth:

That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to in-

vestigate the downgrading or closure of MooroCika post office

places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our

community.

.

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Killen.

Petition received.

Defence Service Home Loans

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble pet-

ition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully

showeth:

-

That the members of the Women's Services of the 1939-45 War not at present considered eligible for Defence Service Home Loans should qualify as 'Australian Soldiers' under the Defence .Service Homes Act. They volunteered for service with the Naval, Military and Air Forces, serving wherever

978 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Petitions

they were sent in whatever capacity they were required and yet are refused Defence Service Home Loans.
They took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies which meant to fight His Majesty's enemies, and although not used in actual combat in war zones, they were available for that use and had a sufficiently grave need arisen would have been used, to serve with distinction as have women of other lands.
In accordance with the Acts and Regulations of the period, the women of the Military Forces had enlisted for service anywhere, some of the Naval women to sail in any waters, others with service on warships optional, while the women of the Air Force could have been sent to Papua New Guinea or other territories under the control or care of Australia.
Ex-servicemen of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force who volunteered in the 1939-45 War but were not sent to War Zones are granted home loans. Not to grant eligibility to ail Ex-servicewomen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you favourably consider amending the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier, Mr Fisher and Mr Jarman.
Petitions received.

(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines..
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling, Dr Everingham and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
South-west Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members <if the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro electric developments in South West Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern. We call on the Federal Government not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the South West but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. It is a national' issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resultant from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cadman and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.

Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies'limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health system and cuts to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and sulfering in our community by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham, Mr Falconer and Mr Shipton.
Petitions received.
Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within four years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:

Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the elfect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulin dependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the syringes be made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Shack and Mr Viner.
Petitions received.
Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should:
Take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing elfectiveness of the Womens Services, i.e., Womens Refuges, Womens Health Centres and Womens Rape Crisis Centre. In particular that:
I. National funding under Special Purposes Grant (Section 96 of Constitution) for a new category called Womens Services to be administered federally under one department.
2. That as an interim measure, current funding of administrative arrangements remain in force.
3. Such Special Purposes Grant funding to be on a guaranteed triennial basis which must take into account inflation and indexation rises.

Petitions

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 979

4. Definite Government policy committment to a substantial injection of funds to consolidate existing services and develop new ones. That such funds be distributed in such a way as to insure equitable national distribution of these resources.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown.
Petition received.
PendIe Hill South Post Office
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Non-Official Post Office at Pendle Hill South is under threat of closure and the Postmistress, Mrs L. Bartlett, has been told by Australia Post that if she resigned in order to transfer the office to another person, that the office would be closed. She has also been informed that if she remains as Postmistress the matter of closure will be reviewed in twelve months' time.
We submit that the office has been serving a community need for about 60 years and that the surrounding area is growing with more houses being built. Many people shop in the small group of shops and would be inconvenienced by the loss of the office. These people include pensioners and patients from the nearby Nursing Home whose only other alternative would be to travel about five kilometres by public transport to Parramatta. There are a number of other Post Offices closer than Parramatta but none of these are accessible by public transport.
The office is also used by motorists travelling along the Western Highway as it is the only Post Office on the Highway between Penrith.and Parramatta on the northern side.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Pendle Hill South Post Office be retained and that the office be reclassified as one to remain in the Post Office Network.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown.
Petition received.
Abortion
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oJ the House of Representatives in the Parliament. assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth; that we support your eftorts to strengthen our family and community life.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will:
I. Cease paying out taxpayers money for unlawful abortion procedures.
2. Eliminate subsidies for abortion referral centres. 3. Ensure that Australia's Human Rights Charter will in-
clude rights for unborn Australians primarily the right to life. 4. Introduce further benefits for pregnant women to assist them in continuing with their pregnancy. 5. Obtain each year from each of the State Attorneys General: (a) written details as to the reasons for which pro-
cedures were carried out under item 6469 of the Medical Benefits Schedule, 6. (b) Declaration that no procedures in respect of which a claim is made within the Health Insurance Act are unlawful abortions.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown.
Petition received.
Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of AustraliajN.S.W. respectfully showeth:
That many thousands of women and children in the Australian community who use the services of Women's Refuges, Rape Crisis Centre and Women's Health Centres:
I. Express their concern at the decision of the Federal Government to pass to the states, the responsibility of funding those essential services because of the poorrecord already demonstrated by some states;
2. Call on the Federal Government to reverse that decision;
3. Request that the government ensure that there is one department which will administer all funds for the above under the heading of Women's Services;
4. Propose that future funding should be on a guaranteed triennial basis which must take into account inflation and indexation rises;
5. Request definite government policy commitment to a substantial injection of funds to consolidate existing services and develop new ones. That such funds be distributed in such a way as to insure equitable national distribution of these resources.
And your petitioners lUi in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Robert Brown.
Petition received.
Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That, as residents of the MulbringjMt Vincent area of the Hunter Valley, we have found that the telephone service provided by Telecom is inadequate for the growing population.
Long delays in linking calls are common, while at peak times it is often impossible to ring any number from here, while people ringing into town have equal difficulty.
As there are too few lines to cope with the volume of calls and the exchange cannot cope, while at the same time there is a constantly increasing population requiring telephone service, we can only see the situation become worse in the future.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the minister responsible bring his department's attention to this situation and take some action towards providing an adequate service to its customers in the near future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Robert Brown.
Petition received.
Copyright
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
The Copyright Act as amended by the Copyright Amendment Act, 1980, places unnecessary restrictions on the education system.

980 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Petitions

All photocopying and videorecording used exclusively for education purposes should be exempted from the provisions of the Copyright Act.
Any amendments to the copyright law which affect the education system should not be made operative during an academicyear.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Carlton.
Petition received.
Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
'That women's refuges have provided on a 24 hour a day basis emergency accommodation, child care, financial aid, moral support, legal advice and gUidance in dealing with government departments from over 13,000 women and children in the past year at a cost to the national government s'ubstantially less than $4 million which is half the cost of holding the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Australia later this year.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the government will not proceed with its stated intention to withdraw from funding women's refuges and pass this responsibility to ill-equipped and sometimes unsympathetic state governments and will increase federal funding levels for women's refuges.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Eagle Farm Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That noise levels created by aircraft using Eagle Farm Airport already constitute an annoyance and inconvenience to those residents living near the airport and along flight paths.
That relaxation of the Eagle Farm Airport curfew to allow any aircraft including TAA's airbus to fly into and out of Eagle Farm Airport between II p.m. and 6 a.m. would:
(a) Substantially increase the inconvenience and annoyance caused by aircraft noise because the operation of aircraft at this time would seriously disturb people's sleep;
(b) contradict and negate a commendable undertaking made by the Commonwealth Minister for Transport, the Hon. Ralph Hunt, in reply to a question on notice in the Parliament, that the curfew will remain on the runways at the existing site at Eagle Farm Airport.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will not approve the application of TAA-or any other airline-to relax or withdraw the curfew at Eagle Farm Airport.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:

Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Persomil Infor-

mation discussion paper number 14, brought down by the

Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines'the fam-

ily unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian

basis of our society, by proposing that "between 12 and 16

years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of in-

formation to a parent."

'

It is your petitioners sincere belief that:

(a) An adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a
mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.

(b) As a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.

(c) A parent has a unique position which may enable
him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the
right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.

Your petitioners therefore pray:

That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission
and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray

by MrDobie.

Petition received.

Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humbJe.petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is increasing Interest Rates on Home Mortgage Loans without due concern for its impact on the general community and ask that the Government re-consider its attitude to Low and Middle income earners.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert any further effects to increases in interest rates on home mortgage loans which cause financial, social and psychological pressures on families.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrDuffy.
Petition received.

Service Pensions

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-

ition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully

showeth:

'

( I) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valour following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights as regular servicemen.

(2) That by being denied these entitlements, which.other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discrilninated against.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service' by merchant seamen during World War 2.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Petitions

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 981

by Dr Everingham. Petition received.

Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing effectiveness of the women's Refuge Program. In particular that:
I. Realistic funding levels be introduced to maintain existing services offered by Women's Refuges.
2. That the needs for Child Care in Women's Refuges be acknowledged by a specific and adequate allocation of funds for this purpose.
3. That funding be allocated for the purpose of assisting women and children to establish themselves in the community on leaving refuges.
4. That funding be allocated for refuges to address themselves to areas of special needs of migrant women in refuges.
5. That funding be made available for the establishment of new women's refuges.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFry.
Petition received.

Bellerive Post Office
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Petition to Retain the Bellerive Post Office. We, the undersigned, wish to retain our historic Post Office for reasons of convenience and because we ihink, that it is an essential part of the character of Bellerive.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Good luck.
Petition received.

Health Care: Proposed New Constitution

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of
Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That we believe th;lt-'Australia's constitution is undemocratic and should be replaced by a democratic constitution,
particularly as regards the new standard for regulation of Vitamin and Mineral Supplements.

We believe:

(I) This legislation will curb our individual freedom to

care for our own health according to need, environ-

ment, climate, etc.

'

(2) These substances have proven their efficacy in maintaining heal,th rather than destroying it and should remain freely available.

(3) Why curb these substances while other noxious and
toxic substances are freely available to the obvious thorough <\etriment of our society-e.g. commercial alcohol and tobacco.

This new constitution should be drafted at a representative directly elected people's convention. following extensive pub- .lic debate, and then put to a referendum of the people. The
petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament, as a matter of urgency, will help to promote such public debate

and will arrange for the holding of such a people's convention and referendum.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Groom. Petition received.

Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. Because of an anomaly in tax'Tates a single income family pays nearly $ \0 a week more tax than a dual income family earning the same total amount.
2. Family allowances established in 1976 have not been' increased since then, yet over the same period living costs have increased by nearly 60 per cent.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that:
The Parliament should act-
(I) To restore the lost value of family allowances and to index them forfuture price rises.
(2) To increase the spouse rebate from $830 to $1,342 per year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman.
Petition received.

Pensions

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the
under-signed citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That the basic rate of pensio,ns and rent allowance is not

sufficient to meet present day needs.

.

In light of the 20 per cent increase in M.P's salaries pensioners are being unfairly treated.

Therefore, your petitioners urge that:

(I) Basic rate of pension be increased to 30 per cent of the average weekly earnings.

(2) Rent allowance be increased from present $5.00 ~eekly to $20.00 weekly.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Hodgman.

Petition received.

Automotive Industry: Tariff Protection
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia being employed in the automotive products industry respectively showeth:
I. That the automotive products industry is vital to the livelihood and well being of many thousands of Australian workers and their families.
2. That if imported automotive products are allowed to flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the industry of their work opportunities.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

982 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Petitions

by MrHowe.
Petition received.
Medibank
To the Honourable Speaker an'd Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully requests that the Federal Government ensure that:
a. It honours its 1975 election promise to maintain Medibank-a free, universal health insurance scheme, and institute methods of improving hospital and health services for the Australian people.
b. The Community Health Program remains a Federal Government responsibility, with increased funding and expansion of services.
c. It abandons means-testing and the re-introduction of charges at public hospitals which will severely disadvantage low and middle income groups.
d. Every effort be made by the Federal Government to meet the health care needs and demands of the Australian community.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled will give earnest consideration to this most vital matter.
by MrHowe.
Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of 'Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(I) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source Should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respeCtfully showeth:
I. That Federal Government proposals to shift the cost of health insurance onto the individual has placed a disproportionate and unfair financial burden on lower income

groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes.
2. That an estimated 15-20 per cent of Australians will not be able to afford insurance and will be forced to undertake extensive travel to avail themselves of outpatient services, the quality of which will be drastically reduced because of staff cuts.
3. That doctors, who at this moment are awaiting a fee increase, will inevitably become more and more expensive.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government (i) will re-examine the effects of health proposals and of the necessity for compulsory health insurance on lower income groups who do not presently meet the description of disadvantaged, and (ii) redefine the criteria determining the genuinely needy and disadvantaged to encompass the categories of persons mentioned in (I) above.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology and environment of the Island.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the Register of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act, 1975 take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has given approval to the sandmining of Moreton Island despite the advice of conservationists and despite the opposition of the majority of electors in the Moreton Region.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will request the Government to refuse export permits covering mineral sands mined on Moreton Island.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Eagle Farm Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth:
(a) That residents of densely populated suburbs in the vicinity of the airport and residents of other suburbs in the flight path of international and domestic jets are experiencing an unreasonable degree of aircraft noise.
(b) Further, that these same residents will be subjected to prolonged bouts of such aircraft noise if a decision is taken to extend the curfew at both the domestic and international airports.
(c)' That this decision has been foreshadowed on two occasions as follows:
(i) In Submissions to the Public Hearing held by the Public Works Committee of this Parliament in regard to Stage One-RedeVelopment of Brisbane's International Airport; these submissions proposed an extension of the existing curfew when the new runway is completed (approx. 1986). This proposal received the full support of the Queensland Government.

Petitions

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 983

- (ii) T AA's request for an extended curfew to coincide with the introduction of the Airbus.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will refuse to extend the existing curfew and will reconsider its siting plans for the proposed new runway so as to minimise noise pollution over high density suburbs.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Public Hospital Funding
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
\. That the Federal Government's shifting ofresponsibility for funding of public hospitals onto the State Governments has placed a disproportionate and onerous burden onto lower income groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes,
2. That included in the undersirable effects on the public hospital system in Queensland will be:
(i) long waiting times for non-urgent surgery (ii) long waiting periods in out-patients (iii) services, e.g. X-ray and pathology will be reduced (iv) staff will be reduced (v) possible abolition of teaching hospitals and centralis-
ation of training facilities for doctors and nurses (vi) closing down of small country hospitals
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will request the Government to re-examine its public hospital funding arrangements, the impact of these arrangements on lower income groups mentioned in (\.) above and increase funding to the States to ensure that the undersirable effects mentioned in (2.) above do not occur.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys. Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
( I) That a single pensioner earning $20 per week will have an actual income per annum of $4,505 i.e., $310 over the tax-free threshold rendering the pensioner liable to pay $97.60 tax in the 1981-82 financial year.
(2) That the limit of allowable income of $20 per. week for a single pensioner ($34.50 for a married couple) has not been raised since 1967.
(3) That under the present system elderly people who have paid taxes all their working lives are twice penalised after retirement as superannuation or other income may lift their allowable earnings over the tax-free threshold, as well as exclude them from pension-related fringe benefits.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray:,
. That the Government will increase the lower end of the income test scale in order that pensioners with little savings will not be penalised by small fluctuations in their income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

National Roads Construction Program
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth that your petitioners believe that:
The decision to subject the National Roads Construction program to the tendering system will:
(a) Threaten the jobs of 790 workers employed in 17 main road depots in N.S,W.
(b) impair the day labour system and undermine the capacity of Departments of Main Roads to train staff and test road construction concepts
(c) have a disruptive effect on the employment opportunities available in small communities
(d) reduce the flexibility of the Department of Main Roads to handle emergencies caused by flood or fires
(e) ultimately increase the cost of road construction at taxpayers' expense.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government withdraw this disruptive proposal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Family Planning Association of New South Wales
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing effectiveness of the Family Planning Association of New South Wales.
In particular that:
I. Adequate funds to the Family Planning Association of N.S.W. clinical services be maintained at the present levels, without further cuts in clinic hours and standards.
2. Increased funding be provided to the Family Planning Association of N.S.W.-Education Unit for educational services to the community, and health and welfare agencies.
3. Adequate funding be provided to the Family Planning Association of N.S.W. to enable it to give award wages and conditions to all staff members.
4. The Federal Government grant the Family Planning Association ofN.S.W. the status of a non-profit organisation with donor tax deductibility and exemption from sales tax.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in' Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth.
That the burden of interest payments on housing loans is now at such record levels that most citizens paying off their homes are becoming severely financially distressed.
That the burden of additional expense together' with increases in health insurance and hospital charges is putting increasing stress on family relationships.

984 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Petitions

That the policies of favouring overseas private investors to buy up our resources are causing inflationary pressures, declining public services and ever higher interest rates.
That we support all efforts to give relief to people making house repayments, particularly in the first five years of purchase, but also when expenses are higher after the first years of marriage.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will give interest rate relief by way of tax concessions or a subsidy on mortgage repayments.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.
Tongala Post Office
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of undersigned certain concerned citizens respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the rumoured intended closure of the Tongala Post Office. In our opinion for the well-being of the District, the office should retain its present classification.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Tongala Post Office remain an Official Post Office.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrLloyd.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of undersigned certain citizens respectfully showeth their grave concern at the possibility of fees being reintroduced for prospective tertiary students, and also at the prospect of TEAS allowance being abolished or cut back.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or for any category of students;
(ii) the TEAS scheme not be abolished or cut back.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lloyd.
Petition received.
Rights of Disabled
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
, I. The failure of the Federal Government to seek information from the census re disabled people-i.e. partial or total disability-to enable for adequate planning of, and for, types of services needed by disabled people to be undertaken.
2. The failure of the Federal Government to lead the way in employment of disabled people by ernploying a greater number of such people within the Commonwealth Public Service-note the small number currently employed within the Service.
3. The wastage of the Federal Government funds perpetuating large, bureaucratic institutions and organisations where there are often few disabled people ori their boards and

little emphasis is placed on consumer participation in decision making.
4. The failure of the Federal Government to encourage independence of disabled people, or to develop "normalised" support systems-attendant care.
5. The failure of the Federal Government to provide "noninstitutionalised" specialised accommodation for those people who could not be able to benefit from, or cope with attendant care.
6. Failure by the Federal Government to alter, or create a "disability" allowance means test free for all disabled people-this would assist with necessary equipment and mobility costs.
7. Failure to provide a national compensation scheme thus saving time and enabling people to be automatically covered in the event of a disability.
8. Failure by the Federal Government to abolish tariffs on all equipment available to the disabled-e.g. Optacon.
9. Mismanagement of Federal I.Y.D.P. Funds-e.g. nonreceipt by some States of funds through unresolved negotiations.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that immediate action be taken to remedy the above stated and that the Federal Government recognise that disabled people are citizens who should have equal rights.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The 'petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Taxpayers ~ho incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other business expenses.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will everpray.
byMrWest.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned members of parents and citizens associations respectfully showeth:
That retention of the Schools Commission and the Curriculum Development Centre in their present forms'is essential for the balanced and progressive allocation of educational resources and facilities in the Australian community.
That serious concern has been generated by the decision within the Schools Commission guidelines, to cut funds to the general recurrent and capital programs by reallocation to transition, the decision not to implement the school improvement program; and the divisiveness created between government and non-government schools due to increases of $43.25 million to non-government schools while government schools funds have not increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will reverse these decisions-will retain the Schools Commission and Curriculum Development Centre in their original forms; retain the Schools Commission proposals including recurrent and capital funding proposals; basket of services and schools improvement program.

Petitions

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 985

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr EYeringham, Mr Hodges and Mr McVeigh.
Petitions received.
Interest Rates
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of ihe undersigned residents of Salisbury and Elizabeth in the State of South Australia petition that:
Competition between banks and finance Eompanies by giving ever increasing interest rates to obtain the investors' capital, is against the nation's best interest. It penetrates every form of activity by constant demands for higher wages to meet these explosive conditions.
It is an intolerable burden to the younger generation of family life, that by necessity are the recipients of these excessive interest rates that are catastrophic to house purchase and natural living.
We therefore respectfully petition for an urgent annual realistic controlled reduction right "across the board" on all existing and future interest rate agreements. With a maximum interest percentage ceiling on investors' capital, and a scale of interest charges for loans as appropriate.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will give effect to our submissions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Vitamins and Minerals
To the Honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the electors of the division of Gwydir respectfully showeth that the proposal to restrict the potency and open sale of certain vitamins and minerals is not supported by credible scientific evidence and is not justified in the interest of public health and, therefore, government interference over and above existing regulations is not warranted and is an infringement of the right of the individual to exercise his freedom of choice and that in future all interested parties (industry or consumer) be given the opportunity to voice their opinion on matters which so directly affect their well-being and health.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the proposed regulations not be enacted.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHunt.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Hughes respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for post-graduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community.

Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for post-graduate study.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
COMMUNITY YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEME
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-In accordance with Standing Order 131, 1 inform the House that 1 intend to submit a notice of motion seeking the appointment of a select committee to inquire into and report on the benefits that have applied from" and would apply with the continuation of, the Community. Youth Support Scheme, which was referred to in the petition lodged by me today. Ac- ~ordingly, 1 move:
That the petition and all similar petitions which may be presented to the Hou~e be printed.
1 so move in response to over 10,000 people who have today attached their signatuies--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable lady is not entitled to speak to the motion. The question is: 'That the motion be agreed to'. Those of that opinion say aye, to the contrary no. 1 think the ayes have it. 1think the ayes have it.
Mrs Darling-Mr Speaker, in response to over 10,000 people--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume her seat.
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-I said quite clearly: 'I think the ayes have it'. 1 repeated it, and it went without challenge. The right honourable gentleman will have to undo the resolution if he wishes the question to be resubmitted.
Mr Sinclair-Mr Speaker, 1 understood that you said: The noes have it'. 1 now understand that that is not so. Mr Speaker, 1 apologise, but 1 understood that you said: 'The noes have it'. 1 beg your pardon if the noise in this chamber was such that 1 did not hear correctly, but 1 believed that you said: 'The noes have it'. 1 ask that the question be resubmitted.
Mr SPEAKER-On two occasions 1 did, in fact, say: 'I think the ayes have it'. Having regard to what the Leader of the House has said, will the Deputy Leader of the Opposition agree to the question being resubmitted?
Mr Lionel Bowen-Yes.
Mr SPEAKER-The question is: 'That the petition and all similar petitions which may be presented to the House be printed'. Those of that opinion say aye, to the contrary no. On the voices

986 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Petitions

I would say that I think the ayes have it. Is a division required? The House will divide.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

47

Noes

67

Majority
AYES
Armitage. J. L. Beazley. K. C. Blewell.N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John prown, Robert Campbell.G. Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

20
Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo Mahon,Les Mildren, J.B. Milton,P. Morris,P,F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scoll,!.!-. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S.j. Willis,R.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D.
Baume,ME. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown, N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen, Cameron, Ian Cariton, J. J.
Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H Good luck, B. J. Groom, R. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD.
Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M.

Jarman,A.W.
Jull,D.F. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B.
Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M.J.R. MacKenzie, A. J.
Mclean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William
McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P. C.
Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R.
Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M .E. Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair,l. McC.
Spender, J. M. Street, A. A.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson,D.S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Young, M.J.

PAIRS

Falconer, P. D.

PAIRS

Cohen,J. Innes, U. E.

Edwards, H. R. Robinson, Ian

Question so resolved in the negative.

COMMUNITY YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEME
Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That a Select Committee be appointed to inquire into and report on the benefits that have applied and would apply with the continuation of the Community Youth Support Scheme. and that the closure of the Community 'Youth Support Scheme, designated for 31 October 1981. be suspended until such report is received.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA VETO AGAINST UNITED NATIONS
CONDEMNATION OF SOUTH AFRICA
Notice of Motion
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House:
I. Condemns the Reagan Administration in the United States of America for its veto against the United Nations condemnation of South Africa because of its invasion of Angola.
2. believes that the Reagan Administration's veto is not representative of the views of the majority of the American people and especially of black Americans, and;
3. reaffirms its total support of the rights of the people of Namibia to self-determination and calls upon the Reagan Administration to pressurise for the withdrawal of South African forces from that country.

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Acting Prime Minister whether it is a fact that in June last year the Department ofIndustry and Commerce an-
nounced an intended investment program in Australia of some $29,000m. Is it also a fact that this announcement, so described as a resource development boom, was made with a great deal of fanfare by the Minister for Industry and Commerce in the months leading up to the October election? Further, is it a fact that in recent weeks the Acting Prime Minister described the 'wid~ spread references' to a resources boom as 'unfortunate', even though the latest declared investment forecast by the Department of Industry and Commerce now exceeds $35,000m? Why is a much larger projected level of investment now no longer a boom while a lower level is, or was, enthusiastically described as such by him, the Prime Minister and the Minister for Industry and Commerce less than a year ago? In conclusion, when are ordinary Australians, particularly our three

Questions Without Notice

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 987

million citizens who now live in poverty, our yO\lng families trying to buy homes, our children in the education system, our pensioners and our black Australians, going to share in some of this boom?
Mr ANTHONY-The week before last I answered a question from the Leadtn" of the Opposition in relation to this matter. I said it was unfortunate that people were capitalising on the use of the term 'boom', imagining that they could immediately get returns and rewards from this development. I also said that there were very long lead times before there would be substantial benefits to the community, other than those that directly applied. One of the reasons why I have been concerned that people have been capitalising on this term 'boom' is the-
Mr West-What about last year?
Mr ANTHONY-I said that it was an unfortunate term to use and that I had used it myself. But because of the reactions of peopleparticularly the Australian Labor Party, which is now promoting the idea of a resources and a profit-related tax or something else-if this sort of statement gets credence with international investors, they certainly will not come and invest the massive amounts of money that Australia will need if this resource development is to take place. It has already been stated that, due to these resource developments, for every dollar. of profit almost 60c goes to the treasuries of the Commonwealth and the States. That is a very handsome return and it is to the benefit of Australians. The more of these developments that we can have, ultimately the more benefits there will be for the Government to distribute to the people. But if investors become fearful that there will be a supertax, as the Labor Party is promoting, this development will not take place. There will be hesitancy and doubt which will not be to the benefit of Australians. Therefore, those people who interpret the boom as some benefit they can immediately derive have a misconception of the situation because it will take a long time before full benefits will be available to Australians.
FUNDING FOR HOUSING
Mr BOURCHIER-My question is directed to the Minister for Housing and Construction. Has his attention been drawn to recent criticism of Commonwealth funding for housing? Will the Minister tell this House whether the Commonwealth has reduced overall funding in the areas of housing and accommodation for all sections of the Australian community?

Mr McVEIGH-I assure the honourable member for Bendigo that I am aware of criticism levelled by State housing Ministers at the Commonwealth contribution to housing and the accommodation of Australians. I totally reject any suggestion that the Commonwealth has scaled down its financial commitment. The Victorian Minister of Housing in particular, with arrogance and ignorance, denied the integrity of official figures which show that the Commonwealth has increased its commitment to housing and accommodation by 18.9 per cent this financial year. Last year our funding in this area was $555m, and this year it is up to a staggering total of $660m. That, I submit, is a substantial and worthwhile increase indeed. I advise the House that if the Minister of Housing in Victoria, the Honourable Jeff Kennett, believes our increases in the areas of supplementary housing assistance for pensioners, crisis accommodation for families in distress and defence service home loans are inhumane-he has called these Commonwealth contributions inhumane-then I question his common sense, his compassion and his sincerity. Is Mr Kennett suggesting that our war veterans, our pensioners and our families from broken homes are not worthy of assistance?
I remind the House that in Mr Kennett's State in 1979-80 the Victorian Government spend $6 per head of its own funds in the area of housing and accommodation, namely, welfare housing. The national average was $16 per head. I know that my colleagues from South Australia will be delighted to know that the contribution by the South Australian Government was $47 per head. The Commonwealth's contribution, as I indicated in the figues I have just given, has increased by $105m. I suggest that that demonstrates our commitment, a commitment which the Honourable Jeff Kennett is obviously unable to mirror.
For the benefit of the House I table those documents which Mr Kennett has claimed are incorrect. Their integrity satisfies me and, I am sure, will satisfy this House. I call on my Victorian counterpart to devote just a little of his energy to helping the needy within our community rather than engaging in the taxing and non-productive business of political preening.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Dawkins proceeding to address a question to the Minister for Education-
Mr SPEAKER-The question is out of order. I will not allow a Minister's statement to be contrasted with a possible opposite statement of members of the House, because each member of the House has to act on his own behalf. I give the

988 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Questions Without Notic{!

honourable gentleman an opportunity to redraft the question.
PRESCRIPTION OF DANOCRINE
Mr HUMPHREYS-I ask the Minister for Health whether it is a fact that he has ordered investigations to be carried out into alleged frauds involving the prescription of the drug whose trade name is danocrine and whose generic name is danazol by medical practitioners on the Gold Coast of Queensland. If so, can the Minister reveal the details of these investigations and the action taken by him in this connection?
Mr MacKELLAR-Some investigations are taking place in relation to some alleged fraudulent practices involving both medical practitioners and pharmacists on the Gold Coast. I am not in a position to say what is the most recent situation in relation to those investigations; All I can do is reiterate the Government's absolute determination to crack down on any fraud or abuse of the system, whether it be perpetrated by medical practitioners or by allied health professionals.
WAGES POLICY
Mr BRADFIELD-I refer the Minister for Industrial Relations to the statistics on weekly earnings released recently by the Australian Bureau of Statistics. Does the Minister share the concern voiced in this morning's Press that difficulties will now occur regarding a wages policy and the containment of the Government's inflation target?
Mr VINER-I thank the honourable gentleman for asking the question because I think there is a need to put to rest some of the extravagant and loose use of the phrase 'wages explosion' with regard to wages development in the communityat the moment. Of course the Government is concerned at any suggestion of a rapid escalation in wage costs. We believe that the growth in wages must be moderated to ensure that Australia's economic recovery is not jeopardised. But I feel, and the Government feels; that predictions of a wages explosion based on the latest figures by the Australian Statistician as to earnings are unduly alarmist and pessimistic.
I will make some short points. Firstly, although the figures for the latest quarter show a large increase compared with those for the same period last year, the increase for the March quarter was the lowest since the March quarter of 1977. So we have one quarter immediately contrasting with the other, and that is not unusual when we are looking at statistics. The other important factor is that the June quarter figure is higher than it might have been because of the first review under the old wage indexation guidelines. That was the one

by which 80 per cent of the December and March consumer price index movements were automatically passed into wages. That first review meant that the national wage increase was transmitted into earnings at an earlier stage than otherwise would have been the case, so it showed up earlier in the statistics. The inclusion of some of the effects of a third national wage rise in the statistics also affected average weekly earnings movements over the whole year.
Taking all those factors into account and making a deduction for that third national wage increase, in fact the rise over the year would be a little over 13 per cent, which is about the same rate as the rise over the full year to the March quarter and, incidentally, is within the Budget forecast made by my colleague the Treasurer. I feel that, if these statistics are properly analysed and properly understood, any suggestion that they show a wages explosion or a pressure cooker situation is, as I have said, unduly alarmist and pessimistic.
UNEMPLOYMENT: BUDGETARY PREDICTION
Mr MILTON-I address my question to the Treasurer. In view of the Treasurer's budgetary prediction of a small rise in unemployment in 1981-82 as a result of the Government's use of monetary policy to control the economy, what guarantees can he give that this predicted rise in unemployment will not in fact be a very substantial increase? Secondly, what action will the Government take if unemployment does increase beyond the Treasurer's over-optimistic prediction, as has been suggested by many commentators?
Mr HOWARD-I think the first thing I should say to the honourable member is that he had better be a little careful about references to overoptimistic Budget predictions. The fact is that, so far as the last Budget is concerned, most of the major predictions proved to be on the pessimistic side. Indeed, in the last Budget Speech I indicated that although employment would continue to grow at a very strong rate-at least 2 per centthe growth would not be quite as fast as the growth of 2.6 per cent last year, which was enough to bring about a fall in the total number of unemployed persons for the first time in four years. As a result of that there may be some upward movement in the total number of unemployed throughout the course of 1981-82 but it is difficult to give a precise quantification. I assure the honourable member that the Government will continue to follow the policies which it has followed over the last 5+ years and which have led during the past two years to the largest rise in the

Questions Without Notice

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 989

number of people employed in Australia at any time over the last 10 years.
MEAT EXPORTS: SUSPENSION OF BONING ROOMS
Mr FISHER-I refer the Minister for Primary Industry to his decision that as from midnight last night the export operations of independent boning rooms in Victoria are to be suspended. How long will these boning rooms have their export operations affected?
Mr NIXON-It is correct that on Friday officers of the Bureau of Animal Health notified the 27 independent boning rooms that they were being delisted for export purposes from Monday night. On Monday morning another six independent boning rooms were notified of the same action. The purpose of the delisting is to ensure that the independent boning works meet the security requirements for meat handling of the importing countries and the demands that they place on the meat. As a result of the efforts of my Department and the Bureau of Animal Health already three works have been reinstated today. They are Noble Einsiedel Pty Ltd', establishment 201, Overland Meat Exports Pty Ltd, establishment 1,522, and Snow Meat Exports Pty Ltd, establishment 1,793. Those three establishments have been able to demonstrate to the Bureau of Animal Health that they can meet the new security conditions required for the handling of meat.
I have been informed that already one cold store has been approved for the secure storage of meat products destined for the United States of America and other markets. The cold store is Frigoscandia Australia Ltd, establishment 149. Many of the other independent boning rooms that have been delisted have already made application for re-registration. They will also be re-registered when they demonstrate to the Bureau of Animal Health and my Department that they can meet the security requirements laid down.
RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Acting Prime Minister a question. It is supplementary to one I asked a few minutes ago. He will recall that in his answer he sought to project the Fraser Government and himself particularly as the virtuous protectors of the fiscal interests of mining development corporations in this country. I ask whether he has noted 'the comments of Sir Roderick Carnegie of Conzinc Riotinto of Australia Ltd of 1 September when he said: 'Mr Anthony is not fooling anybody in the Australian mineral industry. While he sits on his hands and fails to do anything about proper resource taxation the States are filling the vacuum

with the worst kind of draconian taxes. Exorbitant rail freights, upfront graduated royalties and the Northern Territory's preposterous 35 per cent levy before company tax are examples.' I ask also whether he has noted the comment of Sir Roderick Carnegie that: 'What does hurt industries at times of low earnings are indiscriminate levies applied by the FraSer Government without any test of profitability and without any threshhold, simply to pander to Mr Fraser's fetish about the need for a Budget surplus'. In the circumstances will the Minister accept that spokes~ men for the mining industry, in this respect at least, know what they are talking about, recognise the unfair and damaging nature of the rather complex and uneven set of fiscal measures which are currently imposed on them and stop the nonsense of trying to misrepresent the fairness and reasonableness of a resource rental tax?
Mr ANTHONY-There may have been some moderately criticising remarks by Sir Roderick Carnegie in relation to the Commonwealth. But one ought to look up the records of what the whole mining industry said when the Labor Government was in office. Goodness me, did'nt it have justification for criticism then, because the LaboTGovernment brought the whole mining and resources industry in this nation to a standstill. During the three years it was in office not one major development took place. Therefore, it is. to the credit of the Government that we have been able to. create an atmosphere in. which currently we see mammoth amounts of money being passed into resource development in this country. The Government is proud of that and wants to see it continue. A continuation of it would mean that more wealth would be created to be distributed to the people in this nation. When the Leader of the Opposition talks about levies being placed on industries, we should remember who it was that placed a $6 a tonne levy on the export of coal from this country. Which Government managed to reduce that by half? It was this Government, the Liberal-National Country Party Government, which reduced it so that we could get confidence going'--and we ,have confidence going-in that industry. Therefore, it does not become the. Opposition to criticise this Government one iota because our record stands up to the extent that the Australian mining industry is expanding, is developing and is creating employment-in sharp contrast to what a Labor government did a':ld to what a Labor government would do should one be elected.

990 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

TASMANIAN AIR SERVICES
Mr GROOM-Did the Minister for Transport recently state that the Government's 10 per cent 'air bridge' subsidy for air services between Tasmania and the mainland will not apply to the new service to be provided by East-West Airlines Ltd unless East-West charges the same fare as Ansett Airlines of Australia? Did the Minister make such a statement? If so, can he explain the reason behind it? Can he also explain how this decision, if it is a decision, can in any way help to encourage true cO,mpetition between our airlines and bring about 10wer air fares?
Mr ~lJNT-The 10 per cent subsidy that was provided to the domestic carriers was designed, of c,ourse, to try to achieve some equity for Tasmimians as a result of the Government's decision to adopt the principal recommendations of the Holcroft report. The 10 per cent subsidy was designed to remove the difference between the increase that occurred as a result of the elimination of cross-subsidisation and the average increase that occurred overall. The 10 per cent was in itself a bridging amount to compensate for the formula being used, bearing in mind that it would have been a very, serious impost on the Tasmanian people. I am currently having a look at the application made by East-West.- I see some difficulty in applying that formula to the East-West fare structure because it does not completely comply with the conditions that apply to the two majors which were heavily cross-subsidising their fares to Tasmania. However, the matter is under consideration. As soon as I have completed my consideration of the matter I will be in touch with the honourable member.
INVASION OF ANGOLA BY SOUTH AFRICA
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I direct a question to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I refer to the fact that, following the recent South African invasion of Angola, the governments -of West Germany and France and other European powers called in their resident South African ambassadors and protested in the strongest possible terms. Accord- .ingly, I ask: Has the Australian Government pro- ~ested to the South African Government through Its ambassador here? If it has not, does it propose to do so without any further delay?
'Mr STREET-No, the Australian Government has not at this stage called in the South African ambassador. However, the Press was fully briefed as to my views on the South African invasion of Angola and in fact widely reported my strong condemnation of the South African action. I am happy to repeat to the House what I have

been reported elsewhere as saying; that is, that the action of the South African Government in invading Angola not only has resulted in conflict between the armed forces of the two countries, South Africa and Angola, but, because of the presence of at least Cuban troups in Angola, runs the risk of a conflict involving third parties as well. The Government hopes that the South African Government will negotiate urgently on the United Nations plan for bringing peace to Namibia and an end to the insurgency in that country, reducing the suffering of the people of Namibia, and removing a possible world flashpoint. We are following with great interest the efforts in that context of the contact group of five Western nations, led by the United States, and we trust that its efforts will be successful.
HEALTH CARE CARD: ELIGIBILITY
Mr STEELE HALL-Is the Minister for Health aware that the form for application for a health care card requires income received as salary and wages to be listed for the immediate past four weeks, whereas income from property or self-employment is required for a four-week period averaged over an entire year? Is the Minister also aware that many hundreds of thousands of applicants whose income is derived from salary and wages have broken periods of employment? Will he take steps to have those applicants' incomes similarly averaged over a full year to establish their eligibility?
Mr MacKELLAR-The honourable gentleman raised this matter with me directly, and I undertook at that stage to keep a close watch on the situation. At the present time the Government sees no reason to change the arrangements which are presently in place but, if it can be shown over time that some people are being disadvantaged by these arrangements, obviously I will consider the matter again.
TERTIARY TUITION FEES
Mr DAWKINS-I address my question to the Minister for Education. Did he indicate before the last election that the Government would not reintroduce tertiary tuition fees? Did the Government breach that undertaking as a result of the razor gang's report? Will the Minister now state what the Government's position is on tertiary tuition fees? Will he resist pressure, reported in today's newspaper, to extend tertiary tuition fees to undergraduate students?
Mr FIFE-Despite the difficulty that the honourable member for Fremantle had with the

Questions Without Notice

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 991

question, the answer is clear and easy to understand. In the context of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the Government did give consideration to the question of tertiary education fees. During its consideration it decided, firstly, not to reintroduce fees for undergraduates; and, secondly, to reintroduce fees for students undertaking second or subsequent degrees or higher degrees. That is very easy to understand, and I would have thought that the honourable member for Fremantle would have heard me say it on so many occasions that he would not have needed to give me the opportunity to repeat it.
However, I welcome the opportunity to repeat it because in the last few weeks the honourable member has been very busy going around universities and colleges of advanced education and suggesting to students that the Government is about to reintroduce fees for those undertaking their first degree. I deplore the action of the honourable member because he is creating a great deal of unnecessary concern in the minds of young people. As a member of this House, indeed as a front bench member of the Opposition, he ought to know better. I welcome the opportunity to repeat that this Government has no intention of reintroducing fees for students undertaking their first degree.
SALES TAX
Mr LLOYD-Can the Treasurer clarify the present confusion, and the charges of discrimination between horses, dogs and cats in the application of sales tax to manufactured pet food, saddlery and harness? Is a person who earns his living by breeding, training or racing dogs able to purchase food and other goods for those dogs free of sales tax while someone who earns his living from training or racing horses is not exempt from paying sales tax on their food or other goods such as saddlery? Does a breeder of horses, dogs or cats have to earn his total income from this pursuit to be exempt from sales tax on food for those animals? If not, at what percentage of income does the tax apply? Are all breeds of dogs exempt if the other criteria are met or only breeds of working dogs? Finally, is the proprietor of a supermarket or other shop retailing pet food required to remove the sales tax on presentation of an exemption certificate number, or can the proprietor force the purchaser to buy his pet food only from a wholesaler?
Mr HOWARD-The answer to the first part of the honourable gentleman's question is that the change is meant to impose the rate of 17t per cent in respect of meat designed for sale as pet food, subject to the overriding exemptions in respect of

animals used for certain purposes, which are referred to in the Budget Papers and in subsequent material made available by the Australian Taxation Office. The remaining parts of the honourable gentleman's question are very detailed. I will take them on notice. I will get a response to the honourable gentleman as quickly as possible, but I have long since learnt .that it is very dangerous to give legal opinions on the run.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Fry having addressed a question to the Acting Prime Minister-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question is out of order. The Acting Prime Minister is not responsible for the staff of members.
TRAINING PROGRAMS
Mr BURR-My question is directed to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs. In view of the Government's decision to discontinue the Community Youth Support Scheme and to devote the money to other training programs, will the Government consider expanding the successful youthwork scheme that was instigated by the honourable member for Bradfield?
Mr N. A. BROWN-I have had a number of interesting discussions with the honourable member for Bradfield about the question of youth unemployment and various measures that might be taken to alleviate it. I have found that he has a very great concern about that matter. I understand that I will be seeing him today to discuss his project further. I look forward to further discussions with him about it.
IMPORTATION OF POLLEN
Mr KENT-Is the Minister for Health aware that the importation of raw pollen from countries in which ascosphera apis occurs constitutes a risk to the Australian honey industry? If so, will he agree to the introduction of measures to ban the importation of pollen until effective quarantine controls can be implemented against the introduction of pathogenic viruses which are dangerous to our bees?
Mr MacKELLAR-I am not aware of the precise details relating to the honourable gentleman's question. I will certainly take the question on notice. I make the general comment that Australian quarantine laws are framed to protect to the maximum extent possible Australia's livestock, plants and industries. Of course, we believe that human quarantine also is as effective as it possibly can be. The aim of the Government is to protect Australian producers and Australian industries. If there is a matter which requires extra

992 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

attention I would be grateful if the honourable gentleman would bring it to my attention.
DEFENCE FORCES: WORK VALUE INQUIRY
Mr SCHOLES-Is the Minister for Defence aware of considerable unrest among servicemen as a result of the adoption of the final report of the committee of inquiry into work value in the defence forces? Is he also aware that in at least some establishments there have been suggestions of industrial action of some form and that no organisation exists for, nor is there any means by which the members of the defence forces can, appeal against such decisions? Will the Minister examine means by which a method of appeal can be instituted so that members of the defence forces can be placed in the same position as all other government employees? Will he examine also means by which a case can be prepared on behalf of members of the defence forces and argued in such an appeal, which course is essential if members of the defence forces are to be seen to be treated fairly?
Mr KILLEN-I reject my honourable friend's suggestion that the members of the Services are not being treated fairly. Indeed, if the honourable gentleman should compare the aggregate increase in service pay--
Mr Scholes-I said seen to be.
Mr KILLEN-I accept the honourable gentleman's mild rebuke. If one takes the aggregate service pay increase and compares it with increases for a wide range of activities one finds that the service member is slightly in front. I putit no harsher than that. Beyond that, my honourable friend asked a wide ranging n~ber of policy questions as to whether there ShOU~ be-certainly it was implicit in his questions an advocacy style of presentation and whether there should be a representative of the Services to put the case. The distinguished Deputy President of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission Who conducts this appeal, His Honour Mr Justice Peter Coldham, is a former serviceman of very great distinction and gallantry. He and his .colleagues undertake a very considerable survey of service conditions. I am sure that the honourable gentleman would be aware of that.
Ever since. this system of inquiry was established, the Government has accepted without question the findings of the tribunal. I would hesitate to place servicemen and women in the position where the findings of that tribunal were called into question. I simply say to the honourable gentleman that I will have prepared for him a

table which will show the relationship ofservice pay increase to increases for the rest of the community. Finally, I have heard some expressions of disquiet. In my own day in the Services many years ago I used to join in such conduct myself. I have even heard murmurs of disquiet expressed in this very chamber.
SINGLETON ARMY CAMP: COAL
Mr O'KEEFE-I ask the Minister for Trade and Resources whether it is a fact that strong rumours exist about the mining of coal under the Singleton Army camp. Can the Minister inform the House as to the exact situation in regard to this suggestion?
Mr ANTHONY-The Commonwealth does own the mining rights to a very substantial reserve of coal under the Singleton Army training camp. If the Commonwealth were to realise this asset it would gain a considerable amount of money. At the moment the camp is used by the Army for training purposes and the Army has a lot of money invested in those facilities. However, if the coal deposits Were to be developed-there have been companies seeking information and submitting requests to develop it-the Commonwealth would want to make it open to all companies to submit requests. The Commonwealth would then consider them on their merit. This is a complex matter with the Army using the land. Mining would necessitate placement of the Army camp somewhere else, and a considerable sum of money would be involved in that. These are all matters that need to be examined with the relevant departments. Only when that is done can the Commonwealth Government state its position as to whether development is to take place. In the meantime I can only report that we own a very substantial reserve of coal in the Hunter Valley.
LEBANON: REFUGEES
Mr CAMPBELL-Is the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs familiar with the situation in war-torn Lebanon? Can the Minister give an assurance that people seeking refuge from that unhappy and devastated land' are being offered sanctuary in this country at least as readily as people fleeing the economic hardship of Vietnam?
Mr MACPHEE-I am aware of the situation in Lebanon. In fact, the situation, whilst it has never been very satisfactory, is marginally better than it was a few months ago. Certainly our information is that people wishing to apply to migrate to Australia are able to do so by going to Damascus. Those who, in fact, are based in Beirut within reasonable. proximity to our embassy ar~ able to

Meat Substitution

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 993

make applications to our officials from the Department of Foreign Affairs there.This is a matter which we keep under review. It is a matter which is of concern to many members of this House. At this stage most of the people who wish to apply are able to use the facilities in Damascus.
ADVANCE TO THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE 1980-81
Statement of Expenditure
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-I present the following paper:
Advance to the Minister for Finance 1980-81-Statement of Heads of Expenditure and the amounts charged thereto pursuant to section 36A of the Audit Act 190 I.
Ordered that the statement be taken into consideration in the Committee of the Whole House at the next sitting.
EXPORT DEVELOPMENT GRANTS BOARD
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-Pursuant to section 41 of the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974 and section 20 of the Export Expansion Grants Act 1978, I present the sixth annual report 1980-81 of the Export Development Grants Board.
SENATE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Government response to the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment report on industrial research and development.
VIETNAM VETERANS
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-For the information of honourable members. I present the text of a statement by the Minister for Veterans' Affairs 'On Vietnam Veterans-Service Effects on State of Health-Progress Report on Scientific Studies'.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Exports Grants Acts Amendment Bill 1981.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Bill 1981.
MEAT SUBSTITUTION
Ministerial Statement
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-by leave-This statement is to

advise the House in detail of the measures undertaken by the Government following the confirmed finding on 13 August 1981 of horse meat in a shipment of Australian boneless beef to the United States of America. This discovery, coupled with the finding in Melbourne on August 21 of kangaroo meat in cartons marked for export as boneless beef, is an extremely grave matter. The Government is determined to have all the facts of this case brought to light, to stamp out this kind of activity, to prosecute those involved, and to ensure that all possible measures are taken to prevent such activity from happening again. The tragedy of this case is the immense damage it has caused to the reputation of our meat industry, both here and overseas.

We are currently investigating a situation

where meat bearing the markings of two of

Australia's 400 licensed export establishments has

been found to have been adulterated. Both these

establishments are based in Melbourne. Their

total exports to the United States so far this year

have amounted to 632 tonnes, or 0.39 per cent of

total Australian shipments to the United States

over the same period, amounting to 161,000

tonnes. The Australian Bureau of Animal Health

is carrying out spot checks and species tests on

export boneless beef in store in every State in

Australia. So far, not one of these has shown any

evidence of substitution. Of 742 tests taken up to

9 a.m. today, every single one has proved positive

for beef. Without in any way trying to play down

the gravity of the situation, the facts at present in-

dicate that the great bulk of Australia's meat

export industry is carrying out its trade honestly

and fairly.

.

This is the first known case of horse or kangaroo meat having been substituted for beef. Whilt< there have been a number of broad allegations made over past years, to my knowledge not one of these has related specifically to the substitution of
horse or kangaroo meat. Clearly existing requirements and regulations governing the export meat trade have to be tightened up, and exising penalties for fraudulent activities in the trade substantially increased. We have been faced with a potentially devastating situation which has major ramifications for our $3.5 billion meat industry, anq consMuently for the national economy. Not only must this case be cleared up, and the offenders satisfactorily dealt with, but also the stigma hanging over the Australian meat industry must be removed once and for all. I am determined that it will be. There have been a lot of emotive statements and claims over the past two weeks, including that the Government has moved

994 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Meat Substitution

too slowly on this matter. The facts do not support such claims. The Government has acted promptly, properly, decisively, and in cooperation with the United States.
On 11 August 1981 the Australian Bureau of Animal Health received its first advice from the United States Department of Agriculture that horse meat was suspected iIi a carton of boneless beef, in San Diego, bearing the markings of Australian meat export establishment 140C, Profreeze, Richmond, Melbourne. On 12 August, the movement of all export meat from Profreeze was terminated. Seven other boning rooms in the. same complex were also placed under strict surveillance with thorough checks being made on their product before release for export.
The USDA advised us on 13 August 1981 that laboratory tests on the 140C meat in San Diego proved positive for horse meat. Immediately we received that advice, establishment 140C was deregistered, meaning that it can no longer export meat to anywhere in the world, and the Australian Federal Police were asked to .investigate. These measures were announced publicly on that day. Immediate steps were also taken to tighten security: 1809 cartons of meat in Victoria bearing 140C markings, with a trade value of around $100,000, were seized and impounded for testing; spot checks were introduced in all States; extra meat inspector surveillance was provided at independent boning rooms and cold stores; shiploading security was increased; checking of health certificates and all documentation was intensified.
Further measures were then developed within days:
A new system was devised for security seals to be placed on cartons which will cost an estimated $lm in 1981-82. The first delivery of these seals is expected today and they will progressively be put into use forthwith.
An urgent review of relevant laws and the penalties which can apply was instigated, involving senior officers of the Department of Primary Industry, the Attorney-General's Department and the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs.
Police investigations were intensified and at present there are 15 Australian Federal Police, 4 Victorian Police and 1 officer from the Trade Practices Commission involved. These numbers will be increased as the Commissioner requests.
A special task force was set up within the BAH to co-ordinate a nation-wide sampling and species testing program.

The Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) on 20 August asked the Trade Practices Commission to investigate claims of false description in the trading of meat.
Kangaroo serum was sent to the USDA to assist it in its testing program.

On 1 September, the Australian Meat and Live-

stock Corporation suspended the export licence

of Samsons Meat Co. (Vic.) Pty Ltd, and is con-

tinuing investigations into other companies. On

4 September 1981, the USDA advised that horse

meat had been confirmed in a consignment of

meat from establishment 622-Jason Meats Pty

Ltd, Abbotsford, Melbourne. That establishment

was immediately deregistered and the Australian

Federal Police advised. All cartons labelled 622

are being seized and tested. So far, 2,533 cartons

have been impounded.

.

Because of this latest development I viewed it as essential to take special action in regard to Victoria. I therefore took the decision that day to suspend the export operations of 27 independent boning rooms in Victoria. Yesterday, to strengthen the controls further, I extended this suspension to include independent boning rooms in Victoria that are associated with an abattoir complex. This involves six boning rooms. The suspension became effective from midnight last night and will remain in force until the boning rooms candemonstrate adequate security measures and a satisfactory species testing program. Those who can meet the new requirements will be reinstated immediately-as I said in the House, three already have done so-and will then be able to look forward to again being acceptable exporters to the United States.

There have been questions raised as to why this action did not also include those boning rooms which are registered with the registered number of an abattoir. There are 15 boning rooms in Victoria in this situation. The reason is simply that these boning rooms are part and parcel of a fully integrated operation which is under constant supervision. The overall operation is one in which the live animal is brought in, slaughtered, pro~ cessed, packed, frozen, stored and subsequently loaded out on the one establishment. In other words, the integrated establishments already have a much higher degree of security. The new procedures are being applied nationally from today, and any registered establishment found not meeting them will have its operations suspended.

I turn now to legislative measures that the Government is taking forthwith. Under, existing provisions, the maximum penalties for fraudulent

Meat Substitution

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 995

activity or breaches in our export meat trade are totally inadequate. We will be introducing legislation into Parliament this week to bring these penalties to a realistic level. Maximum penalties under the Customs Act and the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act for illegal export are to be lifted from the present $1,000 to $100,000 or five years' imprisonment, or both, on indictment under each Act. Both Acts will provide also for a maximum penalty of $5,000 or one year's imprisonment, or both, on summary conviction.
There will be a separate, new Act-the Meat Export (Penalties) Act. This also will provide for maximum penalties of $100,000 or five years' imprisonment, or both, on indictment, for offences relating to the misuse of inspection stamps, alteration or interference with descriptions and tags, and making false or misleading statements.Similarly, it will provide for a maximum penalty of $5,000 or one year's imprisonment, or both, on summary conviction. Offences of this nature currently are covered by the Exports (Meat) Regulations, which provide for a maximum penalty of only $100. The Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act will be amended to enable the penalty provisions for breach of export licence conditions to be increased from $2,000 to a maximum of $100,000 or five years' imprisonment, or both, on indictment, and for a maximum of $5,000 or one year's imprisonment, or both, on summary conviction. Further legislation will be introduced at a later date to enable the Corporation to suspend an export licence immediately where prima facie evidence exists that a condition of the licence has been breached.
These measures might sound somewhat extreme, but in my opinion, and in the opinion of the Government, they are realistic penalties that should be imposed on anyone involved in racketeering of this nature and in placing at risk our entire export meat trade. Such penalties also will clearly demonstrate to our trading partners that we will not tolerate fraudulent practices in this industry. The Government gave close consideration to making these legislative changes retrospective but for reasons onegal precedence has .now decided against this. The higher penalties will apply from the date of royal assent.
In addition to the legislative changes, the Government is implementing strict new controls:
Export meat will be stored in specially secured and approved cold stores, under new inventory control measures; owners of registered export establishment will be responsible for all activiHes conducted on their premises; meat transport vehicles and containers will be

. sealed, to add to the security of the packed product during transport from a boning room tCl an approved secure cold store or shipside.
We are examining the possibility of requiring registered export meat packers also to be licenced exporters. This would mean that packers would be responsible and accountable for their product from the time tht(y physically pack it to ,the time it is loaded on ship for export. Another measure under consideration by the Bureau of Animal Health is whether the requirement of a standard one-piece meat carton will be cost effective and will further enhance security, by making relidding impossible. Mr Deputy Speaker, all of these measures have been set in train since 11 August, when we were first notified of possible horse meat substitution. Since that time, I have had constant discussion with representatives in the livestock and meat industry. I have been inundated with representations and suggestions. My concern has been to ensure that those responsible for this racket are brought to justice-and to that end the Australian Federal Police are investigating-and also to ensure that I instigate the appropriate measures to prevent as far as possible such a situation occurring again.
I held a lengthy meeting with meat industry
representatives in Melbourne last Thursday, and convened a special meeting of the Australian Agricultural Council on Friday, at which all State Ministers of Agriculture were present. I wanted to ensure that the initiatives being taken by the Government were considered to be appropriate and were taken after full consultation. At both my meeting with industry representatives, and the Australian Agricultural Council, there was general agreement on the initiatives I had taken and was proposing to take. The special meeting with State Ministers for Agriculture was particularly relevant, because to a large degree the problem arose from, and extended to, areas outside the Commonwealth Government's jurisdiction, notably State controls over knackeries and the movement of pet meat. Clearly there is an urgent and equal necessity for the States and Northern Territory to strengthen their controls in this area. This was impressed upon Ministers at the Agricultural Council meeting, and it was agreed that all States and the Northern Territory immediately examine policies and practices for controlling knackeries, denaturing pet meat, and identifying game meat for human consumption. The matter will be taken further at a special meeting of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, to be held in Melbourne on 18 September. Since the problem is clel;lrly a national one, the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) yesterday telexed all Premiers and the

996 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Meat Substitution

Chief Minister seeking their full support for an urgent examination of these areas so that rapid progress can be made at the meeting on 18 September. On this point, I am pleased to say that I have already been advised that Victoria will cooperate completely in any way possible.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I, also want to make specific mention of the fact that, from the outset, we have had daily contact, and close cooperation, with the United States. When the United States Special Trade Representative, Ambassador Brock, and I discussed this issue on 17 August in Canberra, he expressed satisfaction with the way in which the Australian Government was handling the situation. At no time have we received a complaints from the United States Administration as to the way in which we are dealing with this issue. In fact, its appreciation is on record. Following the Government's action last Friday in regard to the Victorian independent boning rooms, the USDA announced the next day the immediate release onto the American market of all Australian meat except that from Victoria. About 24,000 tonnes of meat, valued at $40m has been released. We are continuing to negotiate for the earliest possible release of some 6,000 tonnes of Victorian meat still being held. The decision by the USDA confirms two most significant points:
(I) the confidence of the United States Administration in the Australian meat export industry; and
(II) the success of close co-operation and consultation between our respective governments and veterinary authorities.
A senior veterinary qfficer from the BAH has been in Washington since 1 September discussing new proposals and other technical matters with his veterinary counterparts in the USDA. The USDA has also sent an officer to Australia for discussions with officiaJs.
Honourable members will be aware that on 26 August I issued a statement confirming new procedures adopted by the United States to prevent any attempt at substitution of meat for the United States market. Among those procedures is a requirement for the Bureau of Animal Health to set up an approved procedure for species testing in Australia before export meat receives its final certification. To this end we are currently discussing with the USDA a detailed species testing program whereby registered premises will be divided into three risk categories, with appropriate sampling for each category as follows:
(I) where product is produced under a full time inspection supervision system from

.slaughter through to final containerisation on the one establishment with only one' operator, samples be taken from 10 cartons per week on a random basis;
(II) where product is produced under full time inspection supervision, but where there are leased boning rooms on the establishment, samples from 10 cartons per week of each operator's product be taken on a random basis;
(III) where product has been transferred from either an abattoir or a boning room and stored elsewhere prior to containerisation, samples from 10 cartons from each container, or from each consignment of 600 cartons, be taken.
Mr Deputy Speaker, the Government has received an interim report from the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police stating that police investigations intothis case are proceeding satisfactorily. Honourable members will no doubt be aware that one man has just been arrested and charged with 21 offences. I do not propose to canvass any details of the investigations, because it is imperative that inquiries are not jeopardised. The investigations will continue to be followed through to their conclusion as a matter of top priority. In the meantime, the Government feels it is now in a position to consider whether a broader inquiry is necessary. This is based on the fa~t that we now have the interim police report, coupled with the weekend decision of the USDA to release the majority of impounded Australian meat on to the United States market. I want toreiterate that the Government has at no time ruled out the possibility of the holding of a broader inquiry.
Having therefore considered the position and having regard to the seriousness of allegations that have been raised, particularly allegations that people in official positions have been involved in malpractice, the Government has decided to set up a royal commission into certain aspects of the meat industry including allegations of malpractice in relation to the export of meat and to meat preparation in the State of Victoria. The Acting Prime Minister, as is the custom, will be announcing the terms of reference when the commission is established. Victoria has agreed to take part in the royal commission. The Acting Prime Minister has sent a telex to all State Premiers and the Chief Minister inviting them to do likewise. In addition to all the measures I have detailed, the Government has decided to engage an independent consultant to conduct a comprehensive review of the effectiveness of the revised system for the documentary and physical control of export meat. The

Meat Substitution

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 997

consultant is to report as soon as possible and to recommend any additional measures he feels are necessary to ensure that the revised system fully achieves the objective of ensuring to the utmost that only meat legally certified for export is in fact exported. This is, if you like, a double check, to be carried out independently, to ensure that no loophole is left for illegal exports. The question could be asked: Why are such parallel inquiries to proceed? The reasons are that, whilst the Government has decided on holding a royal commission in relation to allegations of malpractice, which could be somewhat lengthy, there is, in the interests of restoring the international credibility of our meat industry, a much more urgent and immediate need for the procedural aspects to be reviewed as promptly as possible by an independent consultant. I hope, subject to negotiations with the consultant to be appointed, to have his report within two months.
Mr Deputy Speaker, serious allegations have been made and it is the Government's determination that they be fully and completely answered, Australia's meat industry has been severely tarnished and it is imperative that its international reputation be cleared. I believe the establishment of a royal commission is the only means by which we will achieve such an aim to the satisfaction of everyone in the community. The measures I have detailed are broad-ranging and decisive initiatives for the Australian meat industry. Such stringent measures have to be imposed on the honest majority, because of the fraudulent actions of a small minority.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-by leave-The Opposition endorses the urgent need for a wide-ranging royal commission of inquiry into all of the ramifications of the allegations associated with this meat industry scandal. It is an outrage. It is doing untold damage to the Australian meat industry and, more specifically, to the export section of the industry. Last week, on behalf of the Opposition, I declared as much pUblicly. I demanded on behalf of the Australian community and particularly on behalf of the processing, distribution and export sections of the meat industry, that such an inquiry should be undertaken. The only way that we in this country can have any hope of restoring badly sagging respectability internationally in the area of export credibility is for the Government to demonstrate, and demonstrate beyond any doubt, that it intends to take firm action to bring to an end any possibility that this sort of behavior can be duplicated on any occasion in the future.

I repeat that we endorse-indeed we had proposed a week ago-the need for a wideranging royal commission of inquiry, one with wide-ranging terms of reference. That means that the royal commission of inquiry obviously has to investigate the allegations and things which obviously flow from them in terms of the way in which people engaged in corrupt and criminal behavior in this matter. The commission of inquiry has to investigate all of those ramifications. But the inquiry should not be stifled at that point. The matter goes much further than that. The allegations that implicate people in some way in this matter go well beyond the immediate offenders committing criminal offences. They reputedly reach to the highest levels of government and of the Public Service. No one in Australia will be reassured, least of all by the glossy words of the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) who appears to be deeply implicated, if in no other way than by his embarrassment at the extraordinarily clumsy way in which he has handled this matter. No one in Australia will be reassured unless there is an independent assessment of these allegations. Therefore, I put on record the concern of the Opposition that, at page 16 of the. copy of the Minister's speech circulated in this House, he said:
. . . the Government has decided to set up a royal commission into certain aspects-
I stress the words 'certain aspects'-
of the meat industry including allegations of malpractice in relation to the export of meat and to meat preparation in the State of Victoria.
If the words 'certain aspects' are to be a fetter to a proper and extensive inquiry and if the inquiry is to be hobbled and blinkered by limited terms. of reference, then we will fight it here and we will fight it in the community, because the community will be dissatisfied with such an undertaking. The community will see it for what it is-that is, nothing more than an extension of the cover up that has been going on, not for the past couple of weeks, not for the past 12 months that the Ministeracknowledges that he has had information about this'matter, but for the past several years about which the record is clear. His predecessor, the former Minister for Primary Industry, was aware at least in 1977, of allegations of corrupt practices in the meat industry. Again, why has the Minister specified the Victorian industry when, indeed, on the basis of information made available to the public, the problem extends to a much wider ambit than that.
It is encouraging that, at last, with all the glacial speed of which the Minister is capable, some action will be taken immediately. But, a fortnight ago, the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr

998 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Meat Substitution

Kerin) outlined a series of initiatives that could be taken immediately. They were initiatives which should have been at least taken then, and at the latest, but, indeed, they should have been taken 12 months ago when the Minister first became aware of these allegations. The initiatives should have been taken five years ago when the then Minister for Primary Industry, now the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair), became aware of the nature of these allegations. The fact is that stable doors are for being closed before, not after, the event. The damage has been done. One does not need much imagination or nous to recognise that if action had been taken earlier so much of the damage that has been done to our trading reputation-, so much of the economic damage that has been done to an important industry in this country and so much damage that has been done to the self respect of Australians as a consequence of this scandal could have been avoided. It is true that there was a sudden flurry of activity on the eve of a very angry morning in this nation and day in this Parliament about the Minister's unparalleled incompetence in this matter. But ifit had not been for the resumption of the parliamentary session one is justified, I believe, in harbouring serious doubts as to what exactly would have occurred.
I repeat, on the basis of the evidence before us and on the basis of the unsatisfactory response of the Minister to the vast rangeof allegations which have been made on this matter and about which he promised to give rebuttals in this Parliament, we must conclude that his behaviour has been totally inadequate and unsatisfactory. It is an unparalleled record of ministerial and Public Service concealment, deception and inco!llpetence and the public is the victim. What has happened is that by the incompetence, deception and concealment practised by the Minister, by his predecessor and by the Public Service, criminal behaviour apparently has been allowed to thrive and corporate crooks have been allowed to flourish. That is a hard fact of life. The wages of ministerial and Public Service incompetence and dereliction of duty appear to have been a bonanza for corporate criminals. The enduring result is a crippling of the meat export industry and almost irreparable damage to Australia's reputation as a reliable trading partner.
Australian export industry generally is now branded with the mark of commercial dishonesty. We are now seen as an untrustworthy trading partner. There can be no other interpretation of the devastating effects of what flows from this scandal. It is all the product of passiveness, of an

attempt to conceal and of a generally supine approach on the part of the Minister. This matter did not arise overnight; it has been known of for several years. It has flourished because the Minister, his predecessor and the Public Service provided the accommodation for it to flourish. That is how we see the basis of the evidence. The Minister now acts because of pressure and tries to project that he is presenting us with virtue. One can only sum it up in one way and that is on the basis of the record. We have witnessed a monumental display of dereliction of duty on the Minister's part.
The Minister for Primary Industry acknowledged that he has known of some of the facts relating to the substitution of horse meat for more than a year. He acknowledged this on his own admission. We know the previous Minister for Primary Industry well because of certain notoriety in this House. Then there is the shoddy performance of the Department of Primary Industry and his unconvincing evidence to the Senate committee of inquiry into Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd. We look forward to the report on that matter with great curiosity but I let that matter rest there. The Minister knew in 1977 about this matter which is before us. What has he done in that period? He has done nothing. There have been five years of inaction while complaints and evidence of corruption and of criminal behaviour in the meat industry have been pipelined to the Government.
In 1978 Senator Primmer outlined a vast and devastating range of abuses going on in the industry. What did the Government do? What did the now Minister for Communications, who was then the Minister for Primary Industry, do? Nothing! He has maintained his reputation since. None of them has done anything. Let us look at one of the more searing personal observations made by Senator Primmer. He accused Mr Sinclair of corruptly allocating export credits to favoured friends. Senator Primmer said:
Export licences for the profitable United States market are granted on the basis of credits earned from exporting to other markets. I believe that a considerable amount of favouritism is being exercised by the Minister for Primary Industry in the granting of United States export licences and export orders to companies which have not earned sufficient credit.
Senator Primmer continued:
Is it the case that Mr Whitaker--
He is a beneficiary-
Is a personal friend ofMr Sinclair?
Perish the thought. Who could harbour such a thought of the Minister. Senator Primmer continued:
Further, was Mr Sinclair in any way responsible for the granting to Norwest an extra quota worth $1.5m, for export to

Meat Substitution

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 999

the United States of i\merica? Is it a fact that Norwest had not earned the credits necessary to obtain the extra quota.
Those are questions that deserve to be answered. I think it is legitimate to query why it is that such profitable favours in rural-based industries should be handed out. What association might there be between the allocation of privilege and preference as a matter of abuse of public office and the funding of the National Country Party? That is why these people opposite will never allow legislation to be introduced into this Parliament publicly declaring the sources and amounts of funding. of political parties.
We have to get clearly on record the dimension of the scandal. It is not just a matter of substituting a bit of horse meat or a little bit of kangaroo meat or a tiddly little bit of donkey meat as the Minister for Primary Industry might have us believe, it goes much further than that. Let me outline the nature of these complaints. They range over several years; they did not erupt just in the last few weeks. Most of them, if not all, and perhaps more we have not heard of, have been conveyed to the Government and to the Public Service, who have a lot to answer for in this matter. They comprise the subsitution of inferior meat, the substitution of rotten meat for human consumption, meat from dead carcasses being substituted for meat for human consumption, infected meat, meat that is below standard, the falsification of documentation, the export of meat well below the quality declared and not meeting the specification declared, and old meat being condemned recently in Singapore. There is a long list and a list of long standing.
The problem is that it suited the Government, ,and it suited this Minister for Primary Industry and his predecessor, to perceive all of this with a blurred vision. They have been willingly abetted by the Public Service. The consequence is that cheats have prospered. Under the Fraser Government, in this area, as in so many other important areas of our society, standards have slipped; they have degenerated. The ethical qualities which are essential to the proper conduct of a responsible society and a mutually self-respecting community have been sundered and fragmented.
What is the Minister's justification for this conspiracy of concealment? It was that it would damage the industry if the truth were known. Damage the industry if it were known? The real reason is well known to all of us. The Minister did not want any debate on this matter, he did not want this matter divulged publicly because he wanted to maintain the cover-up. He did not want to be

exposed for his blundering, his dereliction of public responsibility, and his inexcusable incompetence and complicity in concealing this ongoing scandal. The whole world now believes that with the Fraser Government policies of open slather the Australian meat export industry is an industry of easy virtue. That will affect the standard, the reputation and the recognition of Australian exports generally. That is what this Minister has achieved. It is a matter of great hilarity to the Minister, I notice from his countenance, but it is. not a matter of great amusement to the people who are being devastated in consequence of this outrage.
We can only clean this up with a decent dose of sunlight. That is the only remedy. This royal commission of inquiry is being undertaken only because of the persistence of Opposition spokesmen-the honourable member for Werriwa amongst others-the determination of our Senate colleagues in the Labor Party, and the concern expressed by the Australian Democrats and the Independent Senator Harradine. The Minister and the Public Service knew that they could not get away with it anymore. The fix was properly blown apart. It .vould have been different, I repeat, had there been decisive action early, but all we had was the Minister for Primary Industry running around in circles, babbling abuse at anyone who expressed reasonable concern. He did nothing. Look at the catalogue of indecision and confusion by the Minister for Primary Industry. Honourable members will recall that initially he said: 'There's only one company and one freezer involved. It is not much'. He then quoted a few decimal points to show how much of the export market was involved. Now, overnight almost, he closes down all 27 of the independent Victorian boning rooms, and announces today that another six have been closed down. He is on record as saying this at the time of closing down all 27 independent Victorian boning rooms:
A lot of them are good operators.
So he is going to disable the industry on a wholesale scale. He is a man of excessive action: Either he is doing nothing or he is doing too much of the wrong sort of thing. He persisted in the argument in this House that the police were adequate to investigate this matter. The police have now been dumped in panic as the cold light of reality has reached the Minister. The Minister is grabbing for straws. Look at what has happened since Friday of last week-and today is only Tuesday. On Friday of last week it was announced that there would be an interdepartmental committee of inquiry. What a farce! What a vast marshland in which to lose anything someone does not want to

1000 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Meat Substitution

have hanging around. Consider the people on the interdepartmental committee of inquiry. One of the participants would be the Department of Primary Industry-one of the party principals to this scandal. Then, embarrassed at that, recognising that it was not going to wash, that the Australian community was not going to be taken to the cleaners every week by the Fraser Goverpment, the Minister moved to a judicial inquiry, which he had opposed strenuously in this House a week earlier as being totally impractical. I ask honourable members: Who is impractical, who is unbelievable in all this? It is not the propositions for effective action that Labor has repeatedly enunciated but the Minister on his record. Of course now the Government has scuttled the lot and has gone for a royal commission of inquiry. At last it has done what we told it it should do. Butthat inquiry has to have wide ranging terms of reference. It has to have all that fierce independence and the ability through those terms of reference to penetrate, and to penetrate effectively, on this matter.
The Minister, of course, tries to massage us. He says: There is not a great deal to worry about. The Americans are quite understanding about it all.' He says:
The United States is patient and understanding.
I can only hope that the bank managers of honest meat processors in this country give more evidence of their patience and understanding, and I will tell honourable members why. Almost immediately the scandal broke, the price of meat in America plummeted. United States sales collapsed. Already unemployment in the meat processing industry is starting to climb. Smorgan Consolidated Industries in Victoria and Swifts in Queensland are laying off staff because apparently orders are being cancelled. Let us look at what Glenda Korporaal had to say from Washington as published in the Australian Financial Review of 17 August. She said:
The Australian meat trade in the USA has come to a standstill following last week's confirmation that horsemeat has been found in cartons of meat exported from Australia.
The Minister says that the Americans are patient and understanding. I'll say they are! They do not even worry any more; no one wants to buy the meat because of the bungle that the Minister's incompetence is responsible for. He ought to be dismissed from office. After all his assurances for so long in the past couple of weeks while this scandal came to the boil that there was not much in it, last night he said:
It has been a scandal, there is no doubt about that. It is perhaps far wider that we had first thought.
He knows better. He knows that at all times it was far wider than he was confessing. He knows that

to be a fact, not just for the past month or so but for the past 12 months, in which period he is on record as declaring that he had been aware of horse meat substitution. I will quote him in a minute so that we have the record clear. In that curious way he has of tangling his tongue around metaphors, as he has of tangling his feet around facts, he committed himself to getting all of the iceberg on the table. Anything would be better than having him as we have been witnessing him-rushing about mindlessly shuffling deck chairs on a sinking Titanic. The beef industry deserves better than that.
The greatest humiliation is that the United States uncovered the scandal and revealed publicly what the Government had known for five years. The United States made the disclosure, not the Australian Government. It is true that the scandal is of very large proportions. It is a scandal because it covers corrupt practices and it covers long-standing corrupt practices. But there is a greater scandal and that is the cover-up on the part of the Government and the Public Service and the Minister's involvement. We are talking about a $1,600m industry reeling under the crippling blows of Nixon and Sinclair and the whole Fraser Government. The Minister for Primary Industry has to accept the major portion of the blame. But so too must the Minister for Communications, formerly the Minister for Primary Industry, a man who stains with stained hands whatever he touches. Look at the matter of Asia Dairy Industries and television licences as a favour. Now there is the meat export industry. There are other matters which are too delicate to raise again in this Parliament.
Markets are at risk. The markets of Asia, Europe and the Middle East are at risk as much as the United States market. The beef export industry alone is worth about $1,OOOm a year. I repeat: Why did this have to happen? How could it have happened when the evidence shows that the Government was aware of this matter-this Minister 12 months ago and the previous Minister for Primary Industry five years ago? It happened because of incompetence and a conspiracy by government and the Public Service to conceal the facts. The result has been that they have left Australia with the reputation of a commercial . strumpet. We all feel diminished by that because of its unfairness. The problem of the Minister for Primary Industry is that he runs around in everdiminishing circles squawking, but his mind has seized up. He is unable to think constructively in response to the problems. He should have done 12 months ago the immediate things he is proposing to do now. The Minister for Communications,

Meat Substitution

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1001

when Minister for Primary Industry, should have done those things five years ago. The Minister for Primary Industry said that the penalties are derisory. He knew that 12 months ago when he was first made aware of this problem. We discovered today that not only does he say that the penalties are derisory and that there will be appropriate legislative action to make them more punitive, but also in passing he acknowledged that they will not have retrospective effect. The people who are responsible for this criminal behaviour, the people who have done so much damage to the Australian mea~ export industry, get a soft cop. They get it on the cheap. For the future it will be tough.
I think those people outside who find this rather curious and puzzling and who are wondering why the Government and the Minister are being so soft on criminals who have done so much damage to Australia's reputation and an important meat industry and who are starting to harbour suspicions may well have well-founded grounds for harbouring them. That is why there has to be an extensive inquiry into all these ,matters. The Minister for Primary Industry, his predecessor and senior people in the Public Service have to be among those who are brought before the royal commission of inquiry. The Minister said on page 2 of his circulated statement that there were broad allegations but that nothing about horse meat had been raised in those allegations which had reached him. He said:
While there have been a number of broad allegations made over past years, to my knowledge not one of these has related specifically to the substitution of horse or kangaroo meat.
That is not a fair dinkum comment. I will quote the record. I will quote from a summary of the transcript of PM on 2 Sept~mber 1981 provided by. the Parliamentary Library. It states:
Question: Statements have been made today, and they appear to have
also come from inside the meat industry itself, that federal police were told as early as last year of horse meat substitutions going on. When did you first learn about the horse meat switch?
MrNixon: I was told of allegations last year, and I was told that the
matter was referred to the police . . .
Question: So you knew as early as last year that this could have been
going on?
MrNixon: I knew that there was an allegation last year . . .
The Minister knew that there was an allegation about horse meat and today he came into the Parliament and tried to deny that such evidence had ever been presented to the Government and, least of all, that he had ever been made aware of such an allegation. Only a few days ago he declared on record the very opposite. These circumstances

seem to be an extension of the exercise to conceal once again. I turn back to the point the Minister made today about broad allegations. I would have thought that this was refuted by the statements of Senator Primmer in the Senate in' March 1978. They seem specific enough to me and they were made four years ago. Nothing has been done in that period. Senator Primmer outlined a long black list of abuses. I invite honourable members to listen to some-admittedly most-but not all of them. They are: Widespread malpractices in the industry; the Minister refusing to take action; massive backyard processing; subterfuges adopted to avoid inspection; the Minister less ;than studious in seeking to eradicate illegal practices; unregistered meat works processing uninspected meat for export; inferior meat substitution; packaging changed; meat illegally stamped; counterfeit Commonwealth meat stamps; repackaging of uninspected meat; complaints from Europe; the Minister, now the Minister for Communications, knowing of all this before the 1977 election and seeking to do a deal with a television channel to suppress the facts; salmonella contamination; persecution of a meat inspector in the wealthy western districts of Victoria, where some of the more eminent Liberals in the Parliament come from, because he sought to sheet home responsibility for some of these matters; the involvement of State Liberal members of the Legislative Assembly and the questioning of the Minister's integrity in issuing, quite wrongly, export credits, something with which I have dealt. That is not a bad score card of specifics. It contains over 18 specific abuses, none of which was responded to effectively by the Government.
The matter does not stop there. Mr Hawkins, the President of the Institute of Victorian Health Surveyors, is on public record from several sources as saying that his profession had known for about two years of the substitution of horse meat for meat for human consumption, that the authorities were made aware and that nothing was done. This is a conspiracy of enormous complexity and extent. I repeat what I said earlier, that the Public Service does not come out of this scandal unscathed. The suppression of facts, the paralysis of the system it is responsible for and its .apparent complicity with Ministers to conceal facts are all part of this great conspiracy that has to be brought out into the broad daylight by a penetrating and fearless royal commission of inquiry; The self-imposed paralysis of the Government and the Minister defies logic, unless, of course, the commercial integrity and reputation of Australia stands for nought in their view. It is all very mystifying and disturbing. Why did not the Minister act

1002 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Meat Substitution

earlier and fiercely through the courts? If the laws were deficient why did he not change them as he is proposing to do now? If there were slack procedures why did he not toughen them up 12 months ago as he should have done? He has been dithering while there has been open slather for corporate crooks. The question keeps coming back: Why has this been tolerated? What is the true ramification of this scandal? What is its extent? Where does it begin and stop? Alan Reid of the Bulletin, a man who chooses his words carefully and writes them deliberately and with caution, said:
. . . the police were discouraged from pursuing their investigations by senior civil servants and politicians in Canberra . . .
There are not many senior civil servants in the Department of Primary Industry or senior politicians in ,this Parliament who would be in a position to do that sort of thing. Mr Reid added:
For more than 10 months the exporters heard nothing further from the Federal authorities.
He referred to the information passed on to the Government by them.He continued:
When the current scandal broke Australian police told exporters that they had not had sufficient personnel to conduct investigations.
There cannot be any determination or sincerity if the Government ensures that the investigating authority is deprived of the necessary resources to discharge its responsibilities properly. It is like deciding to take the wheels off a motor car to go for a long jurney. One would not get very far. That is effectively what the Government did by this action. Mr Reid said quite bluntly that there is bureaucratic inefficiency verging on the criminal. He referred to the determination of Commonwealth higher-ups to turn a blind eye to improper practices and added for good measure the possible corruption on the part of individuals in official positions. He has effectively destroyed any trust or confidence in either senior Ministers or senior bureaucrats in the Public Service. The Government must answer for these matters. Why was there no action? Why was there a clumsy cover-up? Why did the Minister and the Public Service engage in this complicity? Why was there accommodation for criminal behaviour? Why were crooks allowed to wax fat at the expense of the rest of the industry? The Minister promised that today was the day on which he would declare all, the day on ~hich he would demolish all the allegations. On 3 September on Nationwide in response to a question about the details of this matter he said:
Well that will all be revealed, but-in the parliament .

He has addressed himself to not one of these serious allegations, just about all of which, at least by implication, must point in his direction or somewhere near him. I sincerely trust that when the evidence is extracted this is established as not being so. But the Minister had the opportunity today in this appropriate place to refute very properly those allegations and their implications for him, the Public Service, his predecessor and the Government. He chose nono do so. He leaves a disturbing question mark hanging over the head of the Government. The Australian Federal Police, regrettably, come out of this unforunate episode with a flawed reputation. I remind honourable members of Mr Reid's claims, but let us go on to the words of Commissioner Woods. What did he say? What did he mean? On Nationwide on 2 September in response to a quesc tion he said:
What I have found is a situation of which, I believe, a great deal more energy and effort if expended might have produced a better result.
That, to me, is a very worrying comment-if the police had tried harder, the outcome could have been different. The outcome was that the investigation failed to establish sufficient evidence to proceed with prosecutions. There can be only one different outcome-for sufficient evidence to be established to proceed with prosecutions. That is what he is saying. Why did the police not try harder? We must bear in mind the pressures put on them, declared by Mr Reid. Commissioner Woods went on:
If there's fault then as it was our job to investigate, and I might say this about police investigations, if they're not thorough enough, if they're not persistent enough, if enough resources aren't put into it, there is no way in which a police force can say that someone else is at fault: If it's the police force at all, it does what's necessary. Now I've also said 'I think they could have been done better'.
Well that hasn't been established. I'm not satisfied that the work was done as vigorously as it must, and that's all I can judge.
Then he added:
I haven't had any explanation that satisfied me.
Then we discover that on the AM program next day he said:
So I have to say that . . . more zeal would probably have resulted with.more evidence . . . if more resources had been put on of the sort we're now devoting to it, I'm sure that it'd been a different result, and I have to say that.
He is saying that the police were deprived of resources, that the Commissioner could not allocate more resources. Who overrode the Commissioner? Is that the implication of what is being

Meat Substitution

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1003

said? He is saying that there is a lack of determination to sheet home responsibility with the investigationsand that, if there had been that determination, if there had been those resources, a different outcome would have arisen. It seems to me that he is saying one of two things. Either he is saying that under his guiding inspiration as Commissioner, and that of the Commissioner before him, the Federal Police were indolent and incompetent-it is unlikely he would be making that confession-or he is confirming, with typical English understatement, all the allegations which have been made. It is clear on the evidence, the declaration'of Mr Reid and the reluctance of the Government to face up to this issue today, that the Federal Police have been nobbled-by heavyweight intervention at the highest level. I repeat: There has to be a royal commission in the broadest terms exploring all the ramifications of this industry, the implications of allegations and the behaviour of those associated in this matter in key ways, including senior public servants and Ministers. If that is allowed to be done, we will support the proposal when the terms of reference come before the Parliament. Accordingly, I move:
That so l)1uch of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Leader of the Opposition from moving:
That this House, whilst endorsing the need for a royal commission of inquiry with the broadest terms of reference into the meat processing, distribution and export industries, censures the Minister for Primary Industry for the extraordinarily incompetent way he has handled this matter, including his confession that he was aware of aspects of this scandal 12 months ago but concealed the facts from the public, and declares that he should be discharged from his office as a Minister of the Crown.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-ls there a seconder of the motion?
Mr Kerin-I second the motion and wish to speak now. This issue is Nixon's slaughtergate and, like his namesake in the United States--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Werriwa will resume his seat briefly.
Mr Sinclair-Mr Deputy Speaker, the Government is prepared to take this motion. Therefore, I suggest that the motion for the suspension of Standing Orders be put so that the substantive motion can be considered by the Parliament.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The House has heard the suggestion of the Leader of the House. I recommend to the House that the proposal be adopted.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Mr Nixon-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I make a personal explanation on what has been said?

Mr Hayden-'-I do not think it is appropriate, with respect, Mr Deputy Speaker. You have called the honourable member for Werriwa and it can be handled at the end of the statement by the honourable member for Werriwa.
Mr Sinclair-The honourable member for Werriwa did'not have the call.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition is now obliged to move his motion.
MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY
Motion of Censure
Motion (by Mr Hayden) proposed:
That this House, whilst endorsing the need for a royal commission of inquiry with the broadest terms of reference into the meat processing, distribution and export industries, censures the Minister for Primary Industry for the extraordinarily incompetent way he has handled this matter, including his confession that he was aware of aspects of this scandal 12 months ago but concealed the facts from the public, and declares that he should be discharged from his office as a Minister of the Crown,
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (4.20)-1 second the motion to censure the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). This is Nixon's slaughtergate and, like his namesake in the United States, this tag will pursue him while he remains'a Minister in this House. The speech we have just heard from him has been demolished by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). The statement the Minister read to the House is totally inadequate. It is a tissue of excuses and a catalogue of rationalisations. The actions over the past three or four weeks, as outlined in the statement, can be contrasted most readily with the Government's action with respect to what became known as the Greek social security conspiracy case in which there were 183 arrests and dawn raids. Civil rights have not been trampled on in this case as they were in that case, but there has been abundant' evidence of gross ministerial irresponsibility in this matter. The speech was written by the Department to clear the Minister. It is not the usual bluster we get. It tells of actions of the Minister that he was not prepared to tell the public and it covers up and puts some of the facts in a new form. I will get to that in a moment.
What we are complaining about in this case is not just what has happened over the past three or four weeks since 27 July, 11 August or whatever the date is-it seems to me it took a heck of a long time for the news to get through-but what has happened over the past five or six -years. Let us look at the statement itself and demolish some of the more glaring parts of it. The Minister started by saying that to his knowledge there has not been one other case in the past related specifically to

1004 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Minister for Primary Industry

".,

the substitution of horse or kangaroo meat. First has shown that he is totally inadequate as a Minis-

of all, we must say that three of Australia's leadter. He might be very good at bluff. The Leader of

ing meat exporters reported substitution to the the Opposition, the Premier of New South Wales

Federal Police. The source of that information and the New South Wales Minister for Agricul-

was the Bulletin of 8 September-last week. On ture have all asked the Minister to resign. Mr

page 5 of the Minister's Stateme~f he said that 'an Punch, the Leader of the Country Party in New

urgent review of relevant laws and the penalties South Wales, pooh-poohed the idea of establish-

which can apply was instigated'. Why was it not ing an interdepartmental committee. I was in the

instigated earlier? We only have to remember the northern tablelands and the north-west slopes last

case in which a $100 fine was imposed after 18 week and all the "beef producers there, all the

months of investigation. That was a case in WesCountry Part people, were beside themselves with

tern Australia last year. At that time surely there fear of what w\ls going to happen to this industry.

was a clear need for stiffer penalties. After all, the Goodness gracious me, even the Premier of

Minister has not told us what happened to past Queensland got stuck into his Federal colleagues

police inquiries.

and was going to fly to America. I do not know

whether he was going to fly in his helicopter, but

We can go to other parts of the statement. The he was concerned enough to try to get to America

Minister said that 'all these measures have been before Bills were debated in the Congress. So at

set in train since 11 August when we were first the State level Country Party leaders have been notified of possible horse meat substitution'. But giving the Minister for Primary Industry, a ter-

to take action of this type now will be a lot more ribly hard time.

costly to the industry than a reform of the system would have been. It is quite clear that the Government has known about some of these allegations and practices for some four, five or six years. The Minister also said in his statement that he had never ruled out the possibility of a broader inquiry. Yet as the Leader of the Opposition said, last Friday after the Australian Agricultural Council meeting the Minister was crowing quite loudly that a Federal Police inquiry was quite appropriate. He was saying then that there was no need for a judicial inquiry or a royal commission. The next morning he said that he had changed his mind. He said that there might be a judicial inquiry. He said the reason for that was that the United States released the meat and, therefore, he could go on to that. The reason the United States released the meat was simply that its tests had been finished. The Minister did not make up his mind as a result of that at all. The Minister made up his mind because of the pressure that was coming on to him. The reason for his change of attitude Was not the American decision to release the meat; it was simply because of all the pressures put on him. He suddenly decided that he was going to take this issue seriously. The reason for the change of attitude was the pressure from bodies such as the Cattlemen's Union, the Cattle Council of Australia-rather moderately-and

The sort of bluff with which this Minister carries on is responsible for the problems we have with the air traffic controllers. In every issue he goes in head first and tries to say that nothing is wrong. He simply takes departmental a<lvice, but he had not taken clear action. He thinks he can treat the country people and the beef producers with arrogance, just as some of the top Ministers in the Government seem to think they can treat the Parliament and the idea of ministerial responsibility with arrogance. They do that in the sure knowledge that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) will never touch the three top Country Party Ministers-Anthony, Sinclair and Nixon-no matter how reprehensibly they act. Quite simply, the gang of four, the graziers' Cabinet, runs this country. With the exception of the Treasurer (Mr Howard), t,he Prime Minister regards the rest as also rans. There is no sense in them protesting long and loud about people blowing up this issue, although some of the stuff in the Press was exaggerated. I can assure the House that if we had been in government and had not acted, or had taken only the silly Mickey Mouse actions that have been taken over the last three or four weeks, by now the hide of every Australian Labor Party member would be strung up around Kings Hall.

the Meat Council, and from back bench members , The very basis of our meat problems, whether

and political leaders, all of whom have been they be in inspection or slaughtering or processing

appalled by the way the Minister has acted in this 'or export, is that there are so many firms and

case.

authorities and so many overlapping regulations.

There is the whole problem of dual meat inspec-

Instead of the usual bluster and buffoonery tion, and the regulations are inadequate. Anyone

from the Minister we got clear evidence of who has been in the industry for a long time

bungles-and big bungles at that. The Minister knows that that is a fact, and many of those

Minister for Primary Industry

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1005

people have reported it to the responsible authorities over a long period. The scuttlebutt in the industry is quite horrifying. Many of the stories which have come to me over the past few weeks-I have not been able to prove their accuracy-have come from people who are in responsible positions in the industry. These people are in the know, and they say that they have told the responsible authorities of all the breaches of regulations that are going on. I will discuss some of those allegations in a moment. There is no sense in saying that we are coming to this conclusion only with hindsight. The Minister has taken a piecemeal approach. The National Country Party has already ignored the abattoir crisis. It will not act on this whole problem of dual meat inspection. It will not do anything constructive about the live sheep export issue.
r will deal now with the specifics of the com-
plete lack of ministerial responsibility. The Leader of the Opposition has already itemised the fact that the former Minister for Primary Industry did nothing about the very specific allegations made by Senator Primmer. As a matter or fact, the letter he eventually tabled in the House Was sent to him before the 1977 election. We all know what happened at that time with regard to the beef industry. There was a panic move on the beef incentive payment scheme. There have been six years of persistent allegations, and I will go through some of these. In 1975 a complaint was made to the Victorian Department of Agriculture that meat for local consumption was being falsely labelled as export quality and shipped to the United States. The information was passed to the Commonwealth Department of Primary Industry. The Commonwealth Police investigated,its findings were submitted to the Department ofPrimary Industry, and the evidence was deemed insufficient. In 1977, just prior to the election, Senator Primmer said that the then Minister for Primary Industry, the honourable member for New England (Mr Sinclair), was told of allegations. No action was taken.
In December 1977 the Victorian Attorney General was told of allegations that meat slaughtered for local consumption was being illegally transferred to cold store and shipped' overseas. The allegations were passed on to the Commonwealth Police, but no action was taken. In January 1978 a Richmond councillor named Alexander wrote to the Prime Minister and expressed concern at the allegations. He was advised only that the Commonwealth Police were investigating the matter. In March 1978 Senator Primmer made a statement to the Senate which detailed allegations. Nothing happened. I can go

on. In June 1979 the Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union newsletter detailed allegations of corrupt abattoi.r operators and meat inspectors passing sub-standard meat for export. Aga'in, nothing happened other than that the AMIEU was advised to keep its mouth shut or the jobs of its members would be affected. In November 1979 Mr Williams, the Liberal member of the Legislative Assembly for Doncaster, provided the Commonwealth Police with information alleging that meat prepared for local consumption had been illegally transferred for export. The police investigated the matter, but again no charges were laid.
I do not have time to go through all the allegations and the very specific matters that are on the public record. I am told, in terms of scuttlebutt, that every time these things have been reported they have been referred to the Commonwealth Police or the Australian Federal Police and the Department of Primary Industry and eventually someone has said: 'Ease up, ease up, there are Country Party people involved in this'. I am not saying that I can prove any of that, but that is the story from people who are in the know in this industry. Referring to the next aspect of lack of ministerial responsibility, no action has been taken on the request to close tpe loopholes. Three times the Cattle Council of Australia has approachedthe Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation, and there is rio sense in saying that that is not part of the Minister's responsibility because the Minister has representatives on the Corporation. No action has been taken on any occasion when the meat workers or the meat inspectors have reported to the responsible authorities that loopholes need to be cleaned up. Turning to the domestic ramifications of this trade, everyone knows that once meat crosses State borders nothing can be done about it. We hear of trucks loaded up with kangaroo meat leaving St George in Queensland in the middle of the night, going no one knows where, and so it goes.
l-instance another example of lack of ministerial responsibility. No action has been taken by the'Minister on recommendations in official reports. We hear that some,Mr Big was caught this morning in a caravan fiddling around with rubber stamps. The report of the Committee of Inquiry to examine Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection Systems was presented to the Minister for Primary Industry in January 1980 by Mr Kelly, the former member for Wakefield. On page 41 the report states:
It was observed that at several works visited works management held the interstate branding stamps, The stamp was applied by an employee and the works merely paid the'fee, In other words, no fe-inspection occurred. We were also told that, in many if not all cases, the "Australia Approved" stamp

1006 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Minister for Primary Industry

was provided by works management, and if a new stamp was required, the inspectors obtained if from management. This practice should cease.
This was a report to the Government, but it has taken no action on the recommendation. Of course, the biggest recommendation in this report is with respect to the need for a single, uniform meat inspection system so that standards can be enforced right across Australia. What is likely to happen now-already Mr Bjelke-Petersen. has said it-is that the States will go it alone to give guarantees to our exported meat. That would have all the problems that were pointed out in the Kelly report with respect to deficiencies in meat inspection. There would be a series of leapfrogging actions, and there would be no uniform standards. No action has been taken by the Minister, or at least not publicly, at the various stages of this inquiry. There has been a great catalogue of claims and reports, and at most stages the Minister has either taken no action or has simply responded to them and taken a series of piecemeal actions.
Turning to some of the more important allegations, the first reference to meat substitution was on 9 July. The State authorities in Victoria planned to close loopholes allowing substitution of kangaroo meat in fast foods on the domestic market. Surely if someone had been alert he might have taken some action then or advised the Minister, but no action was taken. Now we are told that the first notification we had about the problem in the United States was on 13 August. We know that the United States knew on 27 July, so apparently it takes some 17 days to get the news through. The Federal Police were called in to investigate claims in the United States that horsemeat had been found. At first this was played down. It was all pooh-poohed. I guess that most of us simply could not believe that anyone would be so criminally negligent or active as to do this. Very little action was taken at that time except the imposition of the export ban on. the Profreeze company. A claim was made by Mr Brown, the Secretary of the Livestock and Grain Producers Association of New South Wales, that beef exports were being deliberately discredited by the United States. Now, that is a responsible body but no action was taken and no comment was made. I guess that we could not take action here. The deregistration of Profreeze was announced on 14 August. Then there was a whole series of claims by the Press and various people in authority, and in most instances no action was taken.
Three or four members of the Australian Federal Police were allocated to the matter. Then the number was increased to 11. Then the matter was

referred to the Trade Practices Commission. Then 19 police were allocated to the case. Then it was announced that there was to be an interdepartmental committee-in other words, the matter was to be buried. At all times, calls for a judicial inquiry or a royal commission were pooh-poohed and said to be inadequate and inappropriate. It is only now that the Minister has finally decided that there is a need for a royal commission. But what is it to inquire into? The terms of reference are to relate to certain aspects and only to the State of Victoria. There needs to be an overall comprehensive inquiry into this whole business.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) claimed that I was aware of the allegations. He mentioned a PM program in which I referred to broad allegations. Let me simply repeat what I said in my speech: To my knowledge not one of these allegations related specifically to the substitution of horse or kangaroo meat. In speaking on PM I was referring to an article in the Melbourne Age newspaper of 6 February 1980 in which an allegation was made that some knackery-killed meat may have found its way onto the export market. The article did not specifically mention horse meat and, as honourable members will know, knackeries in Victoria deal in large part with cattle.
Mr Hayden-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I quoted exactly from the record. It stands, and it devastates the point that the Minister sought to take. The conclusion I reached was a conclusion that any reasonable person would take--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr Hayden-It is the conclusion that in fact the Australian Broadcasting Commission has arrived at in referring to the matter.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications) (4.38)-There is no more important and significant business as far as this Government is concerned than maintaining the reputation of its exports. The motion before the House demonstrates what little concern the Labor Opposition has for that matterin substance. The statement that my colleague the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) made in

Minister for Primary Industry

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1007

the House this afternoon demonstrates the totally comprehensive way in which he has exercised his responsibilities. He has pursued investigations in the manner which is his lot and he has undertaken, in consultation with the United States Administration, with industry representatives and with State Ministers through the Australian Agricultural Council, every proper measure to ensure that the reputation of this well-regarded and, economically, critically important industry is sustained. I think it is absolutely essential that honourable members of this House realise what arrant nonsense the motion moved by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and seconded by the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) this afternoon represents.
Let us look at the circumstances of the charges and then come back to the present state of play. Firstly, the allegation is that in some way the Minister for Primary Industry and I as his predecessor have not pursued the successive number of representations about the proper means of inquiry to ensure that the reputation of our exports is as it should be. Let us look at the case study outlined in the Minister's statement this afternoon. He pointed out that the identification of horse meat in Australian boneless beef occurred on 13 August 1981 and that on the same day the export establishment involved was suspended from future exports. The whole of the circumstances of the suspension and the inquiry into the basis of the substitution-how and where it was done-were referred, through the Department of Primary Industry, to the Australian Federal Police. The Minister outlined in his statement the procedures that were followed in each of the circumstances referred to. Identical procedures have been followed on each one of those occasions where there has been sufficient evidence to' sustain them. I wish to come back to a few of those earlier instances in a minute.
Let us go through the conditions that relate specifically to the motion before the House. Firstly, there has been adequate inquiry. The second and most important thing is that this matter relates to export meat. As a result the circumstances of investigation and inquiry have properly been laid down not just by the Australian Department of Primary Industry or the Australian Bureau of Animal Health but by the United States Department of Agriculture. All the certification procedures that have been followed have been prescribed in consultation with the United States Department of Agriculture. Those procedures have been complied with exactly by the Department for which the Minister for Primary Industry

is responsible. The Minister has tried in each instance to make sure that those conditions have been complied with and when, as in this instance, it has been found that there has been substitution, he has consulted with the USDA to vary the procedures. He has outlined the way in which they are to be varied.
It has been alleged that all this has been known for a long time. I shall refer to that matter before turning to the rest of the proceedings outlined in the Minister's statement. Allegations were made in the Senate a little while ago by Senator Primmer. It is interesting that on the day following those allegations I gave an answer in this House. I tabled a letter that followed an inquiry by the then Commonwealth Police into some of these matters. For the full text of the reply, I refer honourable members to the House of Representatives Hansard for 8 March 1978. The important thing about that answer is that not only did I analyse the,statement made by Senator Primmer, but also that I concluded my answer by stating:
ILSenator Primmer has any . . . other evidence-to justify his complaints, I suggest that he submit it to either my Department or the Commonwealth Police. That might be a more equitable way of settling wild assertations in a fair and just manner.
So we did not just let the matter rest. As Minister for Primary Industry, I said in this Parliament that if Senator Primmer or, for that matter, any other member of the Opposition had facts, figures or allegations that they wished to have followed up, they should report them to the Commonwealth Police. I note that in an article in the Daily Telegraph of Tuesday, 8 September 1981, Senator Primmer is reported as having commented that he was told about the beef scandals during a casual conversation with an acquaintance in a shopping centre car park in a Victorian provincial city. Whether that was sufficient to get the Commonwealth Police to pursue the matter I do not know. WhahSenator Primmer could have done was to give the name of that casual acquaintance. The honourable gentleman on the other side of the House laughs. The important thing is that if that casual acquaintance had the evidence and was capable of sustaining a case, then Senator Primmer should have given the name of the acquaintance to the Commonwealth Police, the Commonwealth Department of Primary Industry or the Bureau of Animal Health and let the inquiries proceed. On the following day I handed down in this Parliament a report from the Commonwealth Police.
Mr Dawkins-You were derelict. You did ]lothing.

1008 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Minister for Primary Industry

Mr SINCLAIR-The honourable gentleman consumption. I have no evidence of that. No evi-

says that I did nothing. I inform the dear man that dence was provided to the Department of Pri-

the matter was' referred to the Commonwealth mary Industry. Indeed, I understand that some

Police so that it could be appropriately pursued questions regarding that matter were asked of the

by the law authorities who are responsible for enthen Minister of Agriculture in the Victorian Par-

suring that Commonwealth legislation is correctly liament. He, in fact, answered the matter, because

complied with. It was quite open to Senator Primit was within his jurisdiction.

mer and any other member of the Opposition to pursue the matter with the Commonwealth Police or the proper authorities. Not one member of the Opposition thought enough of the matter to do so. Indeed, we even find that the Leader of the Opposition referred to poor Senator Primmer the other day as a former Labor senator. That is how much he knew of the gentleman.

The fifth matter was a suggestion that, in some way, I had exercised favouritism in granting United States of America export licences and export orders to companies which had not earned sufficient creditors. It was alleged that I had a personal friendship with a Mr Whitaker and as a result there had been a granting of an extra quota to the Alice Springs meat works. I have metMr Whi-

Putting that aside, let us have a look at the alletaker on, I suppose, half a dozen occasions; I cergations made by Senator Primmer. I shall very tainly would not rate him as a personal friend. I quickly respond to them. The first assertion was certainly did have discussions with the Australian that a number of meat works had been processing Meat and Livestock Corporation, because it is for export meat which had not been inspected by that body which issues export licences, not the Commonwealth meat inspectors. In fact, it was as Government. I said to the Corporation that I bea direct result of the inquiry into that matter that lieved it would be worthwhile establishing a my answer on 8 March 1978 set down specifically worthwhile export works in Alice Springs and those meat works that had been investigated and that I could see that its circumstances were very the fact that a prosecution had been launched similar to those that pertained to the other northagainst one of them. The second matter which ern works which also were granted special dispenSenator Primmer complained about was that the sation in regard to earning the then export credits. Romanian Government had issued a diplomatic I made no special pleading to thl,! Corporation. complaint, which it had not. Thirdly, he suggestedThe matter was decided by the AMLC acting

that two other Eastern European governments entirely within its responsibility and certainly had complained to the then Australian Meat without any ministerial intervention on my

Board concerning meat which had failed to reach behalf.

the required standards. As I understand it, there were, in fact, a number of commercial disagreements regarding the fat content of some meat that had been shipped to a number of Eastern European destinations. In each instance, although litigation commenced on one occasion, there was a settlement out of court and the matter was resolved commercially and amicably between the parties concerned. The Australian Government was not in any way involved.

Not one of those allegations stands up. More importantly, those matters did not relate to meat substitution. Those matters related to alleged contaminated meat and to diseased meat. In no way
did they relate to the matter that is now under inquiry by my colleague the Minister for Primary Industry, his Department, the Bureau of Animal Health and the Australian Federal Police. If we go through this long and complex statement by the Minister for Primary Industry we see the com-

Senator Primmer alleged that I, the Minister responsible, had made an arrangement with the producers of a television program to give an exclusive interview on this and related matters provided the matter would not be exposed prior to the last Federal election. I certainly ask the honourable gentleman to produce any evidence that he knows of to that effect because I certainly know of none. At no stage have I had any interview on a television program that I can recall relating to these allegations made by Senator Primmer.

plete rebuttal of the allegation that in any way he has been derelict in his responsibility. The Australian Federal Police, the body which was approached by the present Minister for Primary Industry, is responsible for the investigation of any breaches of Commonwealth law, as was the Australian Commonwealth Police, the body I approached. It is not within the embrace of any Minister, or any parliamentarian for that matter, to pursue inquiries other than through the appropriate authorities. If anybody has any suggestions that the police have not carried out their work

The fourth allegation is with respect to the disproperly he should present the evidence and have

appearance of 30,000 trunks of mutton which it disclosed. If, in the view of any officer of that

were processed by the Donga meat works for local force the Commonwealth police or Federal police

Minister for Primary Industry

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1009

have not conducted their work properly, it is up to that officer to pursue the matter and to report to the Minister responsible, who in turn can report to this place. There is no suggestion, desire or wish by anybody on this side of the House in any way to hide from a proper investigation of any matters relating to this alleged meat substitution.
The Minister quite properly has consulted with the industry. He has met with the industry. He has outlined in this paper how and where he met with its representatives. Thirdly, he has met with the Australian Agricultural Council. It is imperative that in all' industry which is critical not only just domestically but also externally those responsible for the domestic sale of meat be similarly involved. Of course, it is important that through the Australian Agricultural Council meeting and through the royal commission in which the Victorian Government has already said it is prepared to participate there be a proper investigation to ensure that there is no breaching of the high quality of the very excellent meat that comes-from pastures around this country. Indeed, again in consultation the Minister has done asexpeditiously as possible all that could be expected from him administratively.
The wild assertions and allegations from the Leader of the Opposition are made only because he has been derelict in his duty over the past five years if he has known all about it. He could very easily have gone to Senator Primmer-if he knew him then-and said to him: 'It is about time we had a look at this. Let's go and give evidence to the Commonwealth Police'. But he did not do so. I invited him in this House to do so, and no evidence was given. It is all very well for the Opposition now to say: 'Oh, the Commonwealth Police did not approach us'. I have shown honourable members the basis of Senator Primmer's evidence. If he had evidence he should have given it to the police. If anybody in the Opposition or, indeed, anybody in the industry has evidence he has a responsibility to give it to the Commonwealth police. There is an invitation for them to do so. There is an invitation to report the matters to the responsible authorities.
It has been suggested also that the penalties are inadequate. The Minister quite properly is now changing the penalties because it seems that in the way that they are now administered they could be better structured and more adequate. There are other penalties. It is suggested that those now being charged cannot in any way be considered to have breached a serious Commonwealth law. Without in any way canvassing the issue; I notice that 21 charges under the Crimes Act have been laid against one person involved. Similarly there

are very severe penalties under the Customs Act which, if there are breaches of the Act, can be laid
against anybody responsible. There are for those now responsible legislative provisions which enable prosecutions to be undertaken. I believe that the steps that the Minister announced are quite correct-that it would not be appropriate to apply retrospectively penal provisions although the seriousness of the offence is very strongly appreciated by the Government.

This matter is one which is regarded very seriously by the Government. We believe the reputation of the Australian beef industry and the reputation of Australia's export industry are sacrosanct. We are determined, and the Minister has demonstrated effectively that he is determined, to eliminate any suggestion of any breaches of proper practices. The Minister has undertaken all the procedures that a Minister should properly undertake. J believe this motion was raised in this House pureJy for political mischief. I move:

That the question be now put.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-The question is: 'That the question be now put'. Those of that opinion say aye.

Government members-Aye.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Those to the contrary-say no.

Opposition membersNo.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I think the ayes have it. The question now is that the motion--

Mr Hayden-Wait a minute. The noes have it.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is a division required?

Mr Hayden-Yes. Just because they are Country Party people you cannot put it straight through.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition is reflecting on the Chair. I suggest that he study the Hansard report of his speech. He will then recognise that the Chair wasextremely tolerant and extended great latitute to him when he made heavy imputations reflecting on the integrity of a member. A division is required. Ring the bells.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes Noes . . .

. 66 . 4S

Majority

. 21

1010 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Minister for Primary Industry

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J.
Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H.
Burr,A.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, EweR Cameron, Ian Carllon, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D.M. Drummond, P. H.
Fire, w.e.
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D: Hyde,J. M.
Jarman, W. W. Jull,D.F. -Killen,D.J.
Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R.
MacKenzie, A. J. Mclean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee,I.M. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keere,F.L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J. R. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack, P.D. Shipton, R. E. ,Sinclair,1. McC. Spender, J. M.
Street,A.A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
'Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross,M,D. . Cunningham', B. T.
Darling, E. E. Dawkins,J. S. Duffy,M.J. EYeringham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hayden, W.G. Holding, A. C. Howe, B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurrord, C. J. Jacobi, R.

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly, R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay,Lco McMahon, Lea Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountrord, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scoll, J.L. Theophanous, A. C.
Urcn,T.
Wallis,L.G. West,S. J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Falconer, p, D.
Edward., H. R. Robinson, Ian

Young,M.J. Cohen,B. Innes, U.

Question so resolved in the affirmative,

Original question put:

That the motion (Mr Hayden's) be agreed to,

The House divided;

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr p, C, Millar)

Ayes

45

Noes

66

Majority

21

AYES
Armitage, J.L. Beazley, K. C. Blewell,N. Bowen, Lionel Bro'wn, JohIt Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. EYeringham, D. N. Free,R.V. Fry,K.L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurrord, C. J. Jacobi,R.

Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J.
Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Lea Mildren, J. B. Millon,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L.
Mountrord, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scoll, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wal\is,L. G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D.
Baumc,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchicr, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Jan Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D.M. Drummond, P. H. Fire,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom, R. J. Hall,Steele Harris, O. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

Hunt, R. l. D.
Hyde,B.M.
Jarman,A. W. lull,D.F.
Killen,D.J.
Lloyd, B.
Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R.
MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M.
McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, I. M.
Newman, K. E.
Nixon,P.J. O'Keere, F.L.
Peacock, A. S. Porter,J.R.
Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,I. McC. Spender, J. M.
Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, J. B. C.

Young, M. J. Cohen,B. Innes, U. E.

PAIRS

Falconer, P. D.
Edwards, H. R. Robinson, Ian

In Divjsjon~

Mr Bungey-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order, I wish to point out that members of the Opposition are moving during the counting of a division, Is that permissible?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! Honourable members are required to remain in their positions without moving whilst the tally is being taken, The Chair did not observe the

Estimates Committees

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1011

movement to which the honourable member for Canning referred. I request honourable members to observe the Standing Orders.
Question so resolved in the negative.

ESTIMATES COMMITTEES,',
Memberships
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received the follo)Ving notificati.on of nominations of members to serve on House of Representatives Estimates Committees A to F:

ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A:

ParliamentGovernment Members: 'Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton, Mr Spender.

Opposition Members: Mr Hurford, Mr Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr
Mountford.

Department of the Prime Minister and CabinetMr Viner (Minister Assisting the Prime Minister) acting for Mr Anthony (Acting Prime Minister)

Government Members: Mr Burr. Mr Connolly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr
Shipton, Mr Spender.

Opposition Members: Mr Holding, Mr Hurford~ Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford.

Department of Foreign AffairsMr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs)

Government Members: Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr
Shipton, Mr Spender.

Opposition Members: Mr Beazley, Mr Bowen, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi.

Department of DefenceMr Killen (Minister for Defence)

Government Members: Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr
Shipton, Mr Spender.

Opposition Members: Mr Campbell, Mr Kerin, Mr Morrison, Mr Scholes.

ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B:

Department of Social Security-

,

Mr Hunt (Minister representing the Minister for Social

Security)

Government Members: Mr Adermann, Mr Harris, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr
Tuckey, Mr White.

Opposition Members: Dr Blewett, Dr Klugman, Mr Les McMahon, Mr
Mildren.

Department of HealthMr MacKellar (Minister for Health)

Government Members: Mr Adermann, Mr Harris, Mr Lloyd, Mr RuddQck, Mr
Tuckey, Mr White.

Opposition Members: Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman.

Department of Veterans' AffairsMr Thomson (Minister representing the Minister for
Veterans' Affairs)

Government Members: Mr Adermann, Mr Harris, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr
Tuckey, Mr White,
Opposition Members: Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Holding, Mr Leo McLeay.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs:"'" Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)
Government M'embers: Mr Adermann, Mr Harris, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr
Tuckey, Mr White,
Opposition Members: Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Young.
Department of Aboriginal AffairsMr Viner (Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs)
Government Members: Mr Adermann, Mr Harris, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr
Tuckey, Mr White,
Opposition Members: Mr Dawkins, Mr Holding, Mr Scott, Mr Wallis.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital TerritoryMr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory)
Government Members: Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman,
Mr Harris, Mr Lusher.
Opposition Members: Dr Cass, Mr Fry, Mrs Kelly, Mr Scholes,
Department of Home Affairs and EnvironmentMr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)
Government Members: Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman,
Mr Harris, Mr Lusher,
Opposition Members: Mr Charles, Mr Howe, Mr Uren, Mr West.
Department of Science and TechnologyMr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology)
Government Members: Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr'Carlton, Mr Coleman,
Mr Harris, Mr Lusher,
Opposition Members: Mr Free, Mr Howe, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mildren.
Department of CommunicationsMr Sinclair (Minister for Communications)
Government Members: Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman,
Mr Harris, Mr Lusher,
Opposition Members: Mr Dawkins, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Wallis,
Department of Administrative ServicesMr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services)
Government Members: Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman,
Mr Harris, Mr Lusher,
Opposition Members: Mr Humphreys, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes, Mr Uren,
Attorney,General's DepartmentMr Viner (Minister representing the Attorney-General)
Government Members: Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman,
Mr Harris, Mr Lusher.

1012 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Estimates Committees

Opposition Members: Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Free, Mr Holding, Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury~ Mr Howard (Treasurer) Government Members: Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling. Opposition Members: Mr Robert Brown, Mr Duffy, Mr Howe, Mr Willis.
Department of FinanceAdvance to the Minister for FinanceMr Howard (Minister representing the Minister for Finance) Government Members: Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling. Opposition Members: Mr R. J. Brown, Mr Hurford, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton.
Department of TransportMr Hunt (Minister for Transport) Government Members: Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling; Opposition Members: Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary IndustryMr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry) Government Members: Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling. Opposition Members: Mr Cunningham, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Wallis.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth AffairsMr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs) Government Members: Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr McLean, Mr Peacock. Opposition Members: Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hawke, Mr Mildren. Department of Industrial RelationsMr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations) Government Members: Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr McLean, Mr Peacock. Opposition Members: Mr Charles, Mr Hawke, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon. Department of EducationMr Fife (Minister for Education) Government Members: Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr McLean, Mr Peacock. Opposition Members:

Mr Beazley, Mr Dawkins, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones.
Department of Housing and Construction-
Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction)
Government Members:
Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr McLean, Mr Peacock.
Opposition Members:
Mr Howe, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mountford, Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department of Industry and Commerce-
Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) acting for Sir Phillip Lynch (Minister for Industry and Commerce)
Government Members:
Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter.
Opposition Members:
Mr John Brown, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-
Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)
Government Members: Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr
O'Keefe, Mr Porter.
Opposition Members: Mr John Brown, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford.
Department of Trade and Resources-
Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources)
Government Members: Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr
O'Keefe, Mr Porter.
Opposition Members:
Mr John Brown, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, MrMountford.
Department of National Development and EnergyMr Anthony (Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy)
Government Members: Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr
O'Keefe, Mr Porter.
Opposition Members: Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, M.r Uren.
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Mr Speaker has also received advice from the Opposition Whip that he has nominated Mr Scott to be a member of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs in place of Mr Dawkins.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition seeks to make a personal explanation.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-During Question Time today I

Public Housing Finance

8 Septem~er 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1013

directed a question to the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) in which I wrongly included a quote which I believed came from, and therefore attributed to, Sir Roderick Carnegie. I apologise for the error. I apologise to Sir Roderick Carnegie. It is always an embarrassment to make a mistake. There is only one greater embarrassment, and that is to make a mistake and find that you are so unimportant that no one notices.
PUBLIC HOUSING FINANCE
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The serious plight of the State Governments in relation to the deterioration of Federal funds for public housing as expressed by the Victorian Housing Minister.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers.required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr UREN (Reid) (5.8)-During Question Time today a question was asked by the honourable member for Bendigo (Mr Bourchier) of the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh). The Minister is a reinarkable person. He will say anything, distort any figure and make any irrational statement in relation to welfare housing, which is one of the most serious social problems in this country. An attack was made on the Victorian Minister for Housing, a Liberal Party member in Victoria. The attack was made against that Minister by the Federal Minister for Housing because the Victorian Minister was seeking $400m a year to add to the $255m presently made available under the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. The 'Minister, in reply to the question, distorted the facts. He said that there had been an increase in housing, but he suggested the increase was across the board. He said that there had been an 18 per cent increase. The true fact is that there has been a decrease of 18 per cent in-real terms this year over last year in Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement funding.
Let us look at the money granted during the last year of the Labor Government. In 1974-75 it made available to what we call public sector housing, and what the conservatives call welfare housing, 3.9 per cent of Government expenditure, This year the figure is down to 1 per cent. In current prices the expenditure was $392m in 1974-75.

This year it is $255m. In constant terms, the 1974 figures today would be the equivalent of $789m. With the $255m that has been made available by this Government, even adding the Victorian Minister's requested $400m extra, the resulting $655m is still $130m to $140m below what we as the Federal Labor Government gave in the last full year we were in government.
It is about time this Minister looked at the real facts. He talked about things such as war service homes and the Homes Savings Grant Scheme. Building industry people call the Homes Savings Grant Scheme the home decorator's grant as it is no good to anybody. It does not assist people in any way in acquiring their own home; it only helps to purchase furnishings once the home has been acquired. In 1974-75 $130m was made available for defence service homes. This year the figure is $160m. In constant terms, the $130m we made available is worth $262m, as compared with the present Government's provision of $160m this year. Let us not talk about the record amount of money which was made available to housing. That is utter bunk and everybody knows it. The Minister is a laughing-stock in the building industry and it is time the Government met this serious situation.
After unemployment, housing is the most serious social problem in this country. Over the past six years we have seen this Government withdraw from its federal responsibilities of providing housing security for the Australian people. We have seen an increasing neglect of immediate hardships experienced by people and emerging social needs for housing throughout our community as a whole. Officially there are no facts and figures as to how many people are homeless because this Government will not carry out detailed inquiries in order to get the information.
The Housing Industry Association estimates that around 280,000 people are homeless throughout Australia, a further 250,000 people at least are living in makeshift or mobile homes, and over 80,000 families are on the waiting lists of housing authorities. These people are being ignored and their needs and rights are being rejected by this Government. While these neglected problems are increasing, this Government is reducing the amount of funds for public housing. I gave the figures earlier. If the neglect continues, it may be almost impossible for a humane' government in the future to cope properly with future public housing needs. It will take a number of years and a long period to be able to face and overcome this social problem. This Government is prepared to sacrifice the housing industry deliberately. When I talk about the housing industry, I am talking not

1014 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Public Housing Finance

only of the public sector but also of the private sector. The housing needs of the people are a factor in making room for expanded investment in resources development. This morning on the Australian Broadcasting Commission program AM we heard the honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr) a back bench member of this House, condemn the Government's action on housing. He said:
Far too much emphasis is being placed on large corporate development and perhaps the Government is talking too much to large corporate management and not enough to ordinary people.
He went on to say:
I believe that housing could well be the key issue at the next election and I believe that if the Government don't change their policies so as to allow the benefits of the so-called resources boom to flow through to the ordinary people, I believe the Government will pay a very bavy electoral cost at the next election.
This is a Liberal back bencher, a Liberal member of this House, talking like that on a national radio program. So if this Government is returned to government it will jeopardise the solving of a continuing serious social problem. The Government

has pursued economic policies which have acted to exclude almost four out of five people from access to home ownership. The recent interest rate rises have caused people paying off their homes to default or sell up. The result is an increasing pressure on the private rental market, in which there is increasing overcrowding and overpricing of sub-standard accommodation. Problems are occurring because of the stagnation of the building industry and especially because of the cutback offunds for public housing.
Now, possibly more than ever before, there is a need to expand the provision of pubiic housing if we are to address the hardships now being faced and if we are to cope with emerging problems: But, the public housing stock now represents less than 5 per cent of total housing stock in Australia. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table showing the number of houses and flats completed by the housing authorities in each State from 1950 to 1981.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY STATISTICAL SERVICE Houses and flats completed by State Housing Authorities

Year ended
30 June

New South Wales

Victoria Queensland

South Australia

Western Australia

Tasmania

Total

1950 1951 1952
1953 1954 1955 1956
1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1980-81

No.

% No.

% No.

% No.

% No.

% No.

% No.

%

3,403 17.2 2,454 15.5 1,013 10.7 1,782 36.3 992 27.5 312 10.8 9,956 17.6

3,520 17.0 2,699 12.5 1,230 11.9 3,059 45.5 1,288 23.6 620 15.8 12,416 18.1

3,842 15.6 2,970 12.1 2,076 17.5 3,118 40.4 1,173 17.3 752 18.7 13,931 17.5

4,441 16.7 3,238 14.7 2,314 21.7 4,126 45.9 1,595 19.8 566 17.0 16,280 20.5

5,177 18.8 3,590 16.1 2,105 23.1 3,555 46.6 2,270 30.0 467 17.7 17,164 22.3

5,254 17.8 3,960 16.1 2,047 24.9 3,268 44.0 2,955 32.4 475 18.8 17,959 22.0

3,655 13.5 4,152 17.4 1,754 23.1 3,238 41.5 2,436 29.2 579 20.9 15,814 20.4

3,030 13.1 2,580 12.2 1,912 25.9 3,140 42.3 1,191 22.1 541 18.9 12,394 18.4

3,695 14.0 2,414 10.7 1,504 19.6 3,032 38.0 1,417 22.3 458 17.6 12,520 17.0

3,177 10.6 2,560 9.9 1,781 20.1 3,142 35.8 1,206 19.9 410 15.1 12,276 14.9

3,502 10.5 2,594 9.9 1,452 14.6 3,174 33.1 1,072 17.1 430 16.1 12,224 13.9

3,153 8.7 2,217 8.4 1,746 16.5 3,314 32.3 1,327 20.7 469 17.6 12,226 13.2

4,722 14.6 2,400 10.4 2,006 19.9 3,250 33.4 1,408 22.2 492 19.3 14,278 17.0

4,342 13.9 2,022 8.4 1,798 18.3 2,891 28.0 1,883 26.0 531 20.4 13,467 15.8

4,364 12.9 2,324 8.6 1,876 17.1 2,858 24.9 1,979 23.1 555 20.7 13,956 14.8

5,482 13.7 2,688 8.5 1,744 12.8 3,317 25.8 1,836 19.8 586 21.4 15,653 14.2

5,390 13.2 2,686 8.8 1,702 11.6 3,247 26.6 2,153 24.2 544 21.9 15,722 14.4

4,337 11.8 3,116 9.7 1,643 10.1 3,228 29.8 1,611 16.1 595 20.2 14,530 13.3

5,223 12.6 2,214 6.5 1,716 10.5 2,375 26.9 1,403 11.5 699 19.3 13,630 11.7

4,277 9.5 2,131 5.8 1,678 9.8 1,898 21.8 1,717 10.5 604 19.7 12,305 9.7

4,605 9.5 2,650 6.8 1,703 9.9 1,712 16.9 2,190 11.2 536 15.9 13,396 9.8

4,633 9.2 2,887 7.7 1,730 9.7 2,213 18.0 3,386 20.0 632 21'.6 15,481 11.3

5,218 10.6 2,737 7.7 1,734 7.9 2,201 16.6 2,499 16.8 561 18.5 14,950 10.8

3,429 6.9 1,982 5.2 1,795 6.8 1,618 12.3 2,139 14.6 642 20.3 11,605 8.0

2,601 5.4 1,505 4.1 1,407 5.2 1,339 10.4 2,000 12.5 583 16.5 9,435 6.5

3,752 8.4 3,016 8.1 2,256 10.1 1,589 12.3 1,150 8.0 751 21.7 12,514 9.3

7,068 19.6 2,849 8.3 1,994 9.1 2,276 16.3 1,137 7.6 829 22.5 16,153 12.2

3,428 9.6 2,531 6.7 1,439 6.0 2,144 13.9 1,105 5.2 792 19.611,439 7.9

2,688 7.9 2,539 7.6 1,713 7.2 2,291 19.6 1,562 9.0 906 23.3 11,693 9.1

2,920 8.4 1,835 6.6 604 2.5 1,857 22.1 745 5.1 810 23.2 8,771 7;5

2,983 3,094

7.1 1,185 4.4 436
954(p) ... 647

1..5.

1,392 1,379

16.8

764 753

4.8

790 668

21..9,

7,550 7,495(p)

6..0.

Public Housing Finance

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1015

I. Includes houses and flats built with (a) Housing Agreement money and (b) other money bUI excludes dwellings built (or
purchase<l) with Home Builders' Account monies. 2. There is a break in the series at 1972-73. Figures up to and including 1972-73 include 'alterations and additions' to dwellings.
1973-74 and subsequent years refer to new dwellings only.
3. The lolal figure excludes the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory.
4. The percentages shown are the proportions of lolal houses and flats built in the respective State. Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of Legislative Research Service from information obtained from the Commonwealth and State Housing Departments Authorities and also published in the Annual Reports of The Housing Assislance AC11978.

Mr UREN-I thank the .House. In the 1950s when industrial development for domestic 'production was being put in place, public housing
completions represented 20 per cent of all houses then constructed. In fact, in 1955 housing authorities built nearly 18,000 homes. That represented
22 per cent of all houses built. Last year, only 7,500 homes were built by housing authorities. That represented 6 per cent of all houses built. So
one can see the enormous problems that have oc-
curred. This Government, even when compared with other conservative governments, has diverted funds from the social priorities which it
really has to meet. It is sacrificing an issue of major concern, public and private sector housing, because of the investment boom. It is diverting
money from the housing sector into this activity. We can imagine the crisis when this pattern of industrial development occurs. That crisis will grow
in the future. The Government has not really studied population growth. In the mid 1970s Professor Borrie estimated that Al,lstralia's popu-
lation at the turn of the century would be about 17.3 million or 17.5 million. It is estimated now

that Australia's population at the turn of the century will total 19.5 million. As nothing is being done now to house people, one can imagine what social problems and urban infrastructure problems will occur between now and the turn of the century.
Earlier I was dealing with the serious problem in funds for public housing. I gave the figures. In fact, in 1974-75 the Labor Government made $392m available for housing. This year the amount being made available totals only $255m. In today's money terms that 1974-75 allocation would total $789rri. The 1981-82 Budget shows even a greater dramatic decline in payments to the States for housing when one takes into account inflation and the repayments of capital advances. These figures are nothing more than a scandal. It is a scandalous action by this Government. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard two tables showing the changes in the net payments to the States by the Commonwealth for what I call public housing.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

REAL NET PAYMENTS TO THE STATES FOR HOUSING

$m 1981-82 prices

Fed. Govt payments

State repayment
of advances

State repayment
of interest

Total State repayments

Net Federal payments

1974-75 1981-82

New South Wales

252.9

13.6

62.1

75.7

177.2

84.4

13.1

57.9

70.9

13.5

1974-75 1981-82

Victoria

200.9

11.8

48.9

60.8

140.1

59.8

11.0

45.6

56.5

3.3

1974-75 1981-82

Queensland

201.2

3.4

14.8

18.2

183.0

33.5

3.5

15.5

19.0

14.5

1974-75 1981-82

South Australia

115.6

4.8

26.9

31.8

83.8

35.7

5.1

25.9

31.0

4.7

1974-75 1981-82

Western Australia

76.9

3.4

14.8

18.2

58.7

27.9

3.4

15.1

18.4

9.5

1016 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Public Housing Finance

$m 1981-82 prices

Fed. Govt payments

State
repayment
of advances

State repayment
of
interest

Total State repayments

Net Federal payments

1974-75 1981-82
1974-75 1981-82

Tasmania

53.5

1.6

13.9

1.9

Six States

789.5

38.6

255.2

37.8

9.8 10.2
177.4 170.1

11.3 12.0
215.9 208.0

42.2 1.9
573.6 47.2

Source: Budget Paper No.7, various issues, table 96, \00- \05. NET FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO THE STATES FOR HOUSING (excJudingAboriginaIHousing)

1980-81-1981-82 ($m in 1981-82 prices)

Grants

Loans

Repayments of capital and interest

Total net payments

1980-81 1981-82

New South Wales

34.8

60.7

75.8

19.7

29.8

45.5

71.0

4.3

1980-81 1981-82

Victoria

24.8

48.2

60.4

12.6

21.2

36.1

56.5

0.8

1980-81 1981-82

Queensland

13.3

18.9

20.3

11.9

12.8

14.2

19.0

8.0

1980-81 1981-82

South Australia

13.0

27.7

33.1

7.6

1J.J

20.8

31.0

0.9

1980-81 1981-82

Western Australia

8.9

17.4

19.7

6.6

7.7

13.0

18.4

2.3

1980-81 1981-82

Tasmania

5.2

12.0

12.9

4.3

4.4

9.0

12.0

1.4

1980-81 1981-82

Six States

100.0

185.0

222.2

62.7

"

87.0

139.0

208.0

17.7

Source: 1981-82 Budget Paper No.7, table 96, \00-\05.

Mr UREN-I thank the House. In 1974-75 the States received a net amount of $573m for housing after allowing amounts for capital repayments and interest repayments. In 1981-82 the States were given a net amount of only $47m. In 1980-81 the six States received $62.7m and this year they will receive only about $17.7m. In 1980-81 Victoria received $12.6m. This financial year it will receive $0.8m after both capital and interest payments have been made. It is no wonder that the Victorian Minister of Housing has called for an

extra $400m for housing for the States. Mr Kennett said:
The long-term human costs demand the Federal Government reassess their funding to housing.
Of course, the Victorian Liberal Government is guilty of neglect. It has a policy of selling off public housing. It has contributed only $6 per head of population for housing from its own resources as against $47 per head in South Australia. Criticism of this Federal Government's neglect of housing comes from all sides of the policial spectrum, from industry groups and from the Press. I again seek

Public Housing Finance

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1017

leave to incorporate in Hansard two Press statements, one made by the Housing Industry Association and the other made by the Real Estate Institute of Australia.
Leave granted.
The statements read as follows-

PRESS RELEASE

Canberra 19 August 1981

Budget ignores housing needs

Statement by Mr W (Bill) Kirkby-Jones-National Executive Director

Whilst Housing Industry Association acknowledges that in general terms the 1981/82 Federal Budget is responsible, the housing sector is being asked to bear an unfair share of fiscal and monetary restraint.

The domestic bu4get surplus target of $1.5 billion is a move in the tight direction towards easing upward pressure on interest rates, but housing finance prospects do not look promising.

The budget contains no relief whatsoever for potential first-
time home buyers or for families experiencing financial hardship with greatly increased mortgage repayment burdens.

The absence of even a token interest subsidy scheme shows the Government's insensitivity for thousands of Australian families who have been forced out of the market place by the' current record level of interest rates.

The failure to revitalise the Home Savings Grant Scheme and the further cuts in the level of funding for welfare housing-
programs indicates that the Government now places a low priority on the hou~ing aspirations of ordinary Australians.

The erosion of home ownership opportunities will place further pressure on private rental markets and this will have the effect of quickly wiping out the benefits of the increase in supplementary rental assistance.

The impost of a 2.5% sales tax on building materials used in
the construction of new, houses flies in the face of the Government's stated priority for home ownership and is in complete contradiction to the findings and recommendations of the
Housing Costs Inquiry, set up by this Government.

The price of a modest brick veneer cottage will increase by

at least $500 or one quarter of the present maximum value of

the Home Savings Grant.

'

The Government must move quickly to allay industry concerns by removing building materials from the proposed tax.

I! is now clear that although the Government appears to be a willing listener, it will not heed industry advice and nor will
it act to restore homeownership opportunities.

The demand f\lr new housing is strengthening as a result of considerable growth in net immigration to around 120,000
and increasing family formation.

In such a wealthy country" access to decent, safe and affordable housing should be th~ right of all of its citizens. The failure on the part of Governments to respond to the housing aspirations of ordinary Australians will no doubt invite a serious political backlash.

MORE HOUSING DIFFICULTIES
The dual housing finance squeeze is frustrating potential homeowners at the same time making it harder for them to find rental accommodation they can afford, according to Mr. 'Ged Lawrence, Executive Director of the Real Esta.te Institute of Australia.

Commenting today on an article in the latest edition of the Institute's newsletter "Landline", he said "the home owner-
ship rate is falling and it will continue to fall with too little finance available for housing.

More and more, people are being forced into the private residential rental market, but this tightened considerably in
1980-81.

REIA's monthly surveys of six capital cities showed that to
the end of June the vacancy rate in all cities had fallen below that of 1979-80.

The supply of unlet accommodation had dropped most dramatically in Perth, Adelaide, Brisbane and Canberra
where the vacancy rate in June '81 was almost half of that of June '80.

Melbourne and Sydney vacancy rates had also fallen during the year.

The increased demand for rental accommodation has been brought about by difficulties in raising finance for home pur-
chase." Mr. Lawrence said.

A significant result of tightening private rental markets is
rent level rises. The most dramatic reilt level increases oc-
curred in Melbourne where almost all suburban areas experienced rises, the largest-increases being in inner city areas such as St Kilda and Caulfield.

In Sydney, inner city rent levels also increased at a greater

rate than in other areas.

'

Increasing pressure on the Brisbane rental market forced rents up by nearly $10 a week during the year.

'The recent federal budget will have the short-term effect of making home ownership even more difficult.' Mr. Lawrence
said.

New houses are going to cost more because of the 2.5 per cent tax on building materials.

The building materials tax will also apply to any accommodation built for the rental market.

However, since there is virtually no construction purely for rental, the tax will be a further deterrent. The increasing demand for rental accommodation will not be met by any increase in supply.

Last week's federal budget once again reduced the allocation for welfare housing.

People who have been forced out of the home buyer market and cannot afford to rent in the private residential market will have to join the ever-lengthening queues for a diminishing
supply of government welfare housing.

Media contact: Mr. Ged Lawrence Telephone (062) 474440, (062) 863426 25 August 1981
Mr UREN-I thank the House

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-I draw the attention of the honourable member for Reid to the fact that, if these are lengthy statements, it is still the prerogative of the Speaker to determine whether or not they will be
included.

Mr UREN-I read brieftyfrom the statements. The last paragraph of the Housing Industry Association statement is as follows:

In such a wealthy country, access to decent, safe and affor-
dable housing should be the right of all of its citizens. The failure on the part of Governments to respond to the housing aspirations of ordinary Australians will no doubt invite a serious political backlash.

1018 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Public Housing Finance

The Press release by the Real Estate Institute states:
People who have been foroed out of the home buyer market and cannot alford to rent in the private residential market will have to join the ever-lengthening queues for a diminishing supply of government welfare housing.
Therefore, this House condemns both the Minister and the Government for its enormous cutbacks in public sector housing. It is a scandal. It is a serious social problem. Governments must meet their responsibility of providing better housing for the people of Australia; otherwise I see great chaos within our society.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (5.22)-Once again I listened very carefully indeed to what the Opposition spokesman for housing had to say. I listened in vain for new ideas, for constructive suggestions or for anything at all that would let me believe that the Opposition has some worthwhile policy. At the outset I detail to the House some of the things that the shadow Minister for Housing did not tell the people of Australia because he did not want to tell them the truth or pinpoint the fact that in 1975-76, the last year of the Labor administration, its advances for' welfare housing decreased from the $385.4m allocated in the previous year. It is that figure that he always cites. He does not cite the figure for the next year because that Government's allocation for welfare housing was reduced to $364.6m. When one takes into account that inflation was raging at the rate of 17 per cent it is no wonder that the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) does not want to de~ tail to the House the real facts of the situation and that that Government substantially cut advances for welfare housing in its last Budget. He did not tell the House that the greater proportion by far of that Government's allocation in 1975-76 was by way of advances or moneys that had to be paid back. It charged 4t per cent and 4 per cent interest on the very small sums which were advanced for rental housing assistance. Its total grants amounted to $10m. It believed in lending money which had to be paid back. Whereas our allocation includes a significant input of grant money. The States are able to do with it as they wish. We have done this to encourage initiatives and to develop policies which will help people. .
I am disappointed. I have a great deal of respect for the honourable member for Reid. But all I heard was his parroting of the cry of the Victorian Minister of Housing; that it is always the fault of the Commonwealth Government; that the States need to do nothing except sit back and expect the Commonwealth's money to come rolling in. I believe it is appropriate to make the facts quite

clear. Housing, welfare housing in particular, is a shared responsibility. I get the distinct impression that the Opposition, allied with the States, does not know the meaning of the word 'sharing'. It appears to me that their view of sharing is to demand massive sums of money. They expect the Commonwealth to trot off to the taxpayer and say: 'Cough up again'. In effect, they love spending the money that the Commonwealth has the onus of raising.
I suggest that now is the time to let the people of Australia know the facts of the Government's policy on .housing generally. I want to spell out carefully once and for all the basis of funding for welfare housing under the 1981 Housing Agreement. The Agreement provides for a base level of funding of $l,OOOm over the next five years-the first time in the history of Commonwealth-State housing agreements in this country that we have had a forward commitment to allow the States to enter into innovative programs secure in the knowledge that they have a base amount. This amount of course is considered for supplementary top up each year in the budgetary context. This year the total direct Commonwealth funding is $262m. I noticed that the honourable member for Reid said that it was $255m. I do not know where he got that figure. Perhaps he was trying to let Australia know that he does not believe that Aboriginal people, our indigenous people, are entitled to participate in welfare housing. If he looks at the Budget Papers he will find that the total amount allocated is $262m this year and not the $255 as he instanced. I want to let him know that because quite obviously he either has not read the Budget Papers or if he did read them he does not understand them.
We have given $146m in highly ~oncessional advances-advances at 4t per cent repayable over 53 years. We have given a total of $66m in grants-straight out gifts to the States to spend as they see fit. It is money designed for pensioners and Aboriginals. On top of all that there is $500m in untied grants-moneys which can be used by the States for innovative methods of housing assistance, money with which they can tryout new ideas and get out of the rut which unfortunately they have been in for the past few decades. The honourable member for Reid failed to let the people of Australia know that because of the generosity of successive Federal governments the States have available to them $160min revolving funds-surpluses resulting from past operations of the program, surpluses resulting from the generous terms of past Commonwealth assistance. That is over $160m on top of the $260m that can be used this year. It is there for the States' use

Public Housing Finance

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1019

right now, not in four months time or eight months time. This means a total sum of $420m which can be traced back to the financial generosity of the Commonwealth Government will be available for welfare housing in 1981-82.
The honourable member for Reid wants to champion the irresponsible criticisms of States. Let tis come now to States' contributions. I have said before and I will say again and again that if individual States see welfare housing as a priority, as the Commonwealth does, it is up to them to boost their contributions in this area. The Minister of Housing in the Victorian Government, the honourable Jeff Kennett, the sword bearer for the Labor Party and those of his State counterparts who agree with him should bludgeon their Premiers and Treasurers with vigour to secure funds which meet their specific needs. Well they might because the Commonwealth not only has provided the solid base through its direct funding and revolving funds that I have mentioned but has given substantial general purpose funds to the States. This year there has been a staggering in~ crease in those funds of some 10 per cent. Therefore, if State housing Ministers believe that additional funds should go to welfare housing it is up to them to get in and fight for their share of State funds instead of coming to us bellyaching, trying to get more money out of the Commonwealth, which has already established a spirit of generosity unheralded and unknown in this country before the Fraser-Anthony Government came to power. I believe that if the honourable Jeff Kennett and other State Ministers for Housing can persuade their Treasurers and Premiers to get a significant increase in those funds we have made available to the States they can claim to be interested in welfare housing. They should do so rather than adopt the attitude of the Victorian State Minister, who, I believe, is but a political
pup barking at the moon.
Some State Ministers have been -able to get significant increaseS in funds for their own States. I instance in particular the Minister for Works and Housing in the Queensland Government. It seems to me that the States which make the lowest contributions are those which make long and bitter personal attacks on the Commonwealth. I point specifically to Victoria because this matter of public importance has been based on words attributed to the Minister of Housing in that State. As the honourable member for Reid said-for once he has been able to read the housing assistance Acts correctly-in 1979-80 Victoria made available $6 per head of population from its own funds. The national average in that year was $16 per head. South Australia spent $47 per head.

The Minister of Housing in the Victorian Government has not accepted the points of view that I have expressed in detailing the contribution of the Commonwealth Government to the total area of housing and accommodation for all Australians. Does he believe that this money should not be spent on housing people? Is he so callous as to suggest that we should not help pensioners or allocate money for crisis accommodation to help the sons and daughters of people who unfortunately have broken marriages? Is he suggesting that Aborigines and war veterans should become sacrificial lambs? The Commonwealth has boosted housing and accommodation outlays by $105m this year. This covers a total program for all people, be they Aboriginals, migrants, pensioners or defence service personnel, and of course our own well beloved Glebe Estate. We have increased Commonwealth allocations for housing and accommodation over the total broad spectrum to a staggering $660m this year, up from $555m last year. I only hope that the State housing Ministers can absorb some of the infectious enthusiasm that we on this side of the Parliament have for helping people get accommodation.
Most of the areas we have made commitments to are those in which we as the national Government have a demonstrable responsibility. In the area of welfare housing, in which we consider there is a joint responsibility, we are asking forand I believe we have every right to ask because of the contribution we have given-a more compassionate, more humane State involvement. It is the States which have the sole power to determine the total funding for welfare housing. I indicated that we had made available $262m, plus $160m credit in the revolving fund. I point .out with a great deal of pride that the Commonwealth's involvement is in keeping with my assurances to the House when I introduced the Housing Assistance Bill 1981. I said then:
The provision of a guaranteed base level of funding will enable the States to plan ahead with confidence. It should lead to further use by the States of the opportunities for innovative practices provided in the 1978 Agreement.
There are encouraging signs that this is happening. For example, in South Australia the Housing Trust has introduced a pilot scheme involving the leasing of dwellings from the private sector. There is also a proposal under considerat.ion to pay rental subsidies to aged persons on the waiting list for Trust accommodation presently renting in the private market. The Western Australian Housing Minister announced last week a scheme to assist people facing hardship in meeting mortgage repayments. In Queensland, there is now a special program for handicapped persons involving the

1020 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Public Housing Finance

Housing Commission, the State Department of of our supplementary rental assistance for pen-

Health and the Independent Living for Physically sioners. We have heard not one word from the

Handicapped Association.

Opposition about accommodation for the aged. A

These are the types of programs which the States are being encouraged to implement by virtue of the fact that we are giving them significant sums of money as grants and because we are not interfering with them. No longer do they have to come cap in hand to me as the Federal Minister for Housing and Construction and seek permission to do this and that. They have the right and the responsibility and they now have the wherewithal to overcome these very great problems that so many of us know about. The Commonwealth, to its credit, is providing the
flexibility and the financial incentive. It is now up to the States to take the opportunity to provide a wide-ranging, sensible and sensitive package of housing assistance to those in need. No longer can any State say that it is restricted by Commonwealth direction. It is up to the States. Any restriction is self-imposed. I call on State Ministers to redouble their efforts to convince their respective Cabinets that housing is a priority area.

total of $58m will be spent in this key area. Those of us who live in country areas are always delighted when we are associated with the opening of aged persons hostels and homes. I know that the honourable member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe) is delighted when he finds out that money available from the Commonwealth Government assists in the opening of homes for people to live in areas where their friends are and where they have grown up.
Funding for welfare housing includes a total of $34m for Aborigines. In addition, funds totalling about $44m are provided through the Aboriginal Development Commission, most of which are direct grants to assist in the construction and purchase of homes for Aboriginal families. We have not heard anything from Opposition members about this? Do they not think it is important to house our indigenous people? An amount of $74m has been allocated for the Homes Savings Grant Scheme. How ridiculous it was for the shadow Minister for Housing and Construction to

As I said in answer to a question earlier today, call it a home decorator's scheme. I hope that he

the Commonwealth has increased its expenditure will try to convince the half million people who

on housing and accommodation this year by a have obtained assistance since the Scheme was

hitherto unheard of 18.9 per cent. That performimplemented and the 50,000 people whoobtained

ance has yet to be matched by any of the assistance last year that it is a home decorator's

complaining States, including those from which scheme.

criticism has been loudest. The 1981 Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement demonstrates this Government's belief that the State Government is best placed to know the needs of its people. The Agreement further increases the

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The Minister's time has expired.
Mr UREN (Reid)-I claim to have been misrepresented.

freedom of the States to tailor housing programs Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honour-

to meet their particular needs.

able member wish to make a personal

Let us talk about other areas of Commonexplanation? wealth expenditure on housing and MrUREN-Yes.

accommodation-the areas our opponents ignore. They do not like to admit that we are a governmentof compassion and that we are interested in

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-He may proceed. Mr UREN-The Minister for Housing and

people. I refer to supplementary rental assistance Construction (Mr McVeigh) said that I did not

for pensioners. No one from the Opposition side use the correct figure in respect of the

has even tried to indicate the assistance that has Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement

been given to pensioners to live in houses as moneys this year. I advise him that I used the cor-

opposed to those who live in aged persons hostels. rect figure of $255m. I got it from the Budget

An amount of$128m was allocated in the Federal Papers. The reason I did not use the Aboriginal

Budget. Surely that is an important help to those component is that in the corresponding figure I

renting privately. It is a straight out Commongave for 1974-75 I referred only to what the six

wealth initiative. There was an increase in supplementary assistance from $5 to $8 a week-an increase of $50m in a full year. What have we
heard from Opposition members about that? Do

States were allocated. I maintained the same figure t~at is set out in the Budget ~aI?ers. ~hat amount 1S $255m. I wan~ to put the M10lster nght. He ~ould be better adv1sed In the future.

they oppose that increase in assistance? Why do r'-~Mr HOWE (Batman) (5.38)-The Age on 19

they not give credit where it is due? We are proud May carried an editorial which was headed 'Two

Public Housing Finance

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1021

wrongs from the Right'. I will read the opening sentences. It stated:
Sometimes both sides of an argument are clearly wrong. Such is the case with the continuing dispute between the State Housing Minister, Mr Kennett, and his Federal counterpart, Mr McVeigh. In trying to dodge the blame for the tragic reduction in welfare housing activity here, each Minister has exposed the indifference of the other's Government. But neither has a leg to stand on in defending his own Government's record-and neither has promised to take up the slack left by the other.
The Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) has defended the Government's record. However, it is interesting that the Government's record is coming under increasing criticism from within the ranks of the Minister's own party, Mr Kennett has been a most trenchant critic. He has said:
I cannot understand their attitude to housing in a year when they are budgeting for a surplus in excess of $1.5 billion. To allocate only $250m to government housing throughout Australia is absurd.
He has also been quoted as saying:
The long term human costs demand the Federal Government reassess their funding for housing.
He called the reduction in Federal funding to housing from $285m in 1980-81 to $250m in 1981-82 a totally unrealistic policy. These criticisms reflect, firstly, a growing concern in the Liberal Party about the impact of government policies on lower income sections of the popUlation; secondly, the final stages of the breakdown of the new federalist policies which were supposed to be the hallmark of the Fraser Government; and, thirdly, a growing confusion about the direction of policies which should be pursued. The first issue of the impact on lower income people was emphasised only yesterday by the honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr) who chastised the Government for its lack of concern about growing inequality as it is demonstrated in Australia, particularly in the area of housing. It appears that all State Ministers agreed last Friday that there needs to be a massive increase in Commonwealth funding. A number of those Ministers are Liberal Ministers. Finally, the most basic issue is that of the correct policies which should be pursued. It is this issue which is the most serious.
It is quite clear that the Victorian Government has no ideas on housing policy. Mr Kennett apparently believes that the way can be made for housing by cutting back on areas of social expenditure such as health, welfare, social security and education. He believes that we can Sacrifice' government welfare, broadly defined, in the interests of saving his own portfolio. He strongly believes also that we ought to cut back on funds for foreign aid; that is, sacrifice the poor of the

developing world. Mr Kennett has only one priority, that is the housing industry, entrepreneurs and builders who are going broke because of the crisis in the housing industry in Victoria. He is not particulrly concerned about the people who ought to be getting public housing but are not able to get it. Similarly, the Federal Minister has no clear ideas about housing policy. He is certainly correct when he points to the fact that Victoria on a per capita basis is spending less than any other State. It is spending $6 per capita compared with twice that amount in New South Wales, $47 in South Australia, and $3lin Tasmania. However, he has made no contribution, nor is he likely to make a contribution, to the causes of the deep and underlying problems of housing in Australia. When presenting to Parliament a report earlier this year on the Indicative Planning Council the Minister said:
The main message contained in the report is that the health of the housing industry will depend on sound policies and planning by all levels of government, designed to ensure that the industry is the beneficiary not the casual ty of the resources boom.
The reality is that this is at the root of the current housing crisis in Australia. The Minister also said:
We will lead the way but planning, co-operative effort and far sighted policies are required from all levels of government.
It is now generally agreed that the pressure on interest rates and ..the reduction of funding for capital works generally are the result of the' Government's deliberate intention to make way for the private sector and, particularly, resource based industries. The FederalGovernment can hardly complain about the enthusiastic way in which a number of States grasped this straw as the means of seeking economic recovery. The Commonwealth itself deliberately encouraged the' States several years ago to seek special infrastructure loans on a very large scale. The Government is now seeking to slow down some of this public sector activity. It is even more seriously seeking to slow down capital expenditure works in relation to such aspects of the economy as the housing industry. The States, having been encouraged only a year or so ago to go in one direction, are now just as enthusiastically being exhorted~by the Federal Government to slow down arid;'g6ina different direction. The Government is confused and the people are confused. No one is quite clear what this Government wants either in housing policy or other areas of government.
I believe that the Government is caught between competing demands of various factions of capital. On the one hand the Victorian Minister of, Housing wants to look after the housing industry which is in desperate trouble. The Federal

1022 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Public Housing Finance

Government wants to assist resource based industries which are looking for infrastructure. On the other hand it wishes to save its own neck by restraining inflation which is now beginning to roar again. The tensions for this Government are growing and, therefore, we are beginning to see the signs of a conflict reflected in policy which eventually will bring it down. The Minister has said that the Opposition does not have any clear ideas in policy. There is not a great deal of point in thrusting forward policy ideas because there has never been a government which has showp. less interest in policy than this Government.
I think a number of points could be made about the Opposition's housing policy. We certainly have no disagreement with the State Housing Ministers that there ought to'be increased funding for housing, particularly public housing. However, there are deeper issues to which we ought to turn as we approach the next election. There is the need to turn to the planning of resource development and not simply to leave such development to market forces, because if-resource development is left to market forces it inevitably will lead to the kind of situation represented by the Gladstones, the Latrobe Valleys and the Portlands where development occurs in advance of social infrastructure. There ought to be a co-operative process between the States and the Commonwealth to plan such development. I see very little evidence of that.
We need desperately a national assessment of the quality of housing in Australia, particularly public housing. On the basis of my experience, most of the public housing located within the inner areas of the city of Melbourne is entirely inappropriate to the needs of the people who live there. When we form a Labor government we will certainly reverse the policy of market rents which is reSUlting in considerable hardship. But in the interim we would certainly support the view of State critics who suggest that rebates should be paid for by the Commonwealth directly. We need to establish national standards in relation to public housing. We need to establish rights of tenure for people In public housing as well as for people in the private sector. We need to move towards achieving uniform legislation concerning landlord and tenant rights.
We need to reassess the needs for public housing in this country. We need to look at the people who require assistance and to define the public housing stock so that it meets the needs of..particular groups of people. If one looks at what has been built one sees that it is not on the whole sensitive in terms of either its location or the type of housing needed by those who are currently homeless or

living in sub-standard accommodation. We need to set in this country housing goals and targets to achieve a reduction in the waiting lists and to expand public sector housing to a reasonable sector of the total housing stock, perhaps 10 per cent. Other countries establish housing goals. Why is it that this country can get no leadership on housing from the Commonwealth Government? I believe it is because the Commonwealth Government is increasingly divided within itself. The Liberal Party is divided. The States are divided against the Commonwealth, even where there are Liberals in charge. The conservative coalitions within this country are facing a crisis of policy which is reflected in housing and in the fact that we never get from this Government any constructive policies.
Mr Shipton-Tell us about Frank Wilkes?
Mr HOWE-I am quite happy to talk about Frank Wilkes and John Cain, who will be the next Premier of Victoria.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.-
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo) (5.49)-It was interesting to listen to the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe), who expounded a very fixed and firm idea of how to cure all the ills of this country. He shares the usual one simple and straight philosophy with all the socialists on the other side of the House; that is spend, spend, spend, without any thought of the consequence and without any consideration of where the money might come from, who will pay for it and what will be the end result. I might remind the honourable member that the end result occurred in 1973, 1974 and 1975 when the socialists had the opportunity to spend and when the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren), who is not here--
Mr Howe-You are talking nonsense.
Mr BOURCHIER-The honourable member was not here. He should sit down and get back to his socialist books. The honourable member for Reid was Minister for Urban and Regional Development and the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson) was Minister for I:Iousing. In those days they said: 'It does not matter what it costs, let us spend'. They were going to buy back the Dandenongs at one stage; they thought that was a good idea. They bought land by the acrethousands of acres near Albury-Wodonga-and leased it back to the farmers. They paid the farmers huge prices, greatly increased land values and then said: 'We will not need this for about 60 years. We will lease it back'. They are the type of people who talk about positive housing policies.

Public Housing Finance

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1023

They do not know what they are talking about and they never have.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr BOURCHIER-I listened to members opposite in silence so they can do me the same courtesy. As I mentioned, the honourable member for Reid talked, without reference to the consequences, about what he would do to fix the housing situation. I mentioned that he was going to buy back the Dandenongs. The honourable member for Hughes, when he was Minister for Housing, put forward in this House one day a proposal to build so many houses out of the money he had allocated. Somebody forgot to tell him that houses were costing more than $10,000 each in those days, but he was proposing to build them for $6,000. That is how much he knew about it. He was going to introduce a housing corporation. I know that the Labor Party still has tucked away that little Bill to socialise and nationalise the whole of the building industry in this country. The building industry has not forgotten and never will.
However, this debate concerns some comments made by the Victorian State Minister of Housing. I find it rather intriguing that a State Minister should want to take to task a Federal Government which has provided most of the money that he needs to spend on housing. It is not our job in this side of the House to attack our State colleagues. We leave that to members opposite who do it so well with their type of politics. But in this case Minister Kennett deserves some comment about the action he has taken. The State Minister has put advertisements in the newspapers, has done all sorts of things and has said that the dreadful Federal Government has not given him enough money. Yet it was spelt out by the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh), who is at the table, how little the State Minister's own Government is putting into housing.
I remind the Minister of a conversation he had in Melbourne with Victorian Federal members of the coalition Government when he asked them to meet him. He said to us: 'All we need to fix up housing at this stage is more Federal funds'. There was no mention of State funds. I asked him: 'Do you not think the thrust of the Federal Government is the right thrust to control inflation created by the Labor Party? Do you not think it is the right thrust that we should be trying to bring down the deficit created by the Labor Party, the straight out bank overdraft created by the Labor Party?' He said: 'Yes, I totally agree. You are doing everything right'. I said to the Minister: 'Would you please explain to me how we are to give you extra money for housing?' He said: 'I do

not care where you get it from as long as I get it for housing'. That is exactly what the honourable member for Batman said. I then asked the Minister and the then Premier-I think the then Treasurer, who is now Premier, was also therewhether they were prepared to go back to the Cabinet room and to say to the other Ministers: 'Look, fellows, we want more money for housing so are you prepared to take cuts in all the other areas?' I do not think the Minister for Housing did that.
I also remind the House that the State Minister of Housing came out with a very good policy of the State Government providing a subsidy of interest payments from funds provided by the Federal Government. Honourable members should note that-we provided the funds that he was going to use to subsidise interest payments. I have heard no more about that. The Minister said to us-I am talking now as a representative of cooperative housing societies which help people on low incomes-'If you can arrange to get your own loans from various institutions we will subsidise the interest'. I helped an organisation in Bendigo to organise loans of more than $2m. We wrote a letter to the Minister but got no response. I met him later and I said: 'You have given us all this great cry about what we do. What about what you propose to do? What are you going to do about it?' He said: 'I will give you an answer within a week'. Several weeks later I am still waiting for that answer. I suggest to the State Minister that he ought to go back to his Premier and Treasurer and say to them: 'Look, Victoria is getting $I,507m as part of the tax sharing arrangements. It will get an extra $15m-a total of $I,522m. Why do you not allocate more of that to housing?' That is the answer. If the States want us to give more for housing, they should say to us that they do not want money by way of State grants, because the tax cake can only go so far. That is what this Government is about-controlling the economy. The effect on the housing industry is as much the responsibility of the State governments which are not prepared to put their money where their mouth is.
If the State Ministers really believe that housing is such an important issue, as the Federal Government does, it is about time they went to their Premiers and Treasurers and told them that a greater part of the tax sharing money should be for housing and that the States should contribute at least on a dollar for dollar basis or even more. Why can they not do that? Let them do that and then they would have an argument to put to us. It is all right for us in this place to criticise each other and to make comments about the current

1024 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Public Housing Finance

situation. Sometimes it does not hurt to put forward a positive view. We never hear a positive view from the other side of the House. We never hear any sort of view except the knocking from the socialists. I put to the Minister at the table the proposition, which I think he received through the back bench committee, that we should try to organise funds for housing to be distributed by this Government through the co-operatives and through the welfare system.
Under the proposal I put forward we would' create a housing loan under government sponsorship, but a housing loan that is tax free. Honourable members may say: 'How can that be achieved?' I remind them that it has been reported that about $500m is lying in banks, money which has been put away by pensioners frightened of losing their pensions because any increase in interest payments would reduce their pensions. Many people have money put away, and they do not want to invest it in interestbearing deposits because they might pay a higher tax. If the Government were to provide a loan, say at a tax-free interest rate of 7 per cent, we would get millions of dollars that at present is not earning the owner or the Government anything at all. That money is lying idle and we need it. In this way the Minister for Housing could get the money needed to create good development in the housing industry.
Let us not mince words about the industry in this country. There is a great demand for housing in this country but there is a shortage of supply, and there are several reasons for that. One is the high cost of borrowing money. The Government, quite rightly, has taken a very hard line on interest rates, and I make no apologies for that. If we were to provide a housing loan in the terms I have suggested to the Minister, then we could subsidise interest in the proper way without affecting the deficit and without increasing inflation. This would help the building industry to get on its feet. It would help young people in this country to get houses. The people who need homes, those who do not get $280 a week or more but live on something under $200 a week would be able to get a house. Thousands of such people in every town and city in this country want housing. If they could get the money at a reasonable rate of interest, and tJ-tat would happen under my proposal, the country would see a lift in the housing industry which would help not only that industry but also the unemployment situation. It would create a flow right across the board because, despite my colleagues in the National Country Party who believe that everything rides on the sheeps's

back, the housing industry in this country is one of the greatest employers of people.
Housing is one of the most important industries in this country, Honourable members on this side of the House have one philosophy in regard to housing. We very much want to see people own their own homes. We should be doing something positive to bring about that situation. I have supported all the things the Government has done in regard to controlling inflation and reducing the deficit. In 1975, when we came into office, Australia was a bankrupt country after three devastating years of the socialists,
Mr Howe-You are talking nonsense.
Mr BOURCHIER-We were totally bankrupt. We had an overdraft of $5,000m, and it was rising. The honourable member was not here so he can dry up. What is more important is that since 1975 we have just about written off that overdraft. We have wiped it out as a result of proper policies:, Honourable members opposite do not understand that. The moment they get back Into office theYwill spend and spend and spend. Inflation will again run at 17 per cent with no trouble at all, and interest rates will go right through the roof. We have the right policies and, when money is lying idle, there is no reason why we should not embark on a proper system to raise funds and to use that money, as I have suggested, by offering people tax-free interest on money they lend to the Government. I believe that would be a good policy, and I hope the Minister will take it on board and try to do something with it.
Mr Shipton-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to raise a point of order arising out of a statement made by the Minister at the table, the Minister for Housing and Construction (MrMcVeigh). He described Jeff Kennett, the Minister for Housing in Victoria, as a sword-bearer for the Australian Labor Party, I ask him to withdraw that and perhaps describe the Victorian Minister as an overenthusiastic but misguided Liberal.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member may be raising a point of view, but it is not a point of order. The discussion is concluded.
EXTENSIONS TO BRISBANE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (6.0)-On behalf of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt), I move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of, the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the

Privilege

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1025

following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament: Brisbane International Airport-Extensions to International Terminal Facilities.
The proposal is for the enlargement of passenger holding lounges, check-in areas and baggage claim areas to alleviate congestion which is presently occurring and to prevent it in the future. In reporting favourably on the proposal and recommending that the work should proceed, the Committee has made two suggestions in the body of the report. Firstly, the Committee has suggested that the question of adequate car parking should be carefully monitored by the Department of Transport. The Committee has also suggested that th~ question of locating coach parking bays closer to the terminal exit be fully investigated and reported in the annual report of that Department. I can assure honourable members that these suggestions will be implemented. The estimated cost of the proposal examined by the Committee was $2.8m at February 1981 prices. The Committee recommended ~onstruction of the work in the reference and, if the House agrees to support this motion, detailed planning can proceed in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee.
Sitting suspended from 6.1 to 8 p.m.
PRIVILEGE
Motion (by Mr Ruddock) proposed:
That the matter of the printed reference and the article by Mr L. Oakes relating to Members of the Commonwealth Parliament appearing on pages I and 9, respectively, of the Sydney Daily Mirror of Wednesday, 2 September 1981, be referred to the Committee of Privileges.
Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) (8.1)-1 recognise the offence that some honourable members may have seen in the words in the article in question. They may feel that the article is cast wide and is non-specific and therefore includes in its descriptions those to whom no reference may be made. On the other hand I take the view that a reference to the Standing Committee of Privileges is a matter of great consequence to the House. From my reading of the article which has been drawn to the attention of honourable members. I do not believe that, whilst it may be offensive to some honourable members, it is of sufficient importance to warrant the attention of the Privileges Committee. Whilst the heading on top of the article reads 'Bludgers on the back bench', that heading no doubt was put there by a sub-editor at some desk within the newspaper office. For consideration of this reference I confine myself to the remarks made under that heading. In looking at the article I can find several paragraphs which I

think would have been better not written. They refer to both sides of politics, to Labor members of Parliament known as LOGS and to Liberal M.P.s 'bludging, in effect, on the taxpayers'. A further reference states:
The parliamentarians with reputations as drunks and those regarded as workers are two quite separate groups.
Whilst such a remark is unfortunate, I really do not wish to vote on this matter in relation to the article itself. In a broad sense it seems to be little more than many articles which have been written over the years concerning many members of par-. Iiament and, of course, it is little more than has been said in this House at times. I noticed that in one debate today one honourable member said of another: 'He will say anything. He will distort anything'. If it is said about a member that he will distort anything, on examination that is a very serious statement; yet it went unchallenged in this House today. I think all of us can find in our memories further statements of that nature.
For my own part, I suppose I have given a good deal in politics and I have received a good deal in insult and injury via the Press. Early this year I was associated with the words 'deceit' and 'scandal' in an article in the Sunday Mail, a weekend newspaper in South Australia. It was headlined: 'Damning deceit over Chowilla'. The sub-heading read: 'New research reveals the scandals behind South Australia's impossible dream'. I was closely associated with that impossible dream, as it was then called. To me, of course, that was a highly offensive article. It may very well have yielded some result at law but I felt on consideration, and, after talking the matter over with the reporter who wrote it, that it would be completely futile and non-productive to pursue it further. In fact, I do not believe that my reputation has been harmed by that article. I believe that all honourable members in this House should be and are secure in their reputation as they are known in their district. I do not believe that they will be harmed by a passing reference in the type of article which has been referred to. I again refer to myself, because I suppose it is the easiest way to deflect this argument, instead of using as an example the offence that may have been given to others.
Mr David McNicoll, writing in the Bulletin of 18 August, made humorous but 9a:maging remarks about me. He said that in fact I had been dropped from Who's Who in Australia. What could be more damaging to a member of Parliament than to be dropped from Who's Who? That must be the final emptiness of all politics. He went on to say:

1026 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Privilege

When,Steele Hall got pre-selection for Boothby, there was near revolt in several of the branches. They wanted no part of him, an~ it took great persuasion to get many Liberals to work for him.
He went on to say, in perhaps the more damning of all the remarks contained in this article:
Like many other politicians, Steele Hall has an ambitious and talented wife, regarded by some as the real member for Boothby.
What could be more damning thanthat? 1 know that Mr David McNicoli is a delightful old gentleman who belongs in the empire of the last century.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member will remain relevant to the issue.
Mr STEELE HALL-Having said that, 1 have not in any way taken any umbrage at what he said. It was just a passing comment. 1 think that in politics one must take these things as general comment. 1 can understand the ire of some honourable members at the article concerned. 1 believe, however, that for the sake of Parliament and its reputation it would be better if the matter receded, into obscurity. For that reason and because all of us have made mistakes at times and have written or said things that we have sometimes regrettedbecause of the many circumstances which surround political life-I will not support this reference.
Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (8.6)-1 read this article at the time it was published. 1 must confess that 1did not think it was one of the better pieces of journalism that Mr Oakes has published. Certainly, he said some things which were critical of honourable members of this House, but 1 must confess that 1 was surprised this afternoon when 1 heard the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) express the view that this was a grave reflection upon this House. 1 was somewhat surprised, Mr Speaker, to hear you express the opinion that you were of the view that prima facie it was a breach of the privileges of this House. 1 have with me the nineteenth edition of Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice. At page 144, on the subject of privilege, it states:
In 1701, the House of Commons resolved that to print or publish any.books or libels reflecting on the proceedings of the House is a high violation of the rights and privileges of the House, and indignities offered to their House by words spoken or writings published reflecting on its character or proceedings--
These are important words-
have been constantly punished by both the Lords and the Commons upon the principle that such acts tend to obstruct--
I add some emphasis to the word 'obstruct'-
the Houses in the performance of their functions by diminishing the respect due to them.

Reflections upon Members, the particular individuals not being named or otherwise indicated, are equivalent to reflections on the House.
1 find it very difficult to think that what Mr Oakes said could be said to have a tendency to obstruct the House in the performance of its functions. What Mr Oakes said may be found by some to be offensive, by others to be inaccurate, and by others still to be slightly ridiculous. But 1 would have thought that to constitute a prima facie breach of privilege, a breach that should be referred to a committee of this House, in this day and in this robust age, an allegation made against the House should be very serious indeed. 1 must confess that 1 can see nothing to warrant such proceedings. We would look more than a little ridiculous if our skins were so sensitive, if we were such tender plants, that we could not take criticism which might be without foundation, which might be utterly inaccurate, and which might in some ways reflect on the way in which we go about our duties. If we cannot take such criticism, what 'are we to do? Are we to say, when general criticism is offered of members of this House, that this is of such importance, such weight, such gravity that it should be referred to the Standing Committee of Privileges? 1 most certainly think that would be an unwise course. 1 think there is no foundation for the reference of this matter to the Committee of pi-ivileges. If the House feels or if members feel that its dignity has been slighted, unless the matter is grave and weighty the House is far better advised to ignore what is said of it. 1 do not support the motion that the honourable member for Dundas has moved.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (8.11)-1 join in this debate to make just two points. The matter of privilege was raised in good faith by the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock). Mr Speaker, you were asked as Speaker to rule as to whether you found it to constitute a prima facie breach of privilege. You so ruled. No doubt you so ruled after due and proper deliberation. The House has established procedures under which, on the basis of your ruling, it is then open to the House to refer the matter to the Standing Committee of Privileges. 1 point out to some of my colleagues opposite who have spoken on this mattei' that a reference to the Committee cannot be construed as being a finding of gUilt or the making of any decision on the merits of the case. It is simply, as far as 1 am concerned, supporting the ruling that you have given. On that basis and for that reason I will support the motion.
1believe that there are due processes within the House. 1 am happy to leave this matter to the adjudication of the Committee. It can return with

Privilege

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1027

whatever recommendation it desires to make, and then will be the time for all honourable members to make up their minds on the basis of the examination of the material that is before them as it comes from the Committee. My own view is that orice the Speaker has ruled that there is a prima facie case-that is not a decision that can ever be given lightly; it can be given only after due and weighty consideration of all the evidence that is before you, sir-the House has no recourse open to it except to act in respect of your ruling and refer the matter to the Committee in terms of the due processes of this Parliament. For that reason I will support the motion.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (8.13)-1 can understand the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) bringing this item forward. Personally 1 take no offence at all at the article. I do not care what people say, whether they be journalists or otherwise. We are guided by our consciences. 1 tell the House one thing that I take exception to: The continued use by the Australian Democrats of the saying: 'Keep the bastards honest'. If we are going to start debating this sort of thing we should fight the sorts of things stated by the Australian Democrats far harder than the sort of thing brought forward by the honourable member for Dundas. 1 have a birth certificate and 1 am sure that most of the members on my side of the House have birth certificates also. If we allow that to go on without taking issue, we should not be worried about being called boozers and so forth. We can be guided by our consciences. We should fight those sorts of things much more vehemently than this sort of thing.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes Noes
Majority
AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume,M.E. Birney. R. J. Bourchier. J. W. Bowen, Lionel Bradfield. J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey. M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Child,J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Everingham, D. N. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. Fry, K. L. Giles, G. O'H. Groom,R.J. Harris, G. McD. Hawke, R. J. L. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Holding, A. C. Howard, J. W.

75 27
48
Humphreys, B. C. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jacobi, R. Jarman,A. W. Jones, Charles Jull,D. F. Killen, D.J. Klugman, R. E. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean,R.M. McMahon, Los (Teller) McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Millar,P.C. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Scholes, G. G. D. Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Mr SPEAKER-The debate has proceeded. 1 found that there is a prima facie breach of privilege. The honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) found that strange. Perhaps if he does more research he will find that a contempt of ~he Parliament is a breach of privilege. He might look at the House of Representatives Standing Committee of Privileges report relating to an editorial published in the Sunday Observer on 26 February 1978. That is a much more recent establishment of the history of these matters. 1 will not, of course, refer to that at the moment. 1 have found that there is a prima facie breach of privilege.
Question put:
That the motion (Mr Ruddock's) be agreed to.
The House divided.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. (Teller) Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Free,R. V. Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Howe, B. L. Johnson, Les

Jones, Barry
Kent, L. Kerin. 1. C. Mildren, J. B. Peacock, A. S. (Teller) Rocher, A. C. Scott, J. L. Spender, J. M. Theophanous, A. C. UTeo, T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Anthony, J. D. Falconer, P. D. Edwards, H. R. Robinson, Ian
In division-

Hayden W.G. Young, M. J. Cohen, B. Innes, U. E.

Dr Klugman-Mr Speaker--

Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable member for Prospect have a point of order?

I028 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Brisbane International Airport

Dr Klugman-This is not a point of order, Mr Speaker. Having thought about the 'question, having been at a meeting organised by this House-an Estimates committee meeting-and not having listened to the debate, I have now decided that I do not wish to vote on this motion. I ask for leave to withdraw.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman has no leave to withdraw.
Question so resolved in the affirmative.
EXTENSIONS TO BRISBANE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Debate resumed.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (8.30)-Prior to the suspension of the sitting for dinner the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) moved:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament: Brisbane international Airport-Extensions to International Terminal Facilities.
The Opposition supports the motion of expediency moved by the Minister. In the Sixth Report of the Public Works Committee of 1981 on pages 14 and 15 the recommendations of the Committee are summarised. Those recommendations are:
I. The existing international terminal facilities at Brisbane Airport are inadequate
2. The proposed extensions to the building and tarmac and other alterations are satisfactory
3. The estimated cost of the work is $2.8m at February 1981 prices
4. The Committee recommends the construction of the work in this reference.
The body of the report sets out past and projected traffic at Brisbane air terminal. It is useful to note in the report that in the 20 years from 1960 to 1980, the number of international passengers utili&ing Brisbane Airport rose from 4;562 to a figure of 341,372. In the five years 1975 to 1980, there was almost a doubling in the number of passengers utilising the airport, the figures jumping from 190,443 to 341,372. Looking at the projected figures for the next decade, the material supplied by the Committee in its report indicates again an almost doubling of passenger transits to 637,900 and an increase in aircraft movements from 3,339 aircraft movements to 4,800 by 1990.
The deficiencies of the terminal, for those honourable members interested in looking at the detail, are reflected in P!lragraphs 21 to 28 of the report. They refer to the number of passengers that are transitting the airport in the current

peaks, being on Wednesdays, when some 600 passengers arrive at the airport in a period of just on 15 minutes. The report also indicates 108 occasions where the number of originating and transit passengers in the forward lounge has exceeded 400 in a 60-minute peak period. It identifies that the facilities for arriving passengers are similarly deficient and the luggage handling equipment at the airport for international passengers is similarly deficient.
The proposed works will enable the use of the terminal up until the year 1990. The aim of the proposal for the work to be undertaken is to extend the international terminal building to permit the loading and unloading of two arriving and two departing Boeing 747 aircraft, each holding 444 passengers, in one hour. In other words, there would be a passenger transit movement or handling movement of some 1776 persons in one hour. As I have indicated, the extensions will enable the airport and the terminal to cope with the movements anticipated in the coming decade. The report-without my going into detail nowoutlines the various works to be carried out in respect of baggage claim facilities, health holding lounge areas, forward departure areas, Customs and drug detection dogs, housing, the relocation of car rental areas and similar matters referred to by the Minister when he moved the original motion.
This is a somewhat farcical situation in that in approximately 55 hours after we dispense with this motion of expediency involving an estimated cost of $2.8m in February 1981 prices, Brisbane Airport will be closed down daily from 9 p.m. until midnight because insufficient air traffic controllers are available to ensure safe operation of the airport. This airport, on which the $2.8m is to be expended when authorised by this Parliament, is to be shut down. Why? Because of the bungling and incompetence of National Country Party Transport Ministers and specifically the former Minister for Transport, now the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), presently the centre of notoriety for other activities, and the present Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt).
I have to say that we are in a situation where this Government is leaderless. Its policy in respect of airports and aviation is in a shambles, as is its aviation administration policy. Because of the incompetence and inefficiency of this Government the taxpayers of this country and the air travellers coming into this country and moving through this country will have to foot the bill. The National Country Party must accept full responsibility for

Brisbane International Airport

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1029

the closure of Brisbane Airport. The serious shortage of air traffic controllers, the loss of key personnel including radar technicians--
Mr McVeigh-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I understand the desire of the shadow Minister to have a wide ranging debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Miller)-The Minister will come quickly to the point of order.
Mr McVeigh-This is an expediency motion dealing with extensions to an international air terminal building. It has nothing to do with traffic operators or--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I take it the Minister is raising his point of order on the question of relevance.
Mr McVeigh-That is right. I think the honourable member is straying far too wide. He is wide bellied.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Shortland may proceed, keeping in mind the need to be relevant.
Mr MORRIS-I understand the point taken by the Minister and the sensitivity on it. We are debating whether to approve $2.8m of public expenditure on the provision of an extended international terminal facility at an airport which in some 55 hours' time will be closed down from 9 p.m. till midnight daily because of the failure of this Government to ensure that there are sufficient trained technical personnel to see that the airport is in operation. In these circumstances I am looking at the wisdom of this expenditure. We want an assurance from the Government that in supporting this motion there will be precise and prompt action by the Government to see that people are recruited and that sufficient air traffic controllers are obtained in this country--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~Order! The Chair is obliged to rule that the honourable member is testing the bounds of relevance.
Mr MORRIS-The Government should see that there are sufficient personnel available to ensure that the airport is kept open and that this expenditure, which the Opposition is supporting at this stage, is justified and that the public and air travellers will have access to the facility. In those terms I believe the comments I am putting to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, and to the chamber, are directly relevant.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair rules to the contrary.
Mr MORRIS~I appreciate the Chair's ruling. The fact is that Brisbane airport does not have

sufficient personnel available to see that these facilities will be available to incoming travellers. It is up to the Minister, in his response to the debate on this motion, to give an assurance to the Parliament, to the people of Australia, to the aviation industry, to the tourist industry and to the airline industry that if this public money is to be expended we can use the facility. What point is there in expending almost $3m of taxpayers' money on a facility that cannot be used for three critical hours in the operation of aircraft each day? In that circumstance I have difficulty in dealing with the subject without making some reference to the capacity of the Department of Transport to ensure that the facility we will pay for is available to be used. If it cannot be used, the Minister for Housing and Construction should be giving an explanation to the Parliament why it cannot be used and what justification there is for expending this amount of money on a facility that will not be available for a critical period each day to the industry that will pay inevitably for the cost of the facility being undertaken.
Brisbane has long suffered from inadequate air terminal facilities, particularly in the international area. The existing international airline terminal was constructed in a rapid program under the then Labor Minister for Transport in 1975 and it was opened in 1975. The predecessors of the Minister for Housing and Construction and the Country Party Ministers responsible for transport-previously Ministers for Civil Aviation-did not adequately plan for airport development. It is common knowledge within the aviationindustry that the airport development program of this Government is dragging one year behind. It is also known-as the Minister for Transport has acknowledged-that the Government has had to transfer airport design engineers and construction engineers from other airport programs around Australia to the Brisbane airport development to try to maintain the rate of development there. I ask the Minister to give the House an assurance-now that I have indicated we will support the motion-that this work will proceed on time, that the facility will be available for the full span of operating hours for the international airline and that the work will proceed on schedule and will become available as quickly as possible. As I said, the Department does not have the skilled personnel to operate the airport. It does not have sufficient radar technicians to ensure that the airport can be operated safely. It does not have sufficient personnel at this stage in the engineering and planning and development sections of the Ground Facilities Division to

1030 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Brisbane International Airport

maintain the numerous airport development programs that it has undertaken.
Your ruling, Mr Deputy Speaker, has somewhat limited my opportunity to canvas some of these matters. I am sure that the public will agree with me, with due respect to your ruling, that these matters should be canvassed in a debate of this nature. If the airport is to' be developed, if the tourist industry in Queensland and the people of Queensland are going to have access to improved international airport services, we want this project carried through to finality and we want the airport opened so that it can be used.
In conclusion, the present. Minister for Transport has acknowledged what his predecessor refused to acknowledge and that is that there are serious shortages of the technical' personnel who are required to operate the airport. The present Minister for Transport has-made a series of statements which amount to soothing words, as did his predecessor. That is no substitute for action. I sound a warning to the Parliament and to the people who use the aviation industry; the industry in this country is rapidly approaching a disaster situation because of the lack of key safety personnel. It is quite pointless to talk about having crash programs to recruit air traffic control trainees and to recruit radar technicians when those people are being poached from this country by overseas governments and overseas firms which offer better conditions and better entitlements.
The proposals put forward at the moment amount only to band-aid solutions or palliatives. The only way to prevent the disaster that is likely to happen in the aviation industry as a result of this Government's mismanagement and incompetence in aviation matters is for the Government to bring the conditions and entitlements of air traffic controllers and radar technicians into line with what is available overseas. Only then will the air traffic controllers, the skilled engineers, the airport technicians, the radar technicians and the people who are trained at the Australian taxpayers' expense be retained in this country and used for the benefit of improving our aviation services. As I have indicated, the Opposition does not oppose the motion of expediency. However, we do seek an assurance from the Minister on those points that I have outlined.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (8.44)-1 wish to speak briefly. I extend my thanks and my congratulations to the Minister who is sitting at the table, the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh), and, indeed, to the Government and to

the Public Works Committee for its recommendation to proceed with this further development of the international terminal of Brisbane Airport at a cost of $2.8m.
Mr Hodgman-You have fought very hard for it.
Mr JULL-We have. This is a most significant move because of the figures given by the honourable member who has just resumed his seat, the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris). In fact, the passenger growth and the aircraft movement growth at Brisbane International Airport have been, quite frankly, staggering. The numbers of aircraft and passengers have doubled every five years.
Mr McVeigh-Will it improve with the Airbus?
Mr JULL-I sincerely hope it will improve with the Airbus, but there are a lot of developments coming up in types of aircraft at airports around Australia over the next few years. The simple fact is that Brisbane has become a most desirable destination for international air travellers. In recent weeks we have seen Philippine Airlines start its services into Brisbane. Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd has asked for rights to come into Brisbane. Yet anOther international airline is making application in the next few weeks for the right to come into Brisbane Airport. It is this sort of boom in the tourist industry that is bringing tremendous wealth to Queensland, even to a point where tourism is now its second biggest gowth industry. We have spoken about that before in the House. But it is important that we have the right infrastructure.
The honourable member for Shortland mentioned that building the present-international air terminal was a measure of the Australian Labor Party. It certainly solved a problem. But let us not forget that that terminal was part of an overall scheme for the redevelopment of Brisbane Airport. The present terminal, in fact, is to be a storehouse in the final scheme of things when the airport is completed. The battle of Brisbane Airport has been a long and complicated one. It goes back to 1968 when the decision was first made to develop it. In 1972 the then McMahon Government granted the funds for the development of the first stage of Brisbane International Airport. In the following year, under the Whitlam regime, the plans for that were cancelled, canned, finished and gone. It was only after a tremendous amount of effort by Government members that the go ahead to proceed with the new Brisbane Airport was finally given.

Brisbane international Airport

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1031

I realise that there are difficulties involved in the construction of the new Brisbane International Airport but we must pay due tribute to the former member for Lilley who did an enormous amount of work, as did the then member for Griffith, the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) and others in this House. We are now getting to a stage where we are starting to see the whole scheme of things develop. Already we are starting to see that the people of Queensland, and indeed of Australia, will get very real development and increases in the amount of money that is spent in that State. We will see that wealth flow throughout the community and create so many of those jobs that we desire to be created. It upsets me when fellow Queenslanders almost seem to be going out of their way to rubbish the development of the new Brisbane International Airport. One thing that we should all be working together for is to ma~e sure that we have the-best possible airport facility in Australia so that we can continue to attract those international carriers, and continue to get those international visitors coming into the holiday State of Queensland, to spend their money and to create those jobs that are so urgently needed. The start is already there; it is happening.
Last year, in Queensland alone, with inadequate air services and with inadequate terminal facilities, 3,500 brand new jobs were created in tourism. These were jobs that were never there before.
If one goes by the overseas experience it is obvious to the meanest intelligence that unless there are the proper airport facilities first the carriers will not come in. That is why the carriers are literally lining up now to come into Brisbane. In the last few months three have requested the right to come into Brisbane and more are interested. All I hope is that we can get the new airport developed and finished so that Queensland can reap the very real benefit that that airport will bring, not only to the people of Brisbane but also to the whole of Queensland and, indeed, the nation.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (8.47)-Mr Deputy Speaker-
Motion (by Mr Hodges) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
, ESTIMATES COMMITTEE E
Membership
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received advice from the Opposition Whip that he has nominated Dr Theophanous to be a member of Estimates Committee E in place

of Mr Innes for the consideration of the expenditure for the Department of Industrial Relations.
CRIMES (CURRENCY) BILL 1981
Bill received from the Senate, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (8.48)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will update and revise all existing Australian law relating to the counterfeiting of currency, both domestic and foreign, and Commonwealth and foreign government bonds and other forms of securities. It will also create offences in relation to reproduction of Australian paper money and prescribed securities. This legislation, when in operation, will also enable Australia to accede to the International Convention for the Suppression of Counterfeiting Currency, which was opened for signature at Geneva on 20 April 1929.
The International Convention waS made under the auspices of the Council of the League of Nations at Geneva in 1929. By a resolution of the United Nations General Assembly in November 1963 any member of that body may accede to the Convention. In all some 70 countries, including the United Kingdom, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, France, West Germany and Switzerland, are now. bound by the Convention. Australia has been unable to accede to the Convention because of hitherto inadequate legislation which has not enabled Australia to reciprocate the protection afforded to Australian currency by a large number of member countries of the United Nations.
The Convention seeks to ensure the prevention and punishment of offences relating to the counterfeiting of currency wherever those offences may be committed. The Convention is aimed particularly at counterfeiting operations involving more than one country; suppression of operations of this nature could, in the absence of international agreement, be hindered by national boundaries. Under the Convention, each state party undertakes to provide appropriate protection against the counterfeiting of domestic and foreign currency. Before becoming a party to the Convention, each party must ensure that its legislation and its administrative organisation conform to the rules of the Convention.
There are significant inadequacies in present Commonwealth and State law dealing with counterfeiting of currencies, both Australian and

1032 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981 Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Bill

foreign. It would not be appropriate to describe

EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDIES

these inadequacies in detail but, by -way of

(CONFIDENTIALITY) BILL 1981

example, I refer to Part IV of the Crimes Act 1914

Second Reading

dealing withcouhterfeiting of coins. The prohibition on counterfeiting of currentcoin is limited to
coins that have been coined in a mint in any part

Debate resumed from 20 August, on motion by Mr MacKellar:

of the Queen's dominions orthat are lawfully curThat the Bill be now read a second time.

rent in~ any part of the Queen's dominions. These

provisions would obviously not fulfil the obliDr BLEWETT (Bonython) (8.54)-The

gations arising under. the Convention. National Epidemiological Studies (Confideniality) Bill

legislation concerning the counterfeiting of provides for the confideniality of information that

government securities was urged in a resolutionis identifiable with particular persons in relation

passed in 1969 in Mexico City at the fifth Conference.of the International Criminal Police Organisation, INTERPOL. The Government sees merit in this recommendation and accordingly counterfeiting of both foreign and domestic government bonds and other securities, while not covered by the Convention, are dealt with in the present Bill. Australian experiehcehas disclosed weaknesses in the laws relating the reproduction of coins of his-
torical interest-for example, in relationto the reproduction of the Spanish coins known as 'Holey Dollars'-and we consider that the opportunity should be taken to deal with these problems in the
leAislation now introduced.

to epidemiological studies of Vietnam veterans and any other prescribed epidemiological studies by the Commonwealth. The Bill seeks to do that by imposing quite heavy fines on the release of any information from such studies identifying particular persons. In addition, the Bill provides that documents, again identifying persons relating to those studies, cannot be produced in courts of law; nor is there to be any compulsion to divulge in a court personal information acquired during those studies. Finally, the Bill contains a provision that the legislation will be retrospective because, as we are informed, the Vietnam veterans pilot study, is already under way. Clause 12 of the Bill is to be retrospective to provide confidentiality in

relation to the studies already under way. Let me

There can be few more important objects of
legislation than protection of the currency of the nation. This is the primary purpose of the present Bill. Until now, law enforcement bodies dealing with currency frauds have had to apply piecemeal pieces of legislation, both Commonwealth and State; these have not given full satisfactory pro-
tection to Australian currency arid often no pro-

say to begin with that the Opposition supports entirelY,the procedures laid down in the Bill. The processes suggested are ones which the Opposition supports because it is quite clear that if such studies are to be successful the participants in the studies must have complete confidence that in no way will the personally identifiable material be
released.

tection at all. to the currencies of other. nations. The Bill raises two issues directly in relation to Adequate protection will now be provided by one prescribed epidemiological studies. I refer to those

comprehensive piece of legislation. Because the briefly. First of all, there is of course the special

Bill will affect all sections of the community, the study for which this Bill was drawn up, that is, the

Government introduced the Bill into the other pilot study persentlyunder way examining the

place during the autumn sittings and let it lie beeffects of herbicides on Vietnam veterans. Sec-

fore the Parliament until the Budget session to enondly, the Bill leaves it open to consider other

able it to be studied and interested parties to epidemiological studies, other studies which may

supply comments. This Bill has now been passed be prescribed by the Commonwealth. It is to those

by the other place and comes before this House two issues that I wish briefly to refer. I take first

for discussion and passage. It is the Government's the latter issue, that is, the possibility that the

intention that the legislation will not be brought Government could prescribe other

into force until the expiration of at least three epidemiological studies. That gives the Oppo-

months after passage. This will ailow the comsition an opportunity to renew a request that has

munity to become acquainted with its terms and been made on the Government several times in

persons in possession of art-icles contravening its the past 18 months to initiate an.epilemiological

provi~ions to surrender them to the authorities. I study of the 2,000 Australians involved in the

commend the Bill to the House.

Maralinga nuclear tests undertaken in the

mid-1950s. As long ago as 1978 my colleague the

honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) ques-

Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned. tioned the then Minister for Health on the need

Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Bill 8 September 1981 REPRESENTA'fIVES 1033

for a follow-up study of people who had worked at the Maralinga test sites in the mid-1950s.
In grievance debates in mid-1980 I pressed the present Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) for an inquiry into the health fall-ouf from the Maralinga tests. I briefly repeat what I said on 15 May 1980, when I pointed out the 'need for a serious approach to an epidemiological study of the 2,000 Australians who worked at Maralinga during the test period, to look at the incidence and pattern of disease and the medical histories of that group of 2,000 Australians'. In many ways it was a relatively easy task to trace the individuals because the effective security arrangements that were involved Jead at least to relatively easy identification of the l1ames and the orginal addresses of the people involved, which is not often possible when trying to conduct past studies of that nature. Again, in particular relation to this proposal, already considerable monitoring material is available in the field of radioactive induced illnesses which would ,be useful in such an epidemiological study. Finally,. such a study, as with all such studies, would need to measure those 2,000 Australians,-or their case histoties in many cases, unfortunately-against a controlled group of Australians not involved in such tests.
To date the Government's response has been very disappointing. The previous Minister for Health claimed monitoring procedures at Maralinga were so stringent as to be. quite adequate; therefore, there was no exposure to dangerous radiation. As the evidence mounted that position became untenable and the second position taken by the Ministers was the buck passing of responsibility. There was an inglorious period when the Minister for Health passed responsibility on to the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner), who passed the responsibility on to the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen), who quickly shrugged it off to the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick). It finished with the Minister for National Development and Energy in what was the third response of the Government, namely, its refusal to have an epidemiological study but its desire instead to have the notion of individual responsibility-that individuals should come along and make claims. Let me say that is a very haphazard way of dealing with the procedure. Not only I but also newspapers not usually sympathetic to positions occupied by the Opposition thought it was a haphazard approach. The Adelaide Advertiser said that Senator Carrick's proposal on individual responsibility

showed the Government's 'curious sense of non-

involvement' in the whole problem of MaraJinga.

The Melbourne Age stated:

.

The case For a proper and independent enquiry into the whole messy business was in no way answered .by Senator
Carrick's statement

Indeed, I think since then the evidence has confirmed that that was not the way in which to tackle this kind of problem. Very few individuals came forward in 'response t6 Senator Carrick's appeal, which resulr was to be expected. I think that to turn the issue into a. matter of individual responsibility is a most unsatisfactory way o(dealing with the problem. In many ways I regret it very much because. we could have made quite a significant contribution, I believe, in that rather circumscribed situation, in conducting an epidemiological study which in fact would throw light on problems' of interest not just to Australians but to the international community. I am glad to note that at the beginning of this year the Returned Services League requested an epidemiological study of the people involved in the Maralinga tests along the. lines we originally advocated. I renew my request to the Minister to give further consideration to the possibility of such a study under the provisions of this Bill, opening the way as he has to, I hope, a more active governmental involvement in such examinations.

The second issue relates tQthe prescribed study of the effects of herbicides on Australians serving in Vietnam. First of all, again the Opposition supports such an epidemiological study. We believe it could contribute to gathering knowledge of the effects of agent orange and other defoliants on human health. Again it could make an international, not just an Australian contribution. It must be pointed out at this stage that we in the Labor Party believe that a more urgent response is required to the demands of the Vietnam veterans on this issue. Simply to provide this epidemiological study is an insufficient response to the present claims. For one thing, I do not believe that the veterans should be expected to wait for a prolonged epidemiological study, however valuable that study may be, particulilriy as the Minister pointed out himself that at the present stage the actual study is not underway. All we have is a pilot study. He said:

Its purpose is not to yield findings relating to possible effects
of herbicides but to test a number of possible ways of carrying out a major survey,

At this stage, 10 to 12 years after the experience of these men and some women in Vietnam, the Government has got to the stage only of setting up a pilot study to find out what sorts of questions shotdd be asked in the major study. Obviously,

1034 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981 Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Bill

any long run conclusions are a considerable time away. It is our view that the Australian Vietnam veterans should not be expected to wait so long for some response from the Government to the claims they are making.
Whatever intrinsic merits this epidemiological study has-we are not denying these-it is being used politically to postpone any response to the claims of the Vietnam veterans. As I said, in most cases it is 10 years since veterans came into contact with the whole range of defoliants in Vietnam which clearly possessed toxic properties. There is enough evidence about agent orange, agent purple and the rest of the defoliants to suggest that they clearly have toxic properties and certain effects. We do not know about these things as scientifically as we would like to know but there is sufficient evidence to indicate their toxic effects. We do not believe that Vietnam veterans should be required to wait further years when sufficient information is already available, not to answer all the questions in a proper and complete scientific manner but certainly to assess adequately compensation claims being made by the Vietnam veterans. Already $2m has been appropriated for the pilot study. Certainly the claims being made by the Vietnam veterans at the moment are well below that figure.
Therefore, in addition to the epidemiological study, the Labor Opposition supports the need for an independent judicial inquiry into the Vietnam veterans' claims. We say that this inquiry should have broad terms of reference. They would need to include, for instance, such things as an examination of the exposure of both troops and public servants to defoliants in Vietnam. They would need to consider political and military responsibility for the usage of chemicals in the period between 1964 and 1972 in Vietnam. They would need to investigate the medical and psychiatric effects on people exposed in Vietnam and their spouses and dependants. They would need to include a thorough investigation of all appropriate medical and scientific literature. There is a lot of medical and scientific literature around about which judgments can be made even though we might not get the precise superb scientific data that we may ultimately get in many years' time from the proposal to which this Bill refers.
We hope that this inquiry will have the power to recommend changes to repatriation legislation, to recommend treatment programs which may be required and to consider the current and future use of such chemicals in the Australian environment. We suggest that the independent judicial tribunal should be headed by either a judge or a lawyer who is experienced in the compensation

law area and who is backed up by the kind of expertise that he would need to make an assessment of the medical and scientific literature. Therefore, I propose an amendment to the second reading of the Bill. I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words: 'Whilst supporting the provisions of the Bill, the House is of the opinion that the Vietnam Veterans Study referred to in the Bill should be supported by a wide judicial inquiry.
As many members on this side of the House wish to contribute to a debate which we believe is of great importance, I will shorten my remarks to give them the opportunity to make their statements and to develop the arguments in relation to this case. Given the numerous professions from honourable members on the other side of the House, particularly during election campaigns, about their concern over this issue, I hope that they will also take a little of my time to respond to the proposals we are making.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (9.7)-1 second the amendment. As the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) has pointed out, whilst the Opposition is not opposed to the provisions of the Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Bill-the Bill provides necessary and desirable legislative safeguards to protect the privacy of citizens who provide relevant information for the benefit of epidemiological studies-the legislation in its impact is primarily directed at one and only one such study, that is the study currently being undertaken in respect of Vietnam veterans. The Bill is narrowly drawn and is very much within the tradition of this Government in its dealing with the medical, physical and social problems of Vietnam veterans.
The amendment moved by my colleague, the shadow Minister for Health, will provide the third occasion in three years on which the Parliament has had an opportunity to deal with the merits and the justice of the claims of Vietnam veterans. In dealing with these claims I will refer the House briefly to the history of the problem. I believe it can be said fairly that on all the occasions when Vietnam veterans have put their claims for a judicial inquiry fairly and squarely to members of the Parliament, the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) and the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Government has chosen to ignore the justice of those claims and has resorted to a wide variety of scientific gobbledegook in order to avoid facing up to what I believe are very just, real, important and pertinent problems.

Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Bill 8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1035

It is perhaps ironic that those of us on this side of the House who were opposed to Australia's involvement in Vietnam and to the conscription of Australian youth to fight in Vietnam are the people who in this Parliament are the spokesmen for Malcolm Fraser's forgotten warriors. It is perhaps a sad thing that when the Government-the Prime Minister was then Minister for Defencewas in full cry telling the House how urgent was the need to conscript Australian youth to go to Vietnam the Government benches were packed. The cries of support that he had on that occasion were loud and overwhelming. Australian society has been divided on the correct historial perspective of whether that was a just or proper war for Australia to be involved in. We can continue to argue about that.
I find it sad, now it comes to dealing with the
claims of Vietnam veterans, that the Government benches are empty. The Prime Minister is not to be seen and there are no spokesmen on the Government side of the House who are prepared to say: 'These men were exposed to a range of chemicals. They were placed in situations where they could not have known or understood the serious psychological and important physiological effects on their whole lives and the lives of their families for years to come'. What has occurred is a series of statements to this Parliament on behalf of Ministers of the Crown on a number of occasions which have been scientifically false and are now medically disproven. All that has happened is that Vietnam veterans have had to wait while the Government said: 'We are taking a great deal of action. We have had a very important scientific study going on for two years and at the end of another two years we will have some test results'. Of course, what the Minister, the Government and the Prime Minister are not telling the people of Australia is that the Vietnam veterans, their wives and their families are living with those problems now and are dying and the tribunals which were vaunted by the Minister and the Government as providing justice in this situation have become nothing more than an instrument of Government policy.
Let we deal with this sad history. It ought to be reflection on every member of this Parliament, more particularly on the patriots on the other side who never stopped urging that these young men should go off to fight according to their political view of the world or be given the alternative of going to gaol. The Government benches are now empty and silent. Well may they be silent. I turn to the statement that was made to the Parliament on 21 February 1980 by the then Minister for Veterans' Affairs. Dealing with the problem of

exposure to herbicides in Vietnam, the Minister said:
. . . no conclusive scientific evidence at this time that any of the conditions, except chloracne, reported by veterans and deformities in their children are related to any of the chemical components of agent orange or other herbicides used in Vietnam . . .
That was a fairly clear statement. One is entitled to presume that when the Minister made that statement he did so on the best scientific evidence available to him. What are the facts? At the time the Minister made that statement the scientific adviser of the Vietnam Veterans' Association had placed in the Minister's own hand, in the presence of the Minister's top scientific adviser days before
that statement was made to the Parliament, the report of the World Health Organisation scientific inquiry which indicated the range of scientific evidence which made that statement absolute nonsense. I invite any member of this Parliament or the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar), who is at the table, to tell the Parliament that the statement made by the then Minister, the honourable member for Fisher (Mr Adermann), on 21
February 1980 was an accurate statement or a statement which would now be argued for in the body of scientific or medical knowledge now available on this matter.
Of course, a further statement was made on 31 March 1980. On that occasion the Minister announced a major study-now the subject matter of this Bill. Again he raised what was then the formal view of the Government. In the statement he expressed his doubt-this was the purpose of the inquiry-'whether exposure to herbicides would result in health problems'. That was the statement made to the Parliament on the basis of the evi-
dence given to the Minister by the best of scientific and medical evidence available. Let us think of the problem. At that stage the Vietnam veterans, in order to have the merits of their case judicially examined because no justice was to be found within the realm of this Government, had organised themselves in seeking a class action to be prosecuted not in the courts of Australia, where we do not have class actions, but in the courts of the United States of America. What an incredible indictment of the justice of the Prime Minister and of the views of this Government that the only place these men-some of whom had'volunteered, some of whom were Army regulars and some of whom were conscripts-could go to get a judicial assessment, which is all they were seeking, of their rights to compensation based upon the physical, physiological and mental conditions which many of them were suffering as a result of their exposure to herbicides, was the courts in the United States of America. Did the Minister know

1036 REPRESENTATIVES ,8 September 1981 Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Bill

tha.P Of course, he knew it, because at the very time he was making his statement to the Parliament saying 'we are very concerned to have a scientific investigation to find out whether there are any health problems', he had received from Sir William Keys, President of the Returned Services League-not even Sir William Keys's best friends could describe him as a young radical-a document based upon an examination of the evidence which was to be presented in the courts in the United States by the legal adviser to the RSL; not the legal adviser of the Vietnam veterans. That view was communicated to the Minister. What did it say? I quote from Sir William Keys's letter:
Following extensive investigation the national solicitor Mr John Button has reported that there is overwhelming circumstantial evidence and medical and scientific evidence of a substantial nature that indicates the possible success of the 'certification of the class action that is contemplated and its outcome.
The words that I rely on are 'there is overwhelming circumstantial evidence and medical and scientific evidence'. We are not dealing with chemical compounds the nature of which is unknown. There is a great body of scientific knowledge available. That is the point that has been continually minimised by this Government and continually obfuscated in this Parliament. It is interesting to note that the then Minister, Mr Adermann, in presenting this whole question, suggested to the House: 'We will have an epidemiological study but we do not really have to worry about the problems that bedevil Vietnam veterans. We have the Repatriation Review Tribunal and it will deal with individual cases as they come before it and apportion justice and equity on the merits of the claims as they come forward'. That would have been fair enough, and if that had happened I believe there would be much less consternation and much less concern within the rank of Vietnam, veterans.
What are the facts? As at 31 March 1981, 749 claims had been received and 73 cases accepted as service-related, but none were accepted as causally related to chemical exposure. What is the explanation for that? The explanation is very simple. On the one occasion when a requeSt for a pension had been made and knocked back, an appeal was heard in Sydney. The Vietnam veterans ,chose the case as a test case and made it perfectly ,clear to the Tribunal that they wanted to bring forward scientific evidence, and to fly in scientific advisers to argue the case for exposure to chemicals in Vietnam being the basis upon which the pension was sought. As a matter of courtesy they informed the Tribunal that that was their intention and that that was the basis upon which the claim was put The case was due to be

heard and the Tribunal sent out a message that it had looked at the file again and the pension would be granted, that it would not be necessary to argue the question of exposure to herbicides because the pension was being granted on the basis of warrelated disabilities. I do not believe that that happened because someone on the Tribunal picked up the file. I believe it happened, and has happened in every case, because the Government, the Minister and the Department have made it clear that they do not want ,a test case or a series of test cases that open up the question of compensation due and payable to Vietnam veterans and their families on the basis of exposure to herbicides in Vietnam.
I refer honourable members who are'interested in this problem to the recent report to the Government on pesticides used in Vietnam hostilities and their use in Australian agriculture. That is the Government's own dOCUinent, and at page 32 it makes it perfectly clear that herbicides to which Australian forces were exposed in Viet~ nam were used under circumstances where it was impossible to determine the extent to which regulations, which were designed to cover the safe usage of those herbicides, were applied. The Army does not know, but it is honest enough to say that it does not know. The document also indicates the range, complexities and nature of the physical and mental disorders occasioned to ex-servicemen who were exposed.
I will finish on this very simple point. The Government is acting as though Vietnam veterans are asking for something very special when they ask for a judicial inquiry. The lowest citizen in this, community who walks out and commits mayhem, murder, or any kind of social outrage, by virtue of the processes of law in this land will have a judicial assessment made of all the factors that caused him to act in that way, a judicial assessment upon which his behaviour will be judged. The Vietnam veterans are not asking for something which is excessive. They are not asking for compensation per se. They are saying: 'We want a judicial tribunal, a judge, preferably one experienced in matters of industrial law and industrial accident. We are prepared to go before that judicial tribunal, present the full range of our scientific evidence, put our experts in the box and let them be cross-examined. We want the community to judge the merits or the justice of our claims on the basis of that assessment.' Has a more reasonable proposition ever'been put to a government, a proposition which, by its very nature, demands a response from this Government? For many of these men it is a matter of life and death.

Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Bill 8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1037

I have before me a very sad letter from a woman. in the constituency of my colleague the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child). The woman wrote to the Prime Minister and pointed out the change in her husband's nature, his tendency to violence, his fits of depression, his physical i11ness. She asked the Prime Minister to intercede on behalf of her husband, who was a veteran. It took her three months to get a response, and the Prime Minister said there would be a study and nothing would happen. That man hanged himself from a tree.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HARRIS (Chisholm) (9.27)-The purpose of the Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Bill is to provide for the confidentiality of information colIected in epidemiological studies of Vietnam veterans and any other prescribed epidemiological study conducted by or on behalf of the Commonwealth. It is designed to guarantee the privacy of people taking part in such surveys, in this instance the Vietnam veterans who are taking part in the pilot study. If any criticism can be directed at this Bill it is only that it was not brought into the House long ago, indeed before the present study was commenced. 1 note that the Opposition supports the Bill.
It is apparent that no one is likely to give frank, detailed information about his personal or medical history if there is a likelihood of that information coming out into the open. The present Vietnam veterans pilot study will involve examination of case histories of veterans regarding, for example, their physical capacities or incapacities, possibly their ability or inability to have children, and various psychiatric behavioural problems.
A epidemiological study is defined in the Bill as being a study of the distribution of physical, mental and social conditions within the community. It is not restricted simply to studies, of disease. 'Prescribed study' includes the 'Vietnam veterans study' and of course can include other future Commonwealth epidemiological studies declared by regulation to be studies to which the provisions of this Bill wi11 apply.
To return to the example of the present Vietnam veterans' study, to reveal or have available to the public information relating to a Vietnam veteran's mental or physical condition or to his social condition could put at risk the veteran's future in at least three distinct ways. The list is not exclusive. In some situations it could affect a veteran's employment opportunities. It could prejudice a claim later to be made before a court or tribunal

for damages or compensation. Further, matters may be revealed which would harm a veteran's personal relationships; in particular, his matrimonial relationship. It would be quite unjust and unfair to put these men at risk in this way. This Bill, by its provisions regarding secrecy, protection of documents and the imposition of penalties for breaches, will ensure the privacy to which these men are entitled.
1 wish to point out to those veterans who have already taken part in the present study that this Bill wilI have the effect of protecting them in relation to any contribution they have already made. Clause 12 of the Bill provides that the new Act will extend to information given or documents prepared or obtained before the commencement of the Act. Of course, the legislation is not just to provide protection to veterans. The fact that it guarantees privacy makes it very much more likely that veterans will be willing to take part in the study.
I think it is worth pointing out that the Bill does not inhibit an ex-serviceman from making his history open if he wishes. There is nothing in the Bill which requites a man to keep his history secret. There is a variety of ways, if he in fact wishes to bring it out, in which he may do so, whether it be through Senate committees, the Press or by instituting litigation on his own behalf. I should also point out that clause 11 of the Bill permits the publication or divulgence to a court of conclusions based on statistics derived from or procedures used in a study, provided such information would not identify the individual. The honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) may at least consider that this provision will be of real value to veterans should they subsequently institute proceedings in this country. This Bill provides protection to which people taking part in studies of the kind presently being conducted are entitled. I support the Bill.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (9.33)-This Government must institute a judicial inquiry immediately or lose all credibility in the eyes of thousands of Australian servicemen.
Motion (by Mr Hodges) proposed:
That the honourable member be not further heard.
Mrs Child-Mr Deputy Speaker, the Opposition does not intend to call for a division but 1 would like to register a protest.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (9.34)-1 thank honourable members for their contribution to the debate. I shall just point out a couple of things very briefly as I know that

1038 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981 Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Bill

the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson) wishes to make a speech about the Budget. I am glad that the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) supports the Bill. He mentioned other studies being possible under the terms of this Bill and he was quite correct. He referred also to the workers at Maralinga during the 1950s. I point out to. the honourable member for Bonython and to the House the text of Senator Carrick's statement in the other place on 25 March this year. as recorded on pages 719 and 720 of the Senate Hansard. Senator Carrick made it absolutely clear that the Government was encouraging people who may have been at Maralinga during that period to come forward. He also invited the Australian Nuclear Veterans Association to provide lists of people who may have been involved at that time. I believe this is a very clear indication by the Government that it is anxious to contact people who may have been involved at that time. That picks up the point made by the honourable member for Bonython in his address to the House.
I think there was very little relationship to the contents of the Bill in the remarks of the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding). He made his position clear in relation to other aspects of this situation. In relation to the amendment moved by the Opposition, I say only that any judicial inquiry would need to be backed up by scientific evidence. The honourable member for Melbourne Ports stated that there is an ample amount of scientific evidence. There is some dispute about the applicability of some of this evidence. I simply make the point that any judicial inquiry would need to be backed up by scientific evidence. Of course, this is what the Government is seeking to do by the processes it has set in train. That, of course, bears little relationship to the Bill under consideration by the House.
I believe that the Bill advances the situation significantly in that it protects the special interests of individuals involved in any inquiries. I reiterate the point made in the second reading speech, which was acknowledged by the honourable member for Bonython; that under the terms of the Bill it is possible to undertake other epidemiological studies in the future, not only in relation to aspects of this particular inquiry but also in relation to any others that may come forward. I commend the Bill to the House. The Government rejects the amendment.
Question put:
That the words proposed to be omitted (Dr Blewett's amendment) stand part of the question.
The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr A. W. Jarman)

Ayes

62

Noes

39

Majority

23

AYES
Adermann. A. E.
Baume. M.E. Birney. R. J. BouTchier,J. W. Bradfield. J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown. N.A. Bungey. M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. O. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton. J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman. W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D. B. Dean.A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Fife,W.C. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom, R. J. Hall. Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges.J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D.
Hyde,J. M. Jull,D. F.
Killen, D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir. Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,l. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. w.
Viner, R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewell,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G.
Charles. D. E. Child,J. Cross,M.D.
Cunningham, B. T. Carling, E. E.
Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N.
Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L.

NOES

Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Jacobi, R. Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountrord, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scotl, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Anthony, J. D. Falconer, P. D. Edwards, H. R. Robinson, Ian Macphee,l. M.

Hayden, W. G. Young,M.J. Cohen, B. Innes, U. E. Keating, P. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1039

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr MacKellar) read a third time.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed from 27 August, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (9.43)-1 am indebted to my colleague the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) for allowing me to speak on the Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82 tonight prior to my departure for overseas. 1 am very glad to be able to participate with the Opposition in indicting this Budget for its failure to measure up to the expectations of the Australian people. On 18 August the Budget was introduced. 1 suppose in the minds of many people that Budget is no longer a political event. It was deliberately contrived and designed to be an innocuous parliamentary measure. 1 think that in itself is a very interesting situation because this Government is a past master at public relations. It is extremely competent and capable in causing the Australian people to be confused and, in fact, it engages in what 1 call pressure cooker politics. It has the capacity to let the steam out progressively over a period and cause a Budget to appear to be quite innocuous. 1 think in this sense the Government tends to involve itself in a thimble and pea process.
It is interesting what has to be put together with the Budget to see the product of this Government's misdemeanours and shortcomings. It is interesting to put together a number of the events which occurred in the pre-Budget period. 1 especially make reference to such matters as the great dramas described as the Loan Council and the. Premiers Conference. People seem to forget those things when this Budget is brought down. A great deal of hypocrisy is indulged in during Loan Council proceedings, proceedings which of course have a great bearing on the activity of the other significant arm of government in Australia-the States. We know that in the Loan Council meetings there were no increases but, in fact, significant cuts in the capacity of the States to engage in borrowings. That is an amazing situation in the light of the fact that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) prevailed on the States to prepare submissions in respect of large scale projects. 1know that in November 1979 the Prime

Minister wrote a letter to the Premier of NeW South Wales. 1 seek leave to incorporate the letter in Hansard.

Leave granted.

The document read as follows-

My Dear Premier,
In my energy policy statement of June 27, 1979, I drew attention to Australia's abundant coal resources from which most of our electricity is generated.

Recent and prospective increases in world energy prices, and disruptions to supplies of crude oil and petroleum prod-
ucts highlight the potential for Australia's economic development of those resources. In particular, Australia is now more
favourably placed to attract energy-intensive exportorientated industries, especially those involving the processing of minerals using substantial quantities of electricity
generated from coal. Coal-generated electricity is also an increasingly attractive alternative to expensive oil in domestic, commercial and industrial applications.

The Commonwealth Government has noted that a number of projects for electricity-intensive industries such as aluminium smelters have recently been announced and that several State governments are implementing major programs to expand electricity supply capacity to meet their requirements.

At the Loan Council meeting in November last year the Commonwealth supported a number of proposals for special
additions to State borrowing programs for electricity supply projects within the infrastructure financing guidelines. You will recall also that at the June 1979 Loan Council meeting,
the Commonwealth advised that it would be prepared to consider additional projects under the infrastructure guidelines: these additional proposals are to be considered at the Special
Loan Council meeting in December.

In view of the changed world energy situation, it is import-
ant that adequate electricity generation capacity be available in the next decade and beyond. I am therefore inviting all
State governments to reassess the prospective demands on them for electricity and, if necessary, submit proposals for consideration under the infrastructure financing guidelines for
new coal-based electricity supply projects with a view to achieving an acceleration of their electricity supply capital works programs. Any such proposals should be additional to,
and not simply be in substitution for, projects which would have proceeded and been funded under other programs.

As with other infrastructure proposals, any such coal-based

electricity supply projects would be evaluated having regard

to their viability, funds available from other sources and the

Commonwealth's overall economic policy objectives at the

tim~

.

This invitation is extended on the basis that any additional
electricity projects approved, together with similar projects
already approved under the infrastructure guidelines, would constitute an expanded program of electricity generation on a
national level. This could greatly assist the development of en-
ergy intensive industries and make an important contribution to Australia's economic growth and employment opportunities over the next decade and beyond.

This initiative is proposed by the Commonwealth as an integral part of our national energy policy.

Yours sincerely, Malcolm Fraser.

Mr LES JOHNSON-I thank the House. The Prime Minister prevailed on the Premier to prepare submissions which would enable this State to utilise coal, and prepare submissions which had

1040 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No. 1) 1981-82

regard to the energy producing capacity of the State and the need to provide low power costs and the like. Having fulfilled that obligation, the Premier of New South Wales found that almost overnight there was a change of direction. Now, of course, it is doubtful whether some of the great power stations which were put into the planning process will be proceeded with. That in itself is a significant matter that in bygone times might have been thought of as being in the context of a Budget. But that part of the dirty work was done earlier.
The Premiers Conference had the effect of depriving the States of a large amount of revenue for public purposes. It is significant to mention the public purposes issue. There is no use in talking about thousands of millions of dollars unless one has regard to whether it is for public health services, dental health care, women's refuges and matters of that kind. We know that the States received $6,54Im at the Premiers Conference but we know that, because of the rate of inflation and the like, they should have received $6,821m. So there was a $280m shortfall in their general revenue. In addition there was a cut of some $267m in their health program funds. Again I place on record that every Premier throughout the Commonwealth strongly objected. Some people might be tending to forget that great drama that took place in Parliament House when in another thimble and pea process, in a Mandrake the Magician like way the Prime Minister was forced to put his hand into the kitty and produce another $7Im-again all done outside the context of the Budget.
I have in my hand a telex from the Premier of New South Wales to the Prime Minister in which he protests about the whole rearrangement of tax sharing. I will not have time to talk about it tonight in detail. I have already approached the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) to have this telex incorporated in Hansard. I now seek leave to have it incorporated.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
28.5.81 The Rt Hon. J. M. Fraser, C.H., M.P., Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia,
Canberra. I refer to your telex of 12 May, 1981 concerning your proposals for new tax sharing arrangements.
Your reference to a tax sharing base settled at the conference and to a new approach adopted at the conference is a serious misstatement of the events that took place on 4 May.
New South Wales' views on the original Commonwealth proposal were set out very clearly by me at the premiers' conference on 4 May. There was no acceptance on my part in any way of the Commonwealth's successive proposals. I would

also remind you that consideration of your "after dinner" offer was deferred pending preparation of a paper and never resumed. This is documented on page 140 of the transcript.
I repeat that I reject absolutely any variation from the existing formula which provides for the States to receive as a minimum entitlement 39.87 per cent of the personal income tax collections of the previous year.
It is completely erroneous to state that the States were requesting a share of total tax. The transcript of the proceedings of the meeting confims that no premier argued or even supported the proposition that total tax would be an appropriate base for tax sharing.
Your telex states that a share of total taxes should help meet the States' request to reduce the degree of uncertainty in the level of funds available from year to year from Commonwealth sources. This claim is ludicrous in view of the fact that the Commonwealth reserves the right to change the proportion of taxes received by the States from year to year.
It is clear that the proposals presented at the conference on 4 May represent a clear breach of understandings between the Commonwealth and State governments.
I might add that the amount involved so far as personal income tax reimbursements to the six States is concerned could be at least $260 million and as much as $340 million. Combined with the "hospital tax" you are forcing on the States, designed so obviously to cut Federal payments to the States, the total amount would be almost $600 million.
Your proposal concerning hospital fees will mean that from 1982-83, hospitals will not be able to use the increased fees paid by patients to improve their services and health care. It is now clear that your proposal is to reduce Federal contributions to hospitals by 60 per cent of the revenue obtained from the proposed fee increase. From 1982-83, Federal contributions will be reduced by 100 per cent of additional revenue produced by fee increases.
In view of the unfinished discussions on 4 May of tax sharing and hospital funding, I request that both these items be listed on the agenda for the next conference on 19 June.
Mr LES JOHNSON-In his telex, the Premier of New South Wales, stated:
I repeat that I reject absolutely any variation from the existing formula which provides for the States to receive as a minimum entitlement 39.87 per cent of the personal income tax collections of the previous year.
It is completely erroneous to state that the States were requesting a share of total tax. The transcript of the proceedings of the meeting confirms that no Premier argued or even supported the proposition that total tax would be an appropriate base for tax sharing.
. So it goes on, spelling out this misrepresentation of the States' position and objecting to the denial of funds which resulted. In respect of the health situation, in his telex to the Prime Minister the Premier of New South Wales stated:
It is now clear that your proposal is to reduce Federal contributions to hospitals by 60 per cent of the revenue obtained from the proposed fee increase. From 1982-83, Federal contributions will be reduced by 100 per cent of additional revenue produced by fee increases.
Of course, this is another very significant matter which was divorced from the Budget. On Budget night many people thought: 'This is. not terribly bad', but all these other things had taken place at the Premiers Conference and the Loan Council.

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1041

They are only a part of that kind of scenario. One can think of the health program announced well before the Budget. It is another pernicious imposition on the Australian people. Whereas we all were contributing according to our capacity to pay, in some measure at least, in connection with one another's health costs, as we do in respect of one another's education costs and defence costs, the Government has decided to cause everybody to pay the same amount regardless of how sick they may be on the one hand and how rich or poor they may be on the other hand. But this program was leaked out or exuded out well before the Budget so that on Budget night the Budget did not appear to be a terribly bad package deal. So much of the dirty work had been done beforehand.
We have almost forgotten the razor gang provisions, which again were not announced in the context of the Budget. Again that announcement was part of the pressure cooker process of letting a bit of steam out and allowing the people to become accustomed to it. What a package deal of iniquitous proposals were contained in the razor gang propositions. I think we abandoned $350m worth of capital works which involved the embellishment of life for people in many parts of Australia. In respect of the Public Service the razor gang proposals, which were leaked before the Budget, involved some 11,000 jobs. Then, of course, there were all those other cuts and curtailments involving a saving to the Government of some $560m a year. Is not public memory short? Even our own memories as parliamentarians are incredibly short.
It is worth mentioning that this Government announced before the Budget so the Budget would not look too bad that it proposed to close down even the public bookshops-the means by which people can know what government is about-and all those other things. Australia's biggest shopping centre, owned by the people of this country and doing well-the Belconnen Mall-is to be disposed of. Of course, Havelock House, a guest house in Canberra, the blue metal quarry, the hot mix plant and even the migrant hostels are to be turned over to private enterprise. These things are almost inconceivable. Somebody put a notice on the Speaker's chair a 'for sale' notice on the night of the razor gang announcements. There is not much left to sell, is there?
The migrant hostels are to be turned over to cause someone to make some money out of those people who in many cases are suffering from deprivation and many other deficiencies. Canberra's retail market is to be sold. The Australian Government Clothing Factory and the ordnance factories involved with the defence of Australia

are to be turned over to private enterprise. I have fond recollections of an organisation called the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation. It was designed to encourage lenders to maximise their loans to home loan borrowers. A good thing about this lucrative activity is that it has been in the name of the public. In other parts of the world-in America especially-it is a very lucrative concern run by private enterprise, such as the Mortgage Guarantee Insurance Corporation. It is a gilt-edged business. Because it is doing so well, not because it is failing, the razor gang decided to get rid of that as well.
Can anyone imagine our air terminals being sold to private enterprise? Can anyone actually conceive of such a situation? We even toyed with the idea of getting rid of the Glebe Estate. We had second thoughts about that. The experimental building station is another case in point. So the list goes on. There are inquiries to see the extent to which we can sell off Telecom Australia, Australia Post and Trans Australia Airlines. All of these things were announced outside the context of the Budget, in this process of letting out a bit of steam at a time on the assumption that the Australian people are so damned silly that they will not remember what was done in the year after the previous election, not the year before the pending election, in the hope that when we get to election time these things will not count a damn.
But, Mr Deputy Speaker, that is only a part of the business. The Budget does not provide very much that is very useful to people. This Government, which is supposed to be concerned with reducing public expenditure, is increasing its outlays by 12.6 per cent to some $40,862m. Defence expenditure has gone up by some 16.3 per cent, and represents about 10 per cent of the Budget. There is an increase in social welfare expenditure in that there are a few marginal changes in social welfare arrangements affecting a quarter of the beneficiaries of family allowances; that is, those people with larger families. There are a few marginal movements in unemployment benefits but not for the kids under 18 years of age who the Government has stigmatised as dole bludgers. They are not regarded as being affected by the consumer price index and the upward movement in costs and prices. Oh no, we can cause them to starve. But otherwise unemployment benefits have gone up marginally for older people.
There are a few other little bits and pieces. The patient contribution under the pharmaceutical benefits scheme is to rise by 45c to $3.20. I think it was $1.50 when Labor was last in government. We used to call it the free medical scheme but now every time one gets a prescription under that

1042 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

free medical scheme it costs $3.20. The bigger the family, the bigger the imposition. So it goes on. The great benefaction was in respect of foreign aid. Because the Prime Minister goes overseas periodically and has to deliver something to those people overseas, our aid has increased from 0.43 per cent to 0.45 per cent of gross domestic product. We have seen the Community Youth Support Scheme abandoned. That is one of the most iniquitous things any government could possibly do. We have seen further staff ceiling reductions and we have also had advice about many other charges that will seriously undermine the living standards of many Australians.
This Government now has no wages policy and has now abandoned wage indexation. Out of 14 national wage decisions since 1975, 11 cases won less than full indexation. As a result, the pay packets of the wage earners of Australia are $29 a week short. When they start to get to the point of indignation and press for some redress we find that the whole wage indexation program is abandoned. As I have mentioned, health charges will flay people's living standards to a massive extent. I refer not only to the impost in respect of pharmaceutical benefits but also to the fact that now everyone has to belong to a fund. If honourable members do what I did the other day and join a fund at the basic rate, they will be paying no less than $530 a year. That will go up significantly in the near future. The Government has also put up the basic postage rate by 9 per cent, registered publication charges by 23 per cent, private mail boxes charges by 15 per cent-
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr Fife-I require the motion to be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes)-Private mail box charges have gone up by 15 per cent. In all, increased postal impositions amount to some $50m. This Government has decided that public instrumentalities have to pay interest and company tax as well. The same kind of thing applies to Telecom Australia. Charges for local telephone calls have gone up by 33 per cent. Before the Budget the cost of public calls doubled,

the rent of a telephone went up by $10 and the charge for the installation of a phone increased by $30. Many other matters have the effect of eroding the pay packets of the Australian worker. In the Budget itself-having talked about many things which took place before the Budget-is the most inflationary proposal that any government could contrive; that is, the increased sales tax. New sales tax impositions will raise $330m and increases in sales tax previously imposed will raise $420m-in all some $750m. There is a trend to indirect taxes which again affects the lower income people at the same rates as it affects those on higher incomes.
One way or another when we look at all these matters we realise that this Government is a tragedy for Australia. As with the governments of many other countries around the world which are under the influence of multinationals, which serve masters other than the people they are supposed to represent, we understand why there is a tendency for this Government to engage in a repression of the trade union movement. For example, we see a similar situation in Chile. We know that this Government has imposed many restrictions on the trade union movement in recent times. As the ordinary people of Australia seek to maintain their living standards we can expect further repressions and further impositions in respect of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. I say that the Budget--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Debate (on motion by Mr Shipton) adjourned.
ADJOURNMENT
Replacement Aircraft for Royal Australian Air Force-Housing-Community Youth Support Scheme-Health Insurance-New South Wales
State Election
Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (1O.4)-It has been widely rumoured that the Government will make its final choice on the new aircraft for the Royal Australian Air Force before the end of this year, possibly in the next few weeks. If this proves so, the timing of this decision and the decision itself could prove disastrous. Restricted as we are to the two United States contenders, it could prove to be the most costly mistake in economic terms and one of the most irresponsible in military terms ever made in the history of the defence procurement of Australia. These claims are not made

Adjournment-

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1043

lightly. I would like to address myself to the assertions. The Pacific Defelice Reporter pointed out in its February issue this year that the decision concerns the most costly project ever for our forces. It is a decision which will determine the nature of Australia's air defences for at least two, and possibly three, decades. This is a world where. rapid, dramatic and dangerous shifts in international military and political environments have occurred and will continue to occur. Both sides of the House will want the decision to be the right one. The issue is not one that either side would wish to be resolved in a party political atmosphere. It is in that spirit that I believe that we should question now, before it is too late, whether circumstances have sufficiently altered since the possible aircraft choices were narrowed to two for the Government to make a new assessment and to consider what may prove to be a far more appropriate, and additional, current option. Aircraft magazine in its March issue editorial, referred to the description of the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) of both the current finalists as being 'so deficient in the Australian context that neither could be ordered'. The editorial stated:
The public could well take the view that the 1979 decision to concentrate on only two aircraft was a serious error of judgment.
A lot has happened since 1979. It is no criticism of the Minister or his advisers that a period of over two years has seen changes. It would be a damning criticism if the Minister did not respond to and evaluate those changes before committing thousands of millions of dollars and shaping our air defences well into the next century. Aircraft magazine and the Pacific Defence Reporter, both highly regarded technical journals with recognised expertise, have suggested that the Government should widen its options in the aircraft decision. Aircraft magazine mentions the Panavia Tornado and the French Mirage 2000 and the Pacific Defence Reporter adds the F15. The complexities of including three additional aircraft in any widening of options are immense, particularly in the context of Australian industry participation. We could consider at least one of the options. If, as reported in the Pacific Defence Reporter, the Mirage is deficient in range and the Fl5 is as costly as the F18 contender, we could look hard at the European Tornado again. Before discussing reasons for the Tornado option, let us consider briefly the comments on the two current contenders by the Pacific Defence Reporter of February 1981. On the F16 it stated:
No matter what manner of additional capability is built into the F-16, it is never likely adequately to Fulfil the demanding role of our deFence in the Australian scenario.
On the Fl8 it stated:

The F-18, like the F-16, is in the Uniled States Air Force, is not designed For the prime roles of air deFence and strike. In neither case thereFore is there Full compatability with the Australian requirements.
These are two most serious comments. Added to the Minister's own remarks on the two contenders, it is compelling logic that in the changed circumstances of the day we should think and look again. Originally the Tornado was ruled out on the grounds of price. These grounds no longer apply. The flyaway price of the Tornado was quoted in Aviation Week earlier this year as being currently around $A13m. In April this year, the Canberra Times quoted the cost of the Fl6 as $A15m and the F18 as $27m. Let us bear in mind that the Tornado has two engines and the considerable advantage of two crew members, while the F16 has a single engine and a single crew member. It cannot be disputed that the Tornado is the only aircraft currently in production, indeed in service, with a combination of interdiction strike and air defence variants that meets all our tactical fighter force requirements. Its capability includes maritime strike, reconnaissance and air defence. It is the only aircraft capable of fulfilling all the roles presently assigned to the Mirage, the Canberra and the FIll C. There are no question marks hanging over the Tornado. It can be bought off the shelf. There were 33 Tornadoes in service--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (10.9)-In tonight's Melbourne Herald the Housing Industry Association and the Master Builders' Association of Victoria have placed an advertisement attacking the Federal Government's housing policies. They ask where Federal members stand on funds for housing. In the advertisement they say they are gravely concerned and ally themselves with the comments of the Victorian Minister for Housing, Mr Jeff Kennett. Mr Kennett is reported as fully supporting their campaign. The organisations claim that the Federal Government has a lack of understanding of the plight of Victorian home seekers. They have climbed on the Kennett bandwagon. I take it from what they say that they agree with all of Mr Kennett's recent comments, in that they call on the Federal Government to grant the States a further $400m for housing; they invite the Australian Democrats and the Independent Senator Harradine to use their numbers in the Senate to amend the Federal Budget; they claim that the policies of the Federal Minister are 'inhumane'; they are against the granting of foreign aid; they say that the Federal Government is 'not

1044 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Adjournment

really interested and does not care in terms of interest rate escalation'; and they claim that the Federal Government does not deserve to win the next election if it does not increase housing funds. I take it that those associations agree with those comments. It is implicit in the advertisement that the two associations totally reject the Federal Budget. They fail to understand that the overall Budget strategy is to reduce interest rates by budgeting for a domestic surplus and easing the overall demand for money. The two associations fail to appreciate that the Budget aims to control inflation. They fail to realise that the proposed 2t per cent sales tax is a tax for the first time on the tax avoidance cash economy. They fail to give the Federal Government any credit in the last financial year for a real increase of about 11 per cent in private dwelling investment.
Jeff Kennett is confusing welfare housing and home ownership. The Federal Government is concerned about both of these issues. Total estimated outlays on housing by the Commonwealth in the 1981-82 Budget are up by 17 per cent, or $57.9m from $341.1m to $399m. An amount of $74m has been provided for home savings grants in 1981-82 compared with expenditure of $44.6m in 1980-81. The maximum basic grant is for $2,000. As from October 1980 there is an additional bonus of $500 for families with one child and of $1,000 for families with two or more children. As from October 1980 the value limit was raised from $60,000 to $70,000.
The allocation for welfare housing, at $262.2m, is $62.2m higher than the base figure of $200m provided for in the new five-year housing agreement between the Commonwealth and the States. As I have said, the Budget Speech makes the point that the move towards eliminating the Commonwealth's Budget deficit and achieving the budgeted domestic surplus is designed, to a considerable extent, to help ease and indeed reverse the upward pressure on interest rates.
I call upon the associations to withdraw the advertisements. Furthermore, I call upon them to ask Mr Kennett why he has not got more money from his Cabinet and the Victorian cold chisel gang. I ask them to place an advertisement to this effect. This is only fair. Furthermore, I appeal to Jeff Kennett to use his best endeavours to have the proposed newspaper advertisements withdrawn. I also ask Mr Kennett to publicly withdraw his request to the Australian Democrats inviting a defeat for the Federal Government in the Senate.
I share Mr Kennett's concern for welfare housing. I am concerned about the potential effect of

current high interest rates on home ownership. But let us give the Federal Budget a fair go; let us give it time to work. I am strongly in favour of a better deal for Victoria and will fight for Lindsay Thompson to get this. Jeff Kennett's way is not the way of achieving it. Not only, I believe, have these two associations attacked the Federal Government, but they have also agreed and allied themselves with a dissident Minister in a State government. He is a Minister who does not have the support of his Premier for the way in which he is arguing the matter.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (10. 13)-Along with all of my colleagues on this side of the House I have had many requests to do what I can to retain the Community Youth Support Scheme. The decision to abruptly terminate CYSS is indicative of a serious lack of concern and understanding on the part of this Government of the feelings and interests of young unemployed people. Despite the limitations imposed by its restrictive guidelines and lack of resources, the CYSS programs have provided interest, support and opportunities for service and, in many instances, training for its 60,000 participants. It has helped to keep large numbers of young people within the community and still employable. Australia will be the worse for denying some 600 CYSS project officers jobs and the chance to work constructively with young people in the 280 CYSS projects.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics sample figures of unemployment, which exclude people who have worked for more than one hour a week, show that there are almost 100,000 teenagers still unemployed and 30,000 of these are last year's schoolleavers. We still have to take into account this year's schoolleavers. The new training places to be provided will not help many of the young people who used CYSS. The Commonwealth Employment Service provides a totally different service. Lack of staff inhibits its ability to give the type of support services to the young people that CYSS was able to give. An evaluation conducted in the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs in August 1977 found, among other things, that CYSS had provided considerable gains for participants in terms of personal and social development, confidence, morale and motivation. It found also that more resources were needed to allow the scheme to fulfil its own stated objectives.
One of the disturbing things that came out of the Department's evaluation was that the majority of CYSS participants came from underprivileged areas and that many had severe social problems. It found also that most participants had

Adjournment

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1045

been unemployed for longer periods than the average unemployed young person registered with the CES. Evaluations during 1980 were con-
ducted at Melbourne University andSwinbourne College of Advanced Education. Some of their
major results were that participation in CYSS had
reduced the incidence of anti-social activity, especially crime, among unemployed youth in-
volved. The CYSS participation had improved
the self-reliance, confidence and self-esteem of those involved, due largely to the supportive
social framework provided at the projects. It is
equally obvious that the CYSS projects achieved
success in their role as supportive mechanisms for unemployed youth.

with far greater honesty about CYSS than can any member of the Opposition, all of whom basi-
cally opposed the proposition of CYSS until, in
fact, the Government took action in the last Budget. The new converts to CYSS are making
political capital out of the unfortunate unem-
ployed, who received no support, or very little
support, from members of the Opposition through
that scheme until the week before last. However,
following the honourable member for Henty, I mention that the great bulk of the unemployed
were not, in fact, picked up by CYSS. A very
small proportion of unemployed people in
Australia benefited from CYSS. I think that point must be recognised in any discussion of CYSS.

Of course, the situation of unemployed
teenagers has been worsened by the Govern-
ment's continued failure to increase the junior rate of unemployment benefit from the present
level of $36. For the sixth successive Budget the
unemployment benefit received by under 18 year olds was not increased. It is ironic therefore that
while the Government is making life difficult
financially for teenagers, it has scrapped the only support scheme that it finances for unemployed '
young people. The lengthening duration of unem-
ployment and the observation of people workin.g with unemployed teenagers suggest that there IS
now a hard core of young people who are in danger of becoming unemployable. There can
only be serious social consequences as a result of

However, my main purpose tonight is to state
very clearly what appears to me to have been a misstatement of my position in a recent issue of
the Sydney Morning Herald, that of 3 September 1981. In that issue the Sydney Morning Herald printed sections of a letter which apparently fell
off a truck. It was a letter that I wrote to the Min-
ister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) expressing my concern about the proportion of participants in CYSS who would not,
in fact, be picked up by the work training schemes
into which this funding has been diverted. This di-
version will, of course, bring far greater benefits to
far more people than' if that money had been spent in CYSS programs.

this trend which is now occurring. The Australian
Labor Party believes that a comprehensive
reappraisal of all youth employment and training
schemes should be undertaken. The abandoning of the CYSS program was a callous and petty act
by a callous and petty government. It is not too
late for the Government to reverse this decision. It is time for CYSS to go when the unemployment
problem is beaten. At the moment we live with .
almost a generation of young people who have never worked and who may never work. If one
thinks of that we are storing some really horrific
social problems for the future. I ask the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A.
Brown) to have another look at CYSS. The
amount of money that was spent on it is negligible in Budget terms. I think the good that can come
from it for young Australians is incalculable.

What is interesting is that the Sydney Morning Herald ran sections of this letter in an attempt to
indicate that I was opposed to the Government's
position. It ran sections of my letter which, in
effect, repeated what I said in the adjournment debate on Tuesday, 25 August, and which the
Sydney Morning Herald thought not important enough to report. It is interesting that the only reason that the Sydney Morning Herald regarded what I had to say about CYSS in my letter to the Minister as news-as I said, largely it echoed what
I said in the Parliament-was not because it said
anything different but because of the manner in which the Sydney Morning Herald obtained the news. In other words, keyhole journalism is far
more effective and far more dramatic than reporting what goes on in this Parliament. I stress that in this Parliament on that day I said:

Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.18)-Like the
honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child) I want to talk about the Community Youth Support Scheme. I introduce my remarks by saying
that I have been a strong supporter of CYSS through its entire history, unlike members of the
Opposition. As my electorate assistant was the chairman of my local CYSS group I can speak

. . . there is a small group of people who, were assisted by CYSS and who will nol be in a position to be picked up by the
other work training schemes which will in general be a far better and more sensible way to spend the money. This small
group of people are those who are nol in a situation in which they are capable of getting the benefit of pre-training schemes and in effect need some sort of pre-pre-training scheme and some kind of social support rather than the schemes which
were provided for them at the periphery of CYSS.

1046 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Adjournment

That is roughly the same as I wrote in my letter to the Minister, when in fact I used words such as 'pre-pre-training'. It seems, to me the more I look at the situation, that the best way for the problem to be resolved is not for money to be spent on some kind of revamped CYSS just to pick up that group; it seems to me that the established welfare groups, which have very effective track recordsfor example, the Brotherhood of St Laurence, the Sydney City Mission, which has an outstanding record, particularly in the Green Valley area, the Salvation Army and the various other church and welfare groups-are the groups which can provide the sort of social support about which we are now talking. It seems to me that all the complaints related to the employment functions of CYSS which have now been transferred are misdirected. The problem now concerns the residual people, who are a social problem and not an employment problem. It seems to me that it would be much more relevant if we were to direct some money towards the welfare agencies which can do the job far better, I believe. I hope that the Government will undertake to do that kind ofthing.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr FREE (Macquarie) (l0.22)-Tonight marks the end of the first week of the operation of the latest health scheme introduced by this Government. I use this occasion to appeal to the
Government on behalf of the many people who have been and who still are victims of the massive amount of misinformation that has been peddled concerning the new health insurance arrangements. The fact that many people in the community are being misled and have been misled and so have made wrong decisions is a result of two factors: First, a failure by this Government to communicate effectively the new provisions; and, secondly, a failure by the health insurance funds, knowingly or unknowingly, to tell the whole truth.
I mention some examples of victims of the mass of misinformation with whom I have come in contact over recent weeks. I refer first of all to a woman who came to my office. In fact, she was a widow pensioner with an income well below the limit for free cover. She was told by a health insurance fund that she would have to buy insurance, so she did so. A second example is a minister of religion with four children and an income of well below $200 a week, well below the limit for free health cover. He was told by a fund that he would have to be a paraplegic to qualify for the free health card. A third example is a woman with a mother in a nursing home. The mother had the

pensioner health benefit card and she was told by a health insurance fund that she would have to buy insurance. In a fourth case I made an inquiry of a fund about the arrangements for hospitalonly insurance. I was told by the fund that such cover would cover only the cost of a hospital bed and not medical treatment in a hospital.
There is no doubt that advertsing by the funds has been incomplete and unsatisfactory, to say the least. Very soon after the announcement of the latest health scheme there was a rash of advertisements directed at getting people to take out the old budget cover. One had to read down to the fine print to find the announcement that in fact the old budget cover would not apply after 1 September. Throughout fund advertisements there has been an emphasis on taking out maximum cover. There has been a failure to advise people that the tax rebate applies only to contributions for the basic level of insurance. There has been a
failure to advise people of the qualifications for free cover.
My colleague the Opposition spokesman on social security, Senator Grimes, has very effectively pointed out the Government's failure to publicise the qualifications for and provisions of free health cover. He has said that there has been no effective publicity campaign to explain the importance of the cards and the entitlements of card holders. He has pointed out that the Government has not spent one cent on television or radio publicity to explain the rights of the disadvantaged to receive health care. He has pointed out that only some 5 per cent of the estimated eligible people in fact have made inquiries to this point, and in some areas that figure is down to 1 per cent. I have checked the number of inquiries and the number of cards which have been issued in a couple of areas and have found that it is quite right that less than 5 per cent of the estimated eligible people have made inquiries and had cards issued.
Some two weeks ago my colleague the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown) referred to advertisements for hospital and medical
insurance run by FAI Insurances Ltd. They feature as their oracle the Honourable Harry Jago, a former New South Wales Minister for Health. It is a pity that those advertisements do not tell the full story of the end of that gentleman's remarkable career. Some seven years ago he ceased to be the New South Wales Minister for Health under quite spectacular circumstances. He made history. He forgot to nominate for his own seat. At high noon on nomination day there was no Liberal candidate for the seat of Gordon, the safest Liberal seat in New South Wales at that time, because the then Minister for Health, Harry Jago,

Adjournment

8 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1047

forgot to nominate. The electors of Gordon went on to compound the folly by sending the first and I trust the last Democratic Labor Party member to the New South Wales Legislative Assembly. Such is the quality of competence of advice given in the advertisement of one fund.

That is symptomatic of the Government's approach towards its new health scheme. At this, the end of the first week of the operation of the new health scheme, I make one appeal to the Government: If it is to change the health arrangements in this country every 12 months, at least take the trouble to tell the people what the new arrangements are and publicise them properly.

Dr JENKINS (Scullin)-I claim to have been misrepresented, Mr Deputy Speaker.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-If the honourable

member seeks to make a personal explanation he

may proceed.

.

Dr JENKINS-The honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) said that no members of the Opposition had actively supported the Community Youth Support Scheme from its early stage. The Preston employment action group in my electorate was one of the first in existence in Australia. For the first four months of its existence it operated from my electorate office. My electorate assistant was the chairman of the group and I am chairman of the Scullin CYSS committee, the electorate committee. I believe I was misrepresented when the honourable member for Macarthur made his statement.

Mr Baume-In those circumstances, I withdraw.

Mr SAINSBURY (Eden-Monaro) (10.28) - In the last two or three minutes of this adjournment debate I want to introduce very briefly some points relating to the New South
Wales election, the campaign for which is being fought at present. As honot~rable members know, I represent a country electorate in which we have many isolated people, isolated in particular from public transport facilities and also, to a great extent, from education facilities. Living in the bush as I do and seeing how Federal governments of both colours have tended to be pretty fair in their treatment of people in both the city and the country, I find it terribly galling that over the past six years in New South Wales we have had such active discrimination against people in the bush. Of course, that discrimination is not evident if one reads the newspapers because the very smoothtalking public relations machine, run by the Premier at a massive cost to the taxpayers of New South Wales, always tries to gloss over the deficiencies.

I mention five points. First, decentralisation in New South Wales is now concentrated on the western suburbs of Sydney, not the country, and the funding arrangements bear that out. Secondly, drought relief for many people in my electorate and across the drought ridden areas of New South Wales in the past year was not expanded, even when the Commonwealth Government, which after all at that stage was paying $3 out of every $4, offered the State Government an expansion of drought relief schemes. Thirdly, we now have evidence that the State Government is applying to put a massive boost into the funding of roads on the Newcastle route, as distinct from national highways in other areas, such as my area based on the Goulburn regional office. Fourthly, in the rationalisation of colleges of advanced education, the State Government has positively discriminated against country colleges and forgotten that the most sensible place for rationalisation would be in the city. Fifthly, whilst notices on hospital doors in my electorate state that the Federal Government is to blame for the rationalisation of beds, the State Government is still running hospitals in the city of Sydney with bed occupancy rates of only 30 and 40 per cent. That is just the start of my views on the way in which, despite the propaganda, the present New South Wales Government treats people in the bush.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! It being 10.30 p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 1.45 p.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 10.30 p.m.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 8 September 1981, pursuant to statute:
Air Navigation Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 253.
Australian Bureau of Statistics Act-Australian Bureau of Statistics-Proposal for collection of information-1981-No. 3-Supplementary survey of construction industry, 1979-80.
Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 247.
Customs Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, Nos. 244,250.
Defence ActDeterminations-1981No. 37-Payment upon Death of Member or Former Member. No. 38-0utfit Allowance for Special Appointments.
Defence Amendment Act-Interim DeterrrtinationsStatutory Rules 1981, Nos. 254, 255, 256.
Health Insurance Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 246.
Passports Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 245.
Patents Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 243.

1048 REPRESENTATIVES 8 September 1981

Papers

Seamen's Compensation Act-Regulations-Statutory
Rules 1981, No. 248. Seat of Government (Administration) ActOrdinance-1981-No. 21-Health Commission (Amendment) (No.2). Regulations-1981No. 16-(Health Commission Ordinance). No. 17-(Cemeteries Ordinance). States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act-
Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 249.

Telecommunications Act-Australian Telecommunications Commission-By-laws-1981-
Telecommunications (Charging Zones and Charging Districts)-Amendment No. 14
Telecommunications (Community Calls)-Amendment No. 12.
Trade Commissioners Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules
1981, No. 252. Trade Practices Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981,
No. 250.


