House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 124, 1981 Wednesday, 26 August 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 767

Wednesday, 26 August 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles, Mrs Child, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hawke, Mr Holding,Mr Innes, Dr Jenkins, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Kent, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Dr Theophanous and Mr Willis.
Petitions received.
Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child, Dr Everingham, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Kent, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully requests that the Federal Government ensures that:

(a) It honours its 1975 election promise to maintain Medibank-a free, universal health insurance scheme, and institute methods of improving hospital and health services for the Australian people.
(b) The Community Health Program remains a Federal Government responsibility, with increased funding and expansion of services.
(c) It abandons means-testing and the re-introduction of charges at public hospitals which will severely disadvantage low and middle income groups.
(d) Every effort be made by the Federal Government to meet the health care needs and demands of the Australian community.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled will give earnest consideration to this most vital matter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child, Mr Howe, Mr Les Johnson and Mr Barry Jones.
Petitions received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programmes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free, Mr Howe and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Post Office Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Golden Square Post Office places in-jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier.
Petition received.

768 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Petitions

Post Office Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of the Post Office at Tongala, Victoria, places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrLloyd.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies'limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health system and cuts to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and suffering in our community by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier and Mr Peacock.
Petitions received.
Interest Rates
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Australia assembled.
This humble petition of citizens or. this country are concerned with increased house interest rates and that this Government has not taken action to peg increases in such rates. We ask that the Government establish a maximum fixed interest rate on a First Mortgage that would cover the entire period of time for which the loan is taken out. The rate of interest to be set at the time of signing the contract.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Proposed Sinai Peacekeeping Force
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. bipartisan concern exists in the Australian community over involvement of Australian military forces in the Middle East where those forces are not under, United Nations auspices;

2. concern is also evident about Australia's military ca-

pacity to provide those forces without weakening

Australia's defence;

,

3. Sinai is not an area within Australia's sphere .of influence; and

4. Australian agricultural export markets may be ad-
versely affected by Australian military participation in Sinai.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Parliament does not ratify Australian military participation in the proposed Sinai peacekeeping force, unless that force is fully controlled by the United Nations.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Beazley.

Petition received.

Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many thousands of women and children in the Australian community who use the services of Women's Refuges, Rape Crisis Centres and Women's Health Centres and other concerned members of the Australian community;
(I) express their concern at the decision of the Federal Government to pass to the States, the responsibility of funding these essential services because of the poor record already demonstr~ted by some States;
(2) call on the Federal Government to reverse that decision;
(3) request that the Government ensure one department to ;Idminister all funds for the above under the heading of Women's Services;
(4) propose that future funding should be on a guaranteed triennial basis taking into account, inflation and indexation increases and
(5) ask for a positive policy commitmC)nt for a substantial injection of funds to consolidate existing services and to develop new initiatives for women and children in the Australian community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.

Copyright
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the , undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
The Copyright Act as amended by the Copyright Amendment Act, 1.980, places unnecessary restrictions on the education system.
All photocopying and videorecording used exclusively for education purposes should, be exempted from the provisions of the Copyright Act.
Any amendments to the copyright law which affect the education system should not be made operative during an academicyear.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Carlton.
Petition received.

Petitions

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 769

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. the proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will'mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must 'be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. the proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a 'poor risk' (particularly affecting women 'and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. in regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, iL'should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. the proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.
5. the proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an allack on teacher edu~ cation. This allack will create teacher shortages in the mid 1980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or for any category of students;
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students.
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced. (iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary
Assistance. (v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are
rationalised be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received,
Institute of Early Childhood Development
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the Federal Government should re-consider the proposaJ'to merge the Institute of Early Childhood Development with another tertiary institution.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Institute of Early Childhood Development be allowed to continue operating as an independent and autonomous institution providing specialised skills and unique training applicable to the development of children aged 0-6 years.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received,

Tertiary Education Libraries
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia asks that you will increase Education funding so that libraries in tertiary institutions may be able to extend their opening hours. This will enable the libraries to provide a more comprehensive service to full and part-time students. This service is vital to the maintenance of the standard of Education.
Also that the libraries, through said increase in Education funding, be able to offer students a continually updated selection of books and periodicals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.

Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personallnformation discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermine the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that 'between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent'.
Il is your petitioners sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Members orthe House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie.
Petition received.

Automotive Industry: Tariff Protection

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia being employed in the automotive products industry respectively showeth:

I. That the autof!1otive products industry is vital to the

livelihood and well being of many thousands of Australian

workers and their families.

.

2. That if imported automotive products are allowed to
flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the industry of their work opportunities.

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that

770 ,REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Petitions

proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future ,be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHowe. Petition receiv~d.

Moreton Island: Sand Mining

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of
Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens' of Australia respectfully
showeth:

I, That sandmining on MoretOn Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.

2, That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Aus-

tralian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is

urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Com-

mission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the

island.

'

3. That the Queensland Governmen'thas recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will
request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Humphreys.

Petition received.

Health Care Services

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Pet-

ition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully

showeth:

",

I. That Federal Government proposals to shift the cost of health insurance onto the individual has, placed a dispro-
portidmHe and unfair financial burden' OJilower income
groups, but particularly on large, families; singl!: income fa!11i1ies; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those
on fixed incomes.

, 2,'That an'estimated 15-20 per cent of Australians will not be able to afford insurance and will be'forced tounderlake extensive travel to avail themselves of outpatient services, the
quality of which will be drastically reduced because of staff cuts.

3. That, doctors, who at this moment are awaiting a fee increase, will inevitably become more andmor!: expensive.

, Your ,Petitioners therefore h4mbly pray that the Federal

Government (i) will re-examine the effects of health' pro,

posals and of the necessity for compulsory health insurance on

lower income groups who do not presently meet the descrip-

tion of disadvantaged, and (ii) redefine the criteria determining, the ~enuirie'IY, needyaIJd disadvantaged to encompass the

c~t~gones ~f perso~s mentioned in( I.) above, ,

,'

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Humphreys. Petition receiv~d.

,i.",. Labl(lling of Cosmetics rot~e Hon'~urabh; the Speaker and Members 'of the House rif
Representatives in Parliament 'assembled. The petition'of the
undersigned citize[1s of Australia respectfully showeth: ,
:, th~tcqniiriueQ ~se of animal ingredients in cosmetic p~od~
l.lcts, and the, inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abliorren't and barbaric.' "

That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation whi~h mig!)t restrict the activiiies of Cosmetic Companies' which produce cosmetics in whi'ch animal ingredients have been used; or for which animals, were subjected to research.'
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that thc; House of Representatives will: Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes,cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(I) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and sour,ce should be indicated,
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Eagle,farm Airport

To the Speaker and Members of the House o(Representatives assembled: The petition of the' undersigned citizens of
Australia showeth:

(a) The residents of densely populated suburbs in the vicin-

ity of the airport and, residents of other suburbs in the Hight

path of international and domestic jets are experiencing an

unreasonable degree \>f aircraft noise.

'

(b) Further, that these same residents will be subjected to prolonged bouts of such aircraft noise if a decision is taken to extend the curfew at both the domestic and international airports, '

(c) That this decision has been foreshadowed on two occasions as follows:

(i) In Submissions to the Public Hearing held by the Pub-
lio WorksCon'lmittee of this Parliament in regard to
St!lge One-Redevelopment of Brisbane's Internatiomil Airport; these submissions proposed an extension of the existing curfew when the new runway is
completed (approximately 1986). This proposal received the full support Mthe Queensland
Government. (ii) TAA's request for an extended curfew to coincide
with the introduction of the Airbus. '

Y6urpetitiqners therefore humbly pray that the Government will refuse to extend the 'existing curfew and will reconsider' ,its ~iting plans for the proposed new runway so as to minimise noise poilu (ion over high density suburbs.

And y'our petitioners as in'duty bound will ever pray:

by Mr Humphreys;

Petitiohreceived.

Tertiary Education

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the Ho~se of

Representatives in the ParliaIl1ent assembled. This petition of

the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth

that:'

' "'

(i) Th~ fi~ancial ~ituation of s~~dentsenrolled at Aus-

tralian postsecondary institutions is already extremely

difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of

Education's 1979 survey Of student incomes and expenditure)

and any subsuintial increase in'the financial commitments of students would gt~yel~ worsen their financialdifllculties.

" ,(ii) Theimposition of tuition fees for second degrees and post graduate degrees will deter many able persons from

Petitions

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 771

enrolling-such courses and further preserve higher education for the rich.
(iii) The introduction of a loans scheme, subsequent review of the level of TEAS and the tightening of the eligibility criteria for TEAS will cause great financial hardship and will deter students from enrolling in tertiary institutions.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(I) post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students.
(2) the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately.
(3) the Government reverse its decision to introduce a loans scheme and instead increase and extend TEAS scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That the Federal Government's budget decision to disband CYSS is a total abandonment of the so-called 'hard core' unemployed and indeed of all unemployed youth.
2. That-the Government has ignored the valuable contribution made by CYSS Centres in teaching basic skills and setr reliance and in mediating between the community and the unemployed and
3. That the Government has breached a 1980 election promise to increase its financial commitment to all youth programs.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will call on the Government to revoke this budget decision and restore funding to CYSS in line with its 1980 election promise.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHumphreys.
Petition received,
Automotiye Industry: Tariff Protection
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the proposed changes to assistance to the passenger motor vehicle and components industries arter 1984 shall lead to the collapse of the vehicle manufacturing industry in Australia. Your petitioners therefore pray that the Industries Assistance Commission report be not given effect.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hurford.
Petition received.
Defence Senice Home Loans
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That all members of the Women's Services 1939-45 War qualiry as 'Australian Soldier' under the Defence Service Homes Act for loans because on voluntarily joining the Australian Forces they took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies making themselves available for combat duty in War Zones, and according to Acts and Regulations of the period

the Military women had enlisted for service anywhere, some Naval women to sail in any waters, with all servicewomen available for service in Papua New Guinea.
As those members of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force of 1939-45 War who were not sent to War Zones are granted loans, refusal to grant eligibility to all Ex-servicewomen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that you amend the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jarman.
Petition received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The club industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs of life: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The club industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The club industry is entirely within the private sector and makes a contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The club industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The club industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian club industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the club industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
II. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The club industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.

772 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Petitions

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
(I) Recognise the importance and place of the Australian club industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
(2) Accept that the viability of the club industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and s,tability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the club needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer. ,
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles Jones.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation oFstudents enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substllntial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) the imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post:secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
I. post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students.
2. the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately.
3. the Minister of Education immediately clarify the Government's attitude to the re-introduction of postsecondary tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKent.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the decrease in Federal Government funding for health, transfer of Commonwealth responsibility to the States, application of the 'user' pay principle to health services and encouragernent of private business and profits in the health sphere will ineVitably lead to a downgrading of health services and increasing health risks among people who cannot afford health insurance or private payment of doctors and hospitals.
That the cuts in Federal Government spending resulting from the recommendations of the Cabinet Sub-Committee of Review of Government Functions (Razor Gang) will lead to

an increase in unemployment and a general deterioration in community services and living standards.
Therefore your petitioners urge that:
I. The Government continue Commonwealth funding of health services at an improved, and certainly not a lesser, level than that operating prior to I September 1981.
2. That recommendations of the Cabinet Sub-Committee of Review of Government Functions (Razor Gang) be not proceeded with.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lusher.
Petition received.

Middle East
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. Your petitioners are aware that:
I. The Israeli military campaign of raids and attacks on the territory of the sovereign state of Lebanon has caused enormous destruction and loss of civilian life.
2. This campaign is primarily directed against the Palestinian people, and Lebanese supporters of the right of the Palestinians to return to their homeland.
3. In this campaign the Israeli Government has the assistance of US.-made weapons and military supplies.
4. There will be no peace in the Middle East until Israel's attacks on the Palestinians are ended and the rights of the Palestinians are fully recognised, including the right to national self-determination and the recognition of the P.L.O. as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
And accordingly, we call on the Prime Minister and the Minister for Foreign Affairs to exert all possible diplomatic influences on the Government of the USA, in order to persuade that Government to:
A. Exert maximum US. Government opposition to Israel's military campaign in Lebanon and to prevent its recurrence.
B. 'Desist from supplying Israel with any military or economic aid as long as it continues to occupy Arab territories and they deny the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people' in accordance with United Nations Resolution 3414.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.

EISalvador

To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the
House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The
humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That the present government of EI Salvador has been re-
sponsible for the deaths of at least 10,000 people in 1980 alone; and that it has been condemned as one. of the worst human rights violators in the world by organisations such as
Amnesty Intetnational and the US Conference of Catholic Bishops.

Therefore we humbly request that the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia;

(i) urge the Government of the United States of America

to immediately cease all military aid to the Govern-

ment of EI Salvador;

.

Petitions

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES

(ii) suppOrL the freedom of the Salvadoran people against the governing military dictatorship.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr' Morris.
Petition received.
Medibank
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Rt'presentatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal (lfCommonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programmes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefo~e humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce Medibank.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
National Day of Prayer and Fasting
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. the humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
In view of the Spiritual and Moral decline of our nation we, your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament will call a day of National prayer and fasting in 198\.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morrison.
Petition received.
South-west Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of ~.epresentatives in ~arliament assembled. The humble petIliOn of the underSigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro-electric development in. south-west Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern.
Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the South-West of Tasmania but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. This is a nat,ional issue and there for~ Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resulting from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.

Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled .. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the Federal Government's decision to abolish the Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS). There is no other agency to give the support and care which the. participants of the Community Youth Support Scheme require. Transitional Education schemes are suitable for only a small number of the unemployed.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament allocate the necessary funds to enable the continuation of the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.

Rights of Disabled
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

I. The failure of the Federal Government to seek infor-
mation from the census re disabled people-i.e. partial or total disability-to enable for adequate planning of, and for, types of services needed by disabled people to be undertaken.

2. The failure of the Federal Government to lead the way in employment of disabled people by employing a greater number of such people within the Commonwealth Public Service-note the small number currently employed within
the Service.

3. The wastage of the Federal Government funds perpe-
tuating large, bureaucratic institutions and organisations where there are often few disabled people on their boards and
little emphasis is placed on consumer participation in decision making.

4. The failure of the Federal Government to encourage
independence of disabled people, or to develop 'normalised' support systems-attendant care.

5. The failure of the Federal Government to provide

'noninstitutionalised' specialised accommodation for. those

people who would not be able to benefit from, or cope with at-

tendant care.

'

6. Failure by the Federal Government to alter, or create a 'disability' allowance means test free for all disable~ people-
this would assist with necessary equipment and mobility costs.

7. Failure to provide a national compensation scheme thus saving time and enabling people to be automatically.covered
in the event of a disability.

8. Failure by the Federal Government to abolish tariffs on all equipment available to the disabled-e.g. Optacon,

9. Mismanagement of Federal IYDpFunds-e.g. nori-

receipt by some States of funds through uiuesolved

negotiations.

.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray \hat iri]mediate

action be taken to remedy the above stated and that the Fed-

eral Government recognise that disabled people are ~i.tizens

who should have equal rights.

.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray,

by Mr Mountford.

Petition received.

774 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Petitions

Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the. Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in NSW respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B52 bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52s:
(a) carried nuclear weapons. (b) were engaged in bombing missions against
another State. Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy. Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region. Jeopardises the welFare of the Citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents. Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your petitioners thereFore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lionel Bowen.
Petition received;,

Staging of American B52 Bombers

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of
Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned in Tasmania respectfully showeth:

That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base of American B52 Bombers:

Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of

all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of

Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the

USA and another power.

Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that

Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowl-

edge of whether B52's: ,

(a) Carried nuclear weapons.

(b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another

State.

Violates the Australian people's independence and links

this nation irreconcilably with United States Foreign poli-

cies thereby destroying the potential for independent Aus-

tralian defence policy.

.

Violates democratic procedures in committing the Aus-

tralian nation to participation in future wars without due

consultation and informed assessment by Australian citi-

zens and further increases the militarisation' of the Indian

Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region.
Jeopardises the welfare of the Citizens of Darwin, in'that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents.
Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's committment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your Petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot For American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lionel Bowen.
Petition received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned in ACT respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a reFuelling and Rest and Recreation base of American B52 Bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52's: (a) Carried nuclear weapons. (b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another
State. Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy. Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in Future wars without due consultation and inFormed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region. Jeopardises the welfare of the Citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents. Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's committment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your Petitioners thereFore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectFully showeth:

Petitions

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 775

That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B52 bombers:
,Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA. and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52's: (a) Carried nuclear weapons. (b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another
State. Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy. Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region. Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the, threat of accidental ra'dioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents. , Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty. Your petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location, in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US. Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKent.
Petition received.

Staging .of American B52 Bombers

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of
Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in Adelaide respectfully showeth:

That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B5l1 Bombers:

Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of

all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potentiaIof

Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the

USA. and another power.

Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that

Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowl-

edge of whether B52's:

.

(a) Carried nuclear weapons.

(b) were engaged in bombing missions against another

State.' Violates the Australian people's independenc~ and links

this nation, irrecordlably with 'United States foreign poli-

cies thereby destroying the potential for independent Aus-

tralian defence policy.

'

Violates democratic procedures in committing the Aus-

tralian nation to participation in future wars without due

consultation and informed assessment by Australian citi-

zens and further increases the militarisation of thl;: Indian

Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power

conflict in this r e g i o n . ,

Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin, in that

noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fall-

out will increase substantially to the,residents.

Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty. Your petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American 852 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US. Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hurford.
Petition received.

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Kingsford-Smith respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for post-graduate resea~chers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for post-graduate study.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lionel Bowen.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker,and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. 'The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Wentworth respectfully shows our concern regarding the,proposed introduction of fees for post-graduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for post-graduate study.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Coleman.
Petition received.

Tertiary Education

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-
ition of the undersigned members of the elector'ate of Berowra respectfully shows our Concern regarding the proposed intro-
duction of fees for post-graduate researchers in' Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely
thaI this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development
within the Australian community.

Your'petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Govern-

ment will change the decision to introd,uce tuitio,n fees for

post-graduate study.

'

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Dr Edwards.

776 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Petitions

Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of North Sydney respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for post-graduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and developme(1t within the Australian community.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for post-graduate study.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Spender.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned members of parents and citizens associations respectfully showeth:
That retention of the Schools Commission and the Curriculum Development Centre in their present forms is essential for the balanced and progressive allocation of educational resources and facilities in the Australian community.
That serious concern has been generated by the decision within the School Commission guidelines, to cut funds to the general recurrent and capital programs by reallocation to transition, the decision not to implement the school improvement program; and the divisiveness created between government and non-government schools due to increases of $43.25 million to non-government schools while government schools funds have not increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will reverse these decisions-will retain the Schools <;:ommission and Curriculum Development Centre in their original forms; retain the Schools Commission proposals including recurrent and capital funding proposals; basket of services and the schools improvement program.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ian Cameron and Mr Millar.
Petitions received.
Newborough: Post Office
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House'of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the under-signed citizens of the Municipality of the City of Moe respectively showeth that due recognition should be given to the needs of these citizens and our .dependence upon the postal facilities which we currently enjoy.
In support of our petition we point out that the closure of the Yallourn Post Office removed a facility which was used by many of our citizens who are employed by State Electricity Commission, a large number of elderly citizens from Yallourn have been resettled into flats and onto housing estates in Newborough and most of these people do not have private motor transport, the existing public transport (Latrobe Valley Buslines) is both infreq\lent and costly between Newborough and Moe, there is no continuous pedestrian footpath between these two urban centres, and the closure of Newborough Post

Office would place undue hardship upon many members of our community.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will refrain (and will instruct Australia Post to refrain) from taking any action to downgrade or to close either temporarily or permanently the Post Office situated in Rutherglen Road, Newborough.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunnihgham.
Petition received.
CampbeIl Pre-School: Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned electors of the Division of Fraser respectfully showeth:
Consistent with Principle I on the use of space in ACT Government Schools (which has been accepted by the Minister for Education) that the provision of a pre-school in the ACT should be at neighbourhood or suburb level, the Campbell Pre-Schmil provides a caring secure environment most suited to the educational and social development of our young children.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the educational viability of the Campbell Pre-School unit be recognised by ihe Minister for Education when considering the rationalisation of space in ACT Pre-Schools and that the Campbell Pre-School be permitted to remain operative while that viability remains.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrFry.
Petition received.
Erindale Community Library
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of the Australian Capital Territory respectfully showeth:
I. That public libraries provide an important community service through which citizens obtain information, recreation and self-education.
2. That the Canberra Public Library Service (CPLS) is being severely restricted by government-imposed staff ceilings.
3. That the refusal by the Public Service Board to raise the CPSL staff ceiling has prevented the opening of the Erindale Community Library, to the detriment of the residents of the Tuggeranong Valley.
4. That the Government has wasted public money by building and stocking the Erindale Community Library and then failing to provide staff for it to open.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will provide the staff to open the Erindale Community Library.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs KeIly.
Petition received.
Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of

Petitions

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 777

the undersigned residents of Tasmania showeth that your petitioners are concerned about the uncertain future funding for Women's Refuges in Australia.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Commonwealth Government maintain responsibility for the National Women's Refuge Programme by continuing to fund them on a 75-25 per cent Federal State basis.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition receiv<!d.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned pensioners, unemployed and underprivileged persons of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(I) some 2,300,000 persons are poverty stricken in Australia and
(2) in order to stem the tide of rising poverty that is crippling so many, creating much anxiety, despair, ill-health and suicidal tendencies, the opportunity should be taken in the 1981-82 Budget to increase all pensions by 50 per cent.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that steps be taken to increase all pensions by 50 per cent in the 1981-82 Budget.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrUren.
Petition received.
Pornography
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors for the State of South Australia showeth that whereas:
(a) sexual abuse including rape and incest is a growing problem in South Australia,
(b) there is increasing evidence that links pornography with sexual abuse, particularly of women and c~i1dren, and
(c) pornography is poorly controlled and widely available in this State,
Your petitioners therefore pray that your Honourable House will pass legislation:
(a) to ban and destroy the worst pornography, (b) to enforce tighter restrictions on all forms of
pornography, (c) to remove restricted pornography from newsagents
and delicatessens, (d) to establish clear classification standards in the Act,
and (e) to provide Ministerial responsibility for the control of
pornography,
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Wilson.
Petition received.
MEDIBANK PRIVATE
Notice of Motion
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That, because of the contents of the last reports presented to this Parliament, the Joint Commillee of Public Accounts

examine, as a mailer or urgency, the financial operations of Medibank Private to ascertain-
(I) why it lost several million dollars in total in Queensland, New South Wales and Tasmania;
(2) why it made such a huge profit from its Victorian membership;
(3) why its national reserves, according to the HlC report, were less than a fortnight's claims experience, when the Commonwealth Government requires health funds to possess at least two months reserves for financial viability purposes;
(4) why it suffered a depletion of reserves over the previous years operations; and .
(5) why its management expenses range between double and treble that of the major health funds in five of the six States,
That the Committee report to the Parliament on the mailer of Medibank's ability or non-ability to survive financially as a competing health fund.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
Notice of Motion
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) expresses extreme concern at the indifference and procrastination of the Government in relation to Australia's manufacturing industries;
(2) is concerned that no action has been taken on the Jackson and Crawford reports or the White Paper on manufacturing industry;
(3) notes the uncertainty being caused by repeated short term policy changes;
(4) calls for the urgent presentation of firm long term policies on manufacturing in Australia to protect the employment of thousands of Australian workers including 10,000 in the Geelong area alone.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
RESOURCES BOOM
Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Acting Prime Minister. I refer him to his statement last Friday that 'widespread reference to a resources boom was unfortunate '. Does he recall the statement of 2 October last year by the Minister for Industry and Commerce that 'Australia's resources boom is robust'? Does he recall his own statement of 6 October last year extolling 'Australia's coming resources boom'? Does he recall his own reference to 'the likely size of the so-called resources boom facing Australia' in a speech in Japan on 26 January this year? Will he now acknowledge who was responsible for promoting the promise of a coming resources boom? Do we now assume that the promise of 'thousands of new jobs and billions of dollars in exports' made by the Minister for Industry and Commerce in September last year has fallen through? If not, why

778 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

have the Acting Prime Minister and that Minister suddenly resorted to the rhetoric of gloom and doom?
Mr ANTHONY-I acknowledge that the word 'boom' has been used in the past. I think it is unfortunate that it is now being interpreted by many people that the boom is here and that they can expect some share of the benefits of a boom. The fact is that development and growth are taking place and they are taking place at a steady rate. Before the full benefits can be shared with the Australian people, these resources have to be developed and have to be productive and what is produced has to be sold overseas. In many cases the rewards from these developments are many years down the track. The development that has taken place has been of enormous benefit to this country. We all know that the economic recovery of this country is largely a result of the confidence that has been placed in it. Money has been brought into the country to help with the develop~ ment of these resources. This has created more jobs and more commercial activity; so there is some immediate benefit. Claims that the whole' strategy of the Budget ought to be changed so that there is a greater sharing of the benefits of this development are premature because the country is not in a state where these benefits can be shared. Enormous increased wealth is not being gained from these projects as yet. Some of them are coming on stream; they will be progressively coming on stream over a period. I would hate the demands and desires of people to be so great that they interfere to the extent that we lose the confidence of people who want to continue developing these resources, because it is quite fundamental to the long term welfare of this country that these developments take place.
DEFENCE INTEGRATED SECURE COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK
PROJECT
Mr JARMAN-My question is directed to the Minister for Administrative Services. Recently the Minister for Defence and the Minister for Administrative Services announced that the Collins International Service Co. had been selected as the successful tenderer for the Defence Integrated Secure Communications Network project. I ask: Has this contract yet been placed?
Mr KILLEN-I think it proper that I answer this question. As my honourable friend points-out, it was in April this year, I think, that my colleague the Minister for Administrative Services and I announced that the DISCON contract had been,let to the Collins International organisation known as CISCO. My recollection is that. at that time the

principal sub-contractor for the principal contractor was Sperry. For reasons which have not been placed before me the principal contractor, CISCO, dismissed Sperry as the principal subcontractor. It has been contended that the dismissal amounted to an alteration in the conditions of tender. I offer no adjudication whatsoever on that contention. When the matter was placed before me I asked senior officers of my Department to make an assessment. There 'are very settled governmental procedures, which have. been observed by governments from both sides, as to what action sho,uld take place when such a .contention has been made. Officers of the Department of my distinguished friend and officers of my Department .are now involved in discussions as to whether there is any substance in the contention. I assure the honourable member for Deakin and the House that if there is any substance in the contention I will place the details of it immediately, before the House and ensure that the procedures are meticulously observed.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY: RATES INCREASES
Mrs KELLY-I ask the Minister for the Capital Territory: In the light of the report of the Finance Committee of the House of Assembly on the 1981-82 municipal budget, which indicated a cumulative surplus of $6.8m, can he explain why general rates have increased by 11 per cent, water rates by 24 per cent and sewerage rates by 9 per cent in the Australian Capital Territory? Why did the Minister not wait for the findings of the Commonwealth Grants Commission inquiry into Australian Capital Territory finances before this rate increase was announced? Can the Minister give an assurance that Australian Capital Territory ratepayers will receive the 2 per cent per capita grant for local government' purposes from the pesonal income tax pool, as' do all other Australians? What increased services will the ratepayers in Canberra receive?
Mr HODGMAN-I thank the honourable member for her question. The increase of 9 per cent in the sewerage rate and the increase of 11 per cent in the general rate compare more than favourably with rate increases in other cities of Australia. Whether we look at increases in Melbourne, Sydney, Hobart or Adelaide we find that the increased rates imposed in those areas are still far in excess of those payable in the Australian Capital Territory. On the specific matter of water rates, which is one of the most important matters referred to in the House'of Assembly report, I indicate again that the reason for the increase of 24 per cent:in water rates reflected the fact that there

Questions Without Notice

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 779

had been no rise in the basic rate charged during the last two years and no rise in the excess charge for five years. Nobody regrets more than I having to impose increases. I repeat: There had been no rise in the basic water rate charged during the last two years and no rise in the excess charge for five years. Quite frankly that position was indefensible.
The honourable member asked a very important question in relation to the timing of the announcement. I made a decision that, in relation to rates and other charges payable in the Australian Capital Territory, it was proper that they be announced on Budget night along with all the other good announcements with respect to community grants and the like. That decision, I believe, was a proper decision and has been accepted universally in the Australian Capital Territory. That is the simple reason why is was not possible to wait to consider in detail the House of Assembly report, although I have indicated to the House of Assembly-the honourable member was present when I had a 1t hour briefing on Budget night with members of the House of Assemblythat, if there are any further matters in relation to rates, municipal charges and the like, of course I am happy to respond to them.
Perhaps the most important part of the honourable member's question is the one which I now address, that is, when we will be able to announce that the Commonwealth Grants Commission will conduct the long awaited inquiry into the finances of the Australian Capital Territory and also the rating system. I have been advised by my colleague the Minister for Administrative Services-I think all members of the House would be aware of this-that following the last Premiers Conference an undertaking was given by the Government, and properly so, that the States would have an opportunity to come back to the Grants Commission to make their comments in respect of the relativities report. That, as I understand it, quite properly takes precedence. I have asked the Minister to make the Grants Commission available at the earliest opportunity to carry out the inquiry into the finances of the Australian Capital Territory, which I am sure the honourable member will agree has a very important role in relation to the debate on self government and also in relation to the rates inquiry. I think it is fair to say, and I should now say publicly, that I do not believe that the Grants Commission will be in a position to undertake either of those inquiries this calendar year, but I assure the honourable member for Canberra and others directly involved in this matter that I will

do everything I can, and I am certain my colleague the Minister for Administrative Services will do everything he can, to have those inquiries heard and determined by the Grants Commission at the earliest possible opportunity.
ROAD FUNDING
Mr COWAN-I direct a question to the Minister for Transport. Is it a fact that we are in the second year of a five-year agreement between the Commonwealth and the States in regard to road finance? In the first year of the term-namely, last year-was there an 11 per cent increase, this year is there a 9 per cent increase, and are there to be subsequent increases of 7 per cent, 6 per cent and 6 per cent? Were these percentages based upon an anticipated yearly increase in inflation? In view of the present inflationary trends and the urgent need for extra money for roads, is the Minister prepared to review the amounts within the agreement?
Mr HUNT-The answer to the first question is yes. The answer to the second question is yes. The percentage increases that were calculated took into account the economic policies that the Fraser Government has been pursuing. Indeed, in the last financial year the Commonwealth contribution for road construction increased by 11.1 per cent, whereas the inflation rate for the financial year was at the level of 8.8 per cent. Last year the Government announced that it would provide $3,650m to the States, the Northern Territory and local government to assist them with road construction and maintenance over the five-year period from 1980-81 to 1984-85. This is a very substantial commitment. Indeed, no other level of government has made a similar commitment to road construction or to road works in this country. This has been one of the great difficulties so far as forward planning is concerned; whilst the Commonwealth makes forward commitments neither State governments nor local governments choose to do so.
Naturally, we would expect that road-making authorities and local government, with the availability of modern earth-moving equipment and road-making equipment, would take advantage of the potential for productivity gain. If productivity gain is properly achieved, that, of course, should go some way towards offsetting the impact of inflation. Unfortunately, there has not been any way in which we can measure the level of productivity in this area of road construction. Engineers and road-making authorities should make a target-of achieving greater levels of productivity. In addition. to the $3,650m that the Commonwealth has committed to road funding over the

780 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

five-year period, it has made a very substantial commitment to the State and local governments. In this financial year $7,000m will be made available to the State governments by way of revenue grants and $350m will be made available to local government by way of the 2 per cent--
Mr Armitage-Time!
Mr HUNT-Mr Speaker, he does not like the answer. What do we do about him? Local government will in fact benefit to the extent of $350m over this financial year. Local government has enjoyed grants totalling $1 ,350m since 1976-77.
As to the last part of the honourable gentleman's question, the Government will be studying the road funding program for the last three years of the five-year program in the course of budgetary considerations.
BEEF SHIPMENTS TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Mr KERIN-Has the Minister for Primary Industry seen the latest sets of allegations which are proliferating in the media regarding the substitution of horse, kangaroo and whatever meat for beef for export and domestic consumption? As the Australian Federal Police have taken years to investigate Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd without finality, has the Minister considered other means of inquiring into the present malpractices, and all aspects of meat certification, as a means of getting to the bottom of the corruption? For example, will the Minister consider the holding of a judicial inquiry into the longer term aspects of the discovered deficiencies? Is the Minister putting in train measures that can obviously and quickly be taken by him to guarantee buyer confidence in our meat? Specifically, is the Minister prepared to introduce a revised transfer certificate system, to take action to seal off already inspected meat, to take action to monitor the movement of meat into cold stores and between cold stores, to have the Government provide 'export approved' stamps rather than have the companies provide them, and to take action to guarantee the security of stamps? Or is he waiting until the United States announces new requirements before taking action?
Mr NIXON-I am glad that the honourable member for Werriwa has started to take an interest in this matter. In typical fashion, the only ideas he has put up are ideas that have been put to him by others. A number of allegations have been made about this trade. People are coming out of the woodwork with ideas about who is involved in it. I might add that all sorts of people have been named, even people with glasses in this House. All

allegations that have been given to me in a serious manner have been handed to the Australian Federal Police, who are making further inquiries and following them up. Any name that has been mentioned to me has been handed to the Federal Police.
In regard to procedures, when the matter first came to light I considered the suitability of having a judicial inquiry conducted. However, upon the advice of the Solicitor-General I have rejected the idea of such an inquiry being conducted at this point. The Solicitor-General has made it plain that a police inquiry is far better in uncovering all of the facts relating to the incidents and has recommended that the matter be proceeded with in the normal course of the'law. When the House resumes after the next recess I will bring down a Bill to increase the penalties for such offences. As I have already indicated, the present fine of $1,000 will be increased to $100,000 and the capacity to remove the licence of anyone found to be involved in that kind of trading will be introduced. As to the procedures that follow final Commonwealth inspection, the honourable member must know from the statement that I have already made publicly on the issue that a number of the matters that he has just brought forward are being considered by the Bureau of Animal Health for possible implementation. The implementation of a procedure whereby the final Commonwealth inspection is done in the boning room and the meat goes into a bonded cold store is under consideration. Changes to the stamps and wrapping are under consideration. Transportation from the bonded cold store straight to the ship under Commonwealth supervision is under consideration. All of these matters are being studied by the Bureau of Animal Health. Appropriate procedures will be instituted when decisions are taken on those matters.
I am thankful that the Americans have adopted .a very sensible view about the problem we have. Because of the long-standing good record of the Australian meat trade in America, the American Government has not lowered a boom on the trade. It has suggested a number of procedural changes that are in accordance with the procedural changes that I am recommending. I am quite satisfied that we will be able to block off further substitution of meat under the new procedures. As to the people involved in the illegal activities at the moment, when the police complete their inquiries the normal course of the law will be followed and those people will be dealt with.
Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The Opposition is entitled to question the

Questions Without Notice

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 781

Minister about a matter as serious as the trade in meat between Australia and a country as large as the United States of America. Frankly, the matter deserves a competent answer, not the blithering lunacy we have heard.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Keating-We have heard nothing about new procedures; all we hear about is penalties.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Blaxland will resume his seat.
Mr Keating-It is time we got a decent answer.
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the honourable member for Blaxland that if he continues to speak when he does not have the call, despite my requesting him to resume his seat, I will have no hesitation in dealing with him.
Mr Keating-I raise a point of order. The point of order is that anSWers have to be relevant to the question. That answer was not relevant to the germane part of the question. Mr Speaker, you should keep the Minister in order, as well as the Opposition.
Mr SPEAKER-The answer was relevant to the question.
TAXATION
Mr BOURCHIER-Has the Treasurer seen reports that this Government proposes to raise almost as much tax from all sources in a single year as the Whitlam Government raised in three years? Is that correct?
Mr HOWARD-I listened very carefully to the speech of the Leader of the Opposition last night. I was particularly interested when he made some comparisons between the activities of government now and those which occurred a few years ago. '
Dr Everingham-Answer the question.
Mr HOWARD-I will. He made those comparisons. Of course, those sorts of statistical comparisons have to be seen for the ludicrous comparisons that they are when an economy is growing and price levels are changing. But, if the Leader of the Opposition wants to go down that path, let me join him for a moment. Let us put the record straight. Gross domestic product has amounted over the last three years to $345 billion, compared with only $184 billion in the three years that the Leader of the Opposition uses in seeking to compare tax collections. Private fixed capital investment in the last three years has amounted to over $52,OOOm, compared with $27,OOOm during

that three-year period. Here is one that the Opposition does not like to be reminded of: Employment rose by nearly 400,000 in the last three years, compared with 115,000--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question asked by the honourable gentleman related to the collection of taxes. I ask the Treasurer to remain relevant to the question.
Mr HOWARD-I am more than happy to remain relevant to the question, which was very directly related to the size of government and the effect of taxation and expenditure on patterns of economic behaviour within the community.
Perhaps I could conclude by mentioning one other figure, and that is that exports in the last three years have totalled $51.6 billion compared with $24.6 billion in the three years in question. Let us go back then to the constant comparison which is made between taxation collections as an overall percentage of gross domestic product under this Government and in the last year of the Labor Government. If one looks at the statistical comparisons one finds that in the last year of the Labor Government total taxation collections were 25.1 per cent of gross domestic product, but in that year, as a percentage of gross domestic product, the Commonwealth Budget deficit was 4.9 per cent. This year, total tax collections as a percentage of gross domestic product are 27.5 per cent and as a percentage of gross domestic product the Budget deficit is 0.1 per cent. If one makes a real comparison and acknowledges the inevitable, one will see that when governments raise taxation or borrow money they are, by both methods, taking resources out of the community. The Labor Government clearly took more resources from the community than is shown in any of those comparisons which the Leader of the Opposition sought to demonstrate.
SALES TAX
Mr HAYDEN-I congratulate the Treasurer. I wish to ask a question.
Mr SPEAKER-I think it would be wise for the Leader of the Opposition to ask the question before giving his congratulations.
Mr HAYDEN-I join in the general congratulations to the Treasurer for the novel way in which he handles statistics. Disraeli made an appropriate observation about lies, damned lies and statistics. I merely make the observation in passing. Could I encourage the Treasurer to engage in a little more simple arithmetic. I ask: Does the Treasurer recall disputing in this House last Thursday whether the cost on average of increased sales taxes would be about $3.50 a week

782 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

in the community and asserting that it would be no more than in the order of $1.50 to $2? Is it a fact that the new sales tax measures, in a full year, will raise $892m? Is it a fact that there are a little over four and a half million households in Australia? Is it a fact, as a matter of simple arithmetic, that on average that works out, as an extra cost per week for the average household in Australia, at some $3.80 per week-that is, the cost of the new sales tax measures are considerably higher than he acknowledged? How does he justify the imposition of this severe, inequitable and inflationary tax on top of the severe increases in income tax, the imposition of the highest cost for petrol ever in the history of this country, the very costly health insurance people have to bear and, of course, skyrocketing interest rates?
Mr HOWARD-I will not dispute the number of households quoted by the Leader of the Opposition. Nor will I dispute the figure that he took from the Budget Papers about the overall tax collections. What the Leader of the Opposition has done and what, with respect, others have done in making those sorts of simplistic calculations is to ignore the household expenditure patterns of average households in Australia. The Leader of the Opposition is always telling this House that he and his supporters are more in touch with the needs and the problems of average households in Australia. If he really is in touch he will understand that the household expenditure patterns of average householders indicate that there is a much higher, proportion of disposable income spent by those average households on items such as food which remain exempt from sales tax.
SOVIET SATELLITE
Mr DRUMMOND-Has the Minister for Foreign Affairs seen reports that a Soviet satellite may have fallen in the Marble Bar area of Western Australia? Has the Government been able to check the accuracy of these reports?
Mr STREET-I am aware of reports that a Soviet satellite may have re-entered the atmosphere over north-western Australia and the possibility that debris from the satellite may have fallen to earth near Marble Bar. In the light of a reported Soviet Press statement that a Soviet satellite did break up over Australia, on my instructions the Secretary to my Department today called in the Soviet Ambassador and expressed our concern over the reports that we had seen. The Secretary sought detailed information on the question from the Ambassador as a matter of urgency. The Ambassador was unable to provide any information thisrnorning but he promised to convey our concern to his Government and to

provide us with detailed information as soon as possible.
The Government now understands that the object sighted over Marble Bar may not have been a Soviet satellite. Cosmos 434, which was referred to in the Press reports, entered the earth's atmosphere early in the morning of 23 August, Western Australian time; that is, about 12 hours before the reported sightings. So it now seems more likely that the object reported was part of meteorite activity which was predicted for the area at the time. We also understand that Cosmos 434 did not contain any radioactive material. The search for the debris from the sighted object is continuing under the control of the Western Australian Police.
VIETNAMESE REFUGEES
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I refer the Minister for Foreign Affairs to the answer that his colleague the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs gave yesterday in respect of refugees from Vietnam. I ask: Does the Minister acknowledge that there is complete inconsistency between, on the one hand, saying that the Government wishes to help Vietnamese refugees and, on the other, continuing to refuse to provide aid to those same people in Vietnam before they become refugees? Further, has the Minister yet had time to check the reports of statements made by the American Under-Secretary of State in Bangkok that the United States of America would have no serious objection to a further Chinese military strike against Vietnam? Is it not a fact that the policies of China and the United States to bring Vietnam to its knees will mean massive floods of refugees for Australia? Accordingly, will the Minister make the strongest possible protests to both China and America about this attitude?
Mr STREET-There is no inconsistency whatever between trying to provide what assistance we can to those people who wish to leave Vietnam and our policy on aid to Vietnam. Indeed, as my colleague said a day or so ago, we are trying to enter into orderly departure arrangements with the Government of Vietnam. But, so far as aid to Vietnam itself is concerned, the Government does not believe that that country ought to be rewarded for its invasion of a neighbour. As to the final part of the honourable gentleman's question, I have checked the text of the reported statement by, I think, an American Under-Secretary of State of the State Department and the text does not in fact bear out the allegations which were made in the Press report. I will do my best to get a copy of what was actually said for the honourable gentleman.

Questions Without Notice

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES783

MEAT EXPORTS TO THE MIDDLE EAST
Mr IAN ROBINSON-Does the Minister for Primary Industry have any information as to whether there is a racket involved in Australian meat exports to the Middle East, as has been claimed in recent Press reports? Is there a possible link between the alleged fraudulent trading to the Middle East and that to the United States of America?
Mr NIXON-Mr R. J. Gilbertson of R. J. Gilbertson Pty Ltd has handed to the Federal Police an allegedly forged Australian Federation of Islamic Councils halal 'meat certificate. The Federal Police are investigating this matter. The fact is that meat inspection for halal meat is not the responsibility of any government authority; it is the responsibility of the Australian Federation of Islamic Councils. That certificate is accepted by those countries importing halal killed meat from Australia. There have been discussions about the procedures with the Islamic countries and those discussions are proceeding. So far as Iran is concerned, it has had one of its religious officials stationed in Australia conducting certification for the Iran market with assistance from and under the auspices of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation.
Today I heard of other allegations from Mr Jamel Hoar who claims that kangaroo meat has been found in mutton cartons in Saudi Arabia. Mr Hoar repeated his claims in an interview on this morning's AM program. These claims will be investigated to see whether there is any substance to them. There has been no suggestion of substitution by the Saudi Arabian Government for whom Mr Hoar apparently was speaking, but we will look at the allegations again to see what further information can be found.
ARGYLE PROJECT
Mr JACOBI-Has the attention of the Minister for Trade and Resources been drawn to allegations that Conzinc Riotinto of Australia Ltd is negotiating for the De Beers organisation to gain control over the marketing of diamonds from the Argyle project? Is it a fact that such a contract will firstly mean that Australians will lose control over the pricing, production and marketing of these Australian minerals; secondly, a return to Australian prices substantially below the world prices; and thirdly, the extent and value of Australian diamond resources at Argyle are unknown to any Commonwealth agency? In view of the fact that the Argyle deposit is substantially foreign owned and its value is at least $l,OOOm, will the Minister establish an inquiry into the

ownership, the conditions of development, the proposed marketing contract and value of the deposit to ensure that development will be conducted in this nation's interest? Will he take urgent steps to ensure that no c~ntractual arrangements are entered into until this inquiry is completed and a report tabled in Parliament?
Mr ANTHONY-In the last day or so, I saw a newspaper article referring to the possibility that the sale of diamonds from the Argyle mine might be contracted to De Beers in South Africa. I have asked for the facts relating to that situation to be given to me. The marketing of Australian products is largely in the hands of the company, firm or person involved. It is basically the organisation's responsibility to its shareholders to sell its products in a manner which is in the best interests of those shareholders. I hope that, in doing this, it is in the best interests of Australia. Not knowing all the facts, I do not feel that I can give a comprehensive answer to the honourable member's question. If I feel that the matter warrants further comment, I will do so.
RE-ADMISSION OF PAKISTAN TO THE COMMONWEALTH
Mr PEACOCK-I refer the Minister for Foreign Affairs to earlier calls for Australia to support the re-admission of Pakistan to the Commonwealth at the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and to the very recent reports that the Government may now be pr<?pared to do so. Will the Minister advise whether Australia is prepared to support and work for the re-admission of Pakistan to the Commonwealth in conjunction with the other countries which have indicated their support for this proposition?
Mr STREET-The possibility of Pakistan's rejoining the Commonwealth has been under informal discussion between a number of Commonwealth countries for some time. Australia, as host to the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne, has also made a number of informal soundings in Commonwealth countries on this subject in the overall context of the Meeting but has not taken a specific initiative in relation to it. The Prime Minister in his capacity as Chairman of the Meeting also discussed the issue during his recent visits to Britain and India. Australia would welcome Pakistan's return to the Commonwealth but any decision on rejoining remains a rnatter for the Commonwealth as a whole.

784 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

DELAYS IN PHARMACEUTICAL PRESCRIPTIONS
Mr ROBERT BROWN-I refer the Minister for Health to the continuing number of complaints I am receiving from pharmacists in relation to delays in the return of the referred prescriptions and also in the payment of claims. The most recent one involved the return of 44 prescriptions from a March claim in mid-August of this year. Do delays of this kind seriously disrupt the business operations of pharmacists? Did a recent circular to the pharmacy industry from his Department assure that new measures would result in 'the return of referred prescriptions and the statement more promptly and quicker payment of claims by diverting extra staff to payment activity'? If this assurance was given, when will it be followed by action?
Mr MacKELLAR-I acknowledge the difficulties which individual pharmacists face if there is a delay in the payment of their claims because of processing delays in the Department of Health. In fact, the circular which I think the honourable gentleman was referring to was issued out of the New South Wales office of my Department, because the delays in the past have been longer in New South Wales than they have been in other States. There was a diversion of staff to speed up the processing of claims and my information was that it had been reduced to less than 30 days. If that is not the case and if there are some particular problems in relation to anyone pharmacist, I would be grateful if the honourable member would draw that situation to my attention and I would certainly investigate it.
There are problems, of course, when pharmacists do not fill in the claims in an appropriate way. If it is difficult to decipher the information contained on the forms, some delay in payments can be caused. One of the objects of the circular was to encourage pharmacists to fill in the appropriate forms in a manner which made them clearly legible to the people processing the claims. I am conscious of the difficulties which can accrue to pharmacists by the delays in payments. I did take action to make sure that those delays were minimised. If there are particular cases, I would be happy to hear of them.
TRADE UNION MEMBERSHIP
Mr LLOYD-The Minister for Industrial Relations will be aware of the dictatorial tactics of the Transport Workers Union against ownerdrivers during the recent ban on milk pick-up and delivery in Victoria. What information and advice can the Minister give to these people, and to other

self-employed contractors in a number of industries in my electorate, as to what this Government is doing to protect their independence against such bans and against threats and blackmail to force them to join a unioli? What can they do to help themselves?
Mr VINER-I am aware of the kind of conduct referred to, by the honourable gentleman with respect to owner-drivers during the last transport dispute. It occurred not only in Victoria but also in other parts of Australia where a strong segment of the transport industry is operated by owner-drivers. It was out of the Government's concern to give some protection to the position of these people that amendments were made in 1977 to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act, notably sections 132 and 132A. That was done in order to prevent owner-drivers from being compelled to join a union-a uhion being an organisation intended to cover employees, not small businessmen and not people such as owner-drivers in the transport industry. Section 132A, in particular, makes it an offence for any coercion or discrimination to be used against owner-drivers by unions in order to compel them to join a union.
I am sure that the House will be interested in a recent decision by the Federal Court in the case Linehan v. the Transport Workers Union handed down by Mr Justice Northrop on 27 July this year, Mr Linehan being the Director of the Industrial Relations Bureau. Mr Justice Northrop found that the rules of the Transport Workers Union, to the extent that they sought to cover owner-drivers as members, were outside the authority of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. I know that owner-drivers around Australia found that decision of interest to themselves and that it gave them great heart that they could organise themselves, as small businessmen, according to their own interests and not be dominated by any union. Yesterday I met two deputations of ownerdrivers and their associations introduced to me by the honourable member for Mitchell. I am sure that my colleague the Minister for Transport and I can do a good deal to assist them in their endeavours. Let me answer specifically the question asked by the honourable member for Murray. Owner-drivers ought to use the provisions of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act and the Trade Practices Act where boycotts hurt their business affairs. Where it is considered appropriate, they ought to approach the Industrial Relations Bureau which can help them to protect their interests.

Questions Without Notice

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 785

SALES TAX: SPORTING GOODS
Mr JOHN BROWN-I direct my question to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment. Is it a fact that sales tax on sporting goods, prior to the last Budget, returned something over $50m to the Treasury? Is it also a fact that the recent increases in the Budget in that area-from 0 to 2t per cent and from 15 to 17+ per cent-will increase that return to the Treasury to about $70m? Does he agree that the meagre funds allocated to sport in the Budget-approximately $20m-go almost exclusively to the elites of the sporting world, be they Commonwealth Games athletes or members of the Australian Institute of Sport, and virtually nothing goes to ordinary Australians competing in active sport? Will the Minister agree therefore that the Government views Australia's sportsmen and women merely as a source of tax revenue?
Mr WILSON-I think one needs to put into perspective the funding that this Government has provided to Australian sportsmen and women and separate it from the Government's general taxation legislation which provides this Government, State governments and local government with the sort of resources that they need and can allocate according to their priorities for sportsmen, sportswomen and sporting facilities. I draw to the attention of the honourable member the wide ranging policies of the Commonwealth Government which encourage the elite sportsmen and women and those who would aspire to those heights.
In this Budget the Commonwealth Government has made a very substantial increased provision for its sports program. It has put substantial funds into the IntFacilities Program which provides opportunity for elite sportsmen and women from Australia and overseas to perform in facilities of international standard. The honourable member would be mistaken if he thought that those facilities could be used only by the sports~ men and women of national and internatiom,il standard. I am sure many hundreds of thousands of young sportsmen and women will be able to participate in sports taking place in those facilities. The Sports Development Program, on the other hand, has a very substantial element that is designed to give encouragement to young sportsmen and women through strengthening the organisational capacity of Australian sport and through providing development programs such as the National Coaching Accreditation Scheme. The Government's policy is to encourage the elite and also to give encouragement right across the broad base of the community to the provision of increased sports facilities and opportunities for young and old.

NABARLEK URANIUM MINE
Mr ANTHONY-I seek the indulgence of the House to add to an answer to a question which was asked of me yesterday by the honourable member for Reid. It related to a reported incident at Nabarlek uranium mine in the Northern Territory and I undertook to provide further information for him.
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr ANTHONY-Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am advised that the Supervising Scientist first became aware in April 1981 of the possible incident at Nabarlek and was notified by Queensland Mines Ltd on 14 July 1981 that an infringement of the environmental requirements had occurred during the heavy rain on 7 March 1981 when a side flow of fresh input rainwater occurred from the plant run-off pond. That pond was designed to prevent possibly contaminated water from the uranium mill plant area leaving the site. I am advised that although the water in this pond was heavily contaminated early in the last dry season, it has been progressively diluted during the wet season so that any water leaving the area during the incident would have contained only low levels of contamination. However, no samples of water released from the plant area during the incident were collected so it is not possible to document the quality of the water that was actually released from the site. I am advised that no environmental damage is evident from observations made to date.
The mining companies are responsible for monitoring the levels of contamination on the site, while the Northern Territory supervising authorities are responsible for inspection and check monitoring to ensure compliance with the environmental requirements and for monitoring downstream. The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment has asked the Supervising Scientist to make a full investigation of the incident. The matter was discussed at a recent meeting of the Co-ordinating Committee for the Alligator Rivers Region. The Committee has called for reports on the incident and on any deficiencies in regulatory, monitoring or reporting procedures revealed by the incident. The Supervising Scientist will also be reporting on these general matters to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment. Until these investigations are complete and reports are received it is not possible to answer the parts of the question that the honourable member for Reid asked me. Nevertheless the House may be

786 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Minister for Primary Industry

assured that the Government is taking the infringement seriously and that any necessary corrective action that is revealed from the reports will be taken.
SALES TAX
Mr HOWARD-I seek the indulgence of the House--
Mr SPEAKER-I say to the Treasurer that he would do better to ask for my indulgence. He would get it from me. I do not know whether the House would give it to him.
Mr HOWARD-I would be at some risk. Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to add to an answer that I gave to the right honourable member for Lowe yesterday.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman should proceed.
Mr HOWARD-Yesterday the right honourable member for Lowe asked me whether the source of some figures about the consumer price index effect of the sales tax changes was in fact the Bureau of Statistics. I indicated in answer to him that the figures had in fact been obtained by the Department of the Treasury from the Bureau. I have established on subsequent inquiry that that information is wrong. The estimates were provided to me by the Treasury using the methodology of the Bureau. I do not think there will be any significant variation between those estimates and the final outcome.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY: BUDGET SURPLUS
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister for the Capital Territory wishes to add to an answer. He has my indulgence to do so.
Mr HODGMAN-I wish to add to the answer I gave to the honourable member for Canberra. I did not respond to the fourth part of the question. It referred to the position of Australian Capital Territory ratepayers in relation to the 2 per cent of income tax collections made available for local government in the States. I indicate that that matter is currently under consideration. I invite submissions from the honourable members for Canberra, Fraser and Corio and finy other honourable members in the chamber who are interested in that matter.
MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY
Proposed Suspension ofStanding Orders
Mr Kerin-Mr Speaker-
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is not entitled to the call. I know he must have a purpose, but he has not indicated it to me.

Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (2.49)-Mr Speaker, I move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Werriwa from moving:
That this House censures the Minister for Primary Industry for his failure to respond promptly with effective controls or regulations to prevent any doubts as to Australia's determination to stamp out any possibility of further substitution of inferior meats for beef meat exports and expresses its alarm that the only effective measures so far taken have been initiated by United States authorities out of sheer desperation at the lack of action by the Australian Government.
Today in answer to a question the Minister for Primary Industry--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I interrupt the honourable member for Werriwa for a moment. Although I do not know the purpose of the Leader of the House in rising-he has not yet put any motion-I think it may be a conciliatory gesture and we ought to hear him. I call the Leader of the House.
Mr Sinclair-Mr Speaker, I was going to suggest to the honourable member for Werriwa that the Government will not oppose the motion. Therefore, if he wishes to move this motion we will consent to the suspension of Standing Orders so that he might do so.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Motion of Censure
MrKERIN (Werriwa) (2.51)-'--1 move:
That this House censures the Minister for Primary Industry for his failure to respond promptly with effective controls or regulations to prevent any doubts as to Australia's determination to stamp out any possibility of further substitution of inferior meats for beef meat exports and expresses its alarm that the only effective measures so far taken have been initiated by United States authorities out of sheer desperation at the lack of action by the Australian Government.
Today I asked a question of the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). I asked him whether he was going to wait until the United States of America announced new requirements in respect of meat imports before taking action. I had in my possession a telex which details an official United States Department of Agriculture news release. It states:
Secretary of Agriculture John R. Block today announced a series of 'tough, new' steps designated to prevent mislabelled, uninspected or otherwise adulterated meat from coming into the US.
The action follows confirmation by USDA scientists over the weekend that some cartons of meat imported since January from a single Australian plant included horse meat.
Block said USDA will take the following steps to protect American consumers and business interests:
Australian meat labelled as boneless beef presently in the US is being tested to assure its species. The meat will also be

Minister for Primary Industry

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 787

tested to determine whether the adulteration is confined to
the Profreeze plant, Richmond, Victoria, Establishment No. 140C.

Boneless meat leaving Australia must be tested for species
identification by the Australian Government plus be main-
tained under government security until it reaches the US. US authorities will then assume responsibility.

Boneless meat now en route from Australia to the US will be held at the point of entry and tested for species determi-
nation by USDA's food safety and inspection service before it is allowed to enter the US.

Countries shipping boneless meat to the US will be notified that they must initiate a species determination program. All
fresh and frozen boneless meat entering the US, regardless of
country of origin, will be spot-checked for species by US authorities.

USDA will initiate a review of compliance activities within major exporting countries to assure controls are in place dur-
ing all stages of distribution to maintain the integrity of meat exports destined for the US.

'These steps are necessary because mislabelled and adulterated imports apparently have been coming into the US for
several menths' Block said. USDA and Australian authorities
are continuing to investigate the problem.

'Since January I, about 815,000 Ibs of boneless beef have
been imported into the US from the Profreeze facility', Block said. 'Of that USDA has thus far .located and embargoed 270,000 Ibs of boxed unprocessed boneless beef and 275,000
Ibs of patties and ground meat. All of this meat is unacceptable as human food', Block said.

'The discovery last week by Australian authorities that

some product on the docks there destined for the US was ac-

tually kangaroo meat has raised the possibility that kangaroo

meat, as well as horse meat, may have been illicitly imported

in the past.'

.

'Embargoed meat in the US will be further tested for kangaroo after we get testing material from the Australian Government. '
Federal authorities first found in early August that horse meat was being imported in boxes labelled beef when a USDA processing plant inspector in San Diego, California, became suspicious of meat that did not appear to be beef.
I have been quoting from an official United States Department of Agriculture news release. The import of my question today was: Why had the Minister for Primary Industry not taken this simple straightforward action that he could have taken to assure the United States authorities that we were taking the proper steps to ensure that none of this adulterated meat got into the United States of America? The media is having a field day raising all sorts of allegations-next it will be camel, goat or wombat. So far the Minister has said nothing other than to give us these rather fatuous statements that he has referred the matter to the Trade Practices Commission and that the Australian Federal Police are investigating it. The words almost follow identically the same sorts of assurances we got with respect to Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd. The Federal Police have been investigating that matter for years. So far we have no resolution of it.

There is no sense in the Minister coming into this House and saying, in answer to my question, that at last I have taken an interest in this matter because last week I saw him and I said that to my mind it is not in the interests of the Australian beef industry or Australia in general that this issue should get blown up out of all proportion. But it has become very obvious, as the days have unfolded and as this issue has unfolded, that keeping quiet about it on behalf of the Opposition or even the unions-the unions agreed with the same sort of thing; they kept quiet about it-cannot save the industry. There is no sense in the Minister coming into this House and saying that the ideas that I put forward in terms of the steps he could take somehow represent the ideas of others. They mayor may not, but quite plainly the ideas themselves are the simple straightforward ones being bandied about in the industry in terms of actions that the Government could take to protect Australia's name in respect of our largest beef trade. It is a trade worth between $500m and $l,OOOm a year. For the Minister to sit here on his backside for over three weeks now, to give an assurance that the public has known for a week and a half, and to sit here giving the same bland assurances day after day is doing nothing for the beef industry in this country. The cattle producers in this country are greatly concerned. I have inquiries coming into my office all the time from beef producers saying: 'What the heck is Nixon doing about this? We have stuck by the industry and the processors for years. What are they doing? What is happening?'
Australian consumers want to have the guarantees from the Government that a handful of swift operators in Melbourne are not pulling the wool over their eyes too. All that is required from the Minister is a few simple responses in this matter. There are actions he could have taken that would have given assurances to the Australian public and the Australian cattle producing industry. Today, when I raised the question of a judicial inquiry the Minister also said that he looked at that. I agree that there is some case to say there is no way a judicial inquiry or anything like that will solve the problems in the immediate future. We have a problem, and perhaps the Australian Federal Police are the ones best to look at that problem. But, while ever the allegations are spreading and while ever the issue is unfolding, it is quite clear that the Minister should take clear actions, and he can take clearactions with respect to the industry as it is. As it is, other people are completely under a cloud. Allegations such as this came up months and years ago. There have been allegations about forgeries and certificates, and

788 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Minister for Primary Industry

the availability of halal killed meat certificates in Singapore and other places. They were run in the Australian some three or four months ago, I think it was, and no action was taken.
I think it is absolutely essential that the Minister just does not say that five Federal Police-that is the number originally put on to this case; now it is II-is sufficient. There is a lot he could have told the Australian public and the Australian cattle industry. I think it is about time that we had some assurances from this House and from the Minister that he is taking action to guarantee this trade. It seems to me that the United States Department of Agriculture will impose its requirements on the Australian meat industry and we simply will have to follow on from that. If that is the situation-and I suggest that is the situation as I have read the official United States Department of Agriculture news release-I think this Minister should be censured for not having taken action at a far earlier time than he has.
Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (2.59)-1 second the motion, Mr Speaker. It is a dire predicament that Austra~ia finds itself in with its biggest market for meat in jeopardy. We have had a lot of difficulty in this country right throughout the 1970s trying to maintain the viablity of the Australian meat industry, and now to find a trade which is as large as that of the United States put in jeopardy by the behaviour of some unscrupulous people in Australia is most unfortunate indeed. Again, it is a very late hour in the day for the Government to be looking for ways and means of overcoming this occurrence in the future-and at this point it is not even looking. At the moment it is setting II Australian Federal Police officers on to finding out who put this grade of meat in the cold stores.
As my colleague the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) has already pointed out, the United States of America Department of Agriculture has unilaterally taken action, obviously because the Australian Government has been so tardy in taking action. While the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) has been fiddling around with this matter, as he has done with Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd and the other matters within his portfolio which have been of concern in recent years, the United States has been setting its own house in order and making sure that the standard of its food quality is being protected and that, indeed, what it contracts for is what it gets. It ill becomes the Minister to come into this chamber and give the rambling answer that he gave today about waiting for a report from

the Bureau of Animal Health when our whole meat trade is in jeopardy. Apparently television programs depicting kangaroos hopping around are being used in the United States to try to make a mockery of the meat issue and the meat trade with Australia. The damage which will be done by this means among United States consumers will be horrendous. There is no point in saying, as the Minister said at Question Time, that the United States Administration is taking a sane view. One would expect the United States administration to be taking a sane view. What view will the United States consumers who will be well and truly apprised of the fact that we have been selling them horse meat and kangaroo meat take of the market? What will be the market consequences, regardless of the actions of the United States Administration?
What do we have here? We do not see.any sign of super-urgency. The Minister says: 'She'll be right. Just leave it to me. I will get a report in a week or two from the Bureau of Animal Health'. We have II Federal policemen trying to work out the species of meat and who put what in a cold store, instead of the Minister trying to instigate at breakneck speed some kind of species identification procedure and some sort of security on bond stores, not cold stores, which guarantees that this occurrence will not occur in the future and that the United States can be reassured about the veracity of claims by Australians that we are selling to the United States what we indeed contract to sell. A telex from the United States makes the matter quite clear. I will just repeat some of the things mentioned in it. It states:
Boneless meat leaving Australia must be tested for species identification by the Australian Government. . . .
This telex refers to an announcement by the United States Secretary of Agriculture. I repeat that it states that boneless meat leaving Australia must be tested for species identification by the Australian Government. The Minister never told us about that today. What is the United States doing? Is it making a decision without the Minister? On the Minister's performance, it is no wonder that the United States is making decisions without the Minister because he is a log, a drone. He sits quietly while our meat industry falls apart. The telex continues:
.. . . that it must be maintained under government security until it reaches the US.
The United States Government is making its position clear. It is not waiting until the Minister develops a new scheme to look after the meat industry. The United States Government is laying it right on top of the Minister. It is telling the Minister that unless he complies Australia will not get

Minister for Primary Industry

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 789

United States authority to import. The telex goes on to say:
Boneless meat now enroute from Australia to the US will be held at the point of entry and tested for species deterr:tinalion by United States Department of Agriculture's Food Safety and Inspection Service before it is allowed to enter the US.
Countries shipping boneless meat to the US will be notified that they must initiate a species determination program.
In other words, the United States is saying that it will notify Australia. Apparently the United States Government has not already discussed this with the Australian Government. Why should it considering the slack, nonchalant way in which the Minister has treated this whole issue since it first arose in August? It is now a month since this matter was first discovered. Where would the Australian meat industry go if all of a sudden the United States decided that it just would not allow Australian meat into the United States until such time as certain procedures are implemented here and there was some real time delay? What would that do to the finances of the Australian beef industry in anyone year until' we got this matter straightened out? Of course the United States Administration is concerned about the well-being of its people, particularly with talks of salmonella and other problems that we had in Australia. Some of the beef which was headed for the United States market might have come onto the domestic market by way of salami and all of those other things.
One thing that is clear is that this meat has been exported through cold stores, not bond stores. Companies are able to issue stamps in respect of the species of animal. My colleague the honourable member for Werriwa mentioned today at Question Time the prospect of the Government issuing a stamp and instituting government inspection procedures. Again, that matter was not responded to. The Minister's response has been totally inadequate. Given this matter and the dithering on the Asia Dairy Industries issue and in all the other problems that we have seen in the past under this Minister's administation, there could be no ground for confidence in the United States that the Australian Government will move with expedition to shore up this matter. The proposition which has been proposed by the Opposition is, in the circumstances, quite reasonable. We have not rushed into this thing with our mouths open trying to score political points. We have waited for the Government to announce its intitiatives. It has not. It has sat. Again, when questioned today, it did not announce any initiatives. As well as that, the Minister did not even have the honesty to mention that the United States Secretary of AgricuHure has made these

unilateral decisions. Maybe he did not know. If he did not know he is very poorly informed. If the Opposition can be in possession of a telex from the United States Department of Agriculture talking in these terms then why is not the Government? The telex states:
'Since January I, about 815,000 Ibs of boneless beef have been imported into the US from the Profreeze facility' . . .
The telex continues:
'. . . USDA has thus far located and embargoed 270,000 Ibs--
That is, 130 tonnes-'---
Of boxed unprocessed boneless beef and 275,000 Ibs of patties and ground meat. All of this meat is unacceptable as human food . . .
That is, 260 tonnes of beef have been embargoed by the United States Drug Administration and the Minister sits and messes around and says: 'Wait until we get an investigation. We might have a judicial inquiry'. He says that he is waiting on the report from the animal health authorities and that he has referred the matter to the Trade Practices Commission. Whatever happened to ministerial action? What does the Government think we have Ministers for? Ministers are there to break up the log-jam, to get the system working with expedition and to make some Qecisions. One would have thought that the Department of Primary Industry would have got cracking on this matter very smartly. It came up with a whole new list of procedures for identification to protect the United States trade which would have been recognised by the United States Administration as an honest and genuine attempt by the Australian Government to put an end to any prospect of recurrence of this sort of trade and traffic in nonbeef meats. Instead, we have had vacillating reports and the general kind of incompetence we have seen from the Minister for Primary Industry for some time now. The motion moved by the Opposition deserves the support of the House.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3.7)-1 think this censure motion does not come to grips at all with the subject at hand. That is the simple fact of the matter. The reason for that is that the Opposition fails to understand what has been done in respect of the problems of substitution of meat. At the moment the facts are that there is only one brand name where substitution of meat has been proven. The brand name of the meat where both horse meat and kangaroo meat have been found is 140C. This Government was advised of this by the United States Department of AgricuHure on 11 August.

790 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Minister for Primary Industry

On 11 August-talking about inaction-we suspended all further exports from that establishment. One cannot get more prompt action than that. To make an allegation that there has been no action on the part of the Minister for Primary Industry or the Government shows that the Opposition is, unfortunately, trying to make political capital out of an industry that has enormous consequences for the Australian community.
On 13 August when we received confirmation of the horse meat presence following further tests, we deregistered establishment 140C. That means that meat bearing the number cannot and will not be exported anywhere in the world. Is there a lack of action in that? This censure motion charges me with a lack of action. Yet, within the two days following the discovery of the horse meat, on the first day we suspended further esports and, following confirmation that there were foreign substances in the meat, we banned that works 140C from further export. It is easy for the Opposition to come into this Parliament and make wild allegations and try to make political capital. I understand that. It is true that allegations are coming out of the woodwork on this matter. As I said in answer to a question all the allegations that have been put to me I have put to the police for study and investigation because, as I said, people are coming out of the woodwork with allegations. This can be a highly emotional matter.
A number of wild and emotional statements have been made in recent days on the issue. If one picks up today's Sydney Daily Telegraph one will see that the executive director of the Cattlemen's Union, Rick Farley, is reported as calling on the Government to stop trying to cover up the scandal. I do not believe that delisting the works from export is trying to cover up any scandal. I would say that it is quite to the contrary-that it is really getting to the nub of the matter. Mr Farley was also reported in the same newspaper article as saying that he had been told by the Americans that all imports of Australian beef had been frozen. That simply is not true. Mr Farley, who says he speaks for the cattle industry in the northern parts of Queensland, at least ought to get his facts right. We have had consultation with the Americans on the way in which the matter ought to be handled. I had discussions with Mr Brock when he was here and with the American Ambassador on the matter and they professed to be quite satisfied with the actions the Australian Government has taken on the issue. This again shows that the Opposition's censure motion has no grounthe Americans have made in respect of changes to procedures, there is nothing in those requested changes that I have not proposed or am

not proposing to implement if they are practicable. Following consultations over the last few d~ys with United States officials, we are sending a veterinarian to the United States to discuss implementation of the procedures that will occur. So it is incorrect to say that the United States has unilaterally introduced procedures without Australia's knowledge or without consultation.
When the meat was discovered we immediately called in the Australian Federal Police and their investigations are continuing. We have strengthened the number of officers on the caseincreased it from five to 11 ~and they are under the control of Detective Chief Inspector Elkington in Melbourne. I took further action. I immediately ordered the Bureau of Aminal Health to undertake an urgent review of the meat inspection system, particularly final export surveillance because it is quite clear that the transfer is taking place after the final Commonwealth inspection, in the boning and packing works somewhere in the cold stores. It is during the transfer from the cold stores to the shipside after the packets are sealed that the unauthorised meat is being added.
As a result of the meat being discovered I also ordered the Bureau of Animal Health-it has implemented the order-to make spot checks of meat in all States, to have extra meat inspector surveillance at cold stores, extra surveillance and monitoring of ship loading and intensive checking of all certificates and documentations. So in point of fact, the reason the Americans have not just lowered the boom on Australian exports as suggested by Mr Farley is that we have taken all the appropriate actions to ensure that the meat industry is being handled appropriately. In addition, the Bureau is currently examining ways in which to introduce new processes for sealing, stamping and certificating export cartons and also ways in which to introduce greater security over meat transfers, the boning rooms, cold stores and trucking to dockside. It may well be that meat that leaves the boning room in its packet will have to go into a bond store and can only be removed directly to the ship side and that the cold store, being a bond store, will be unable to be used for any other purpose. I have also initiated moves to increase the maximum penalties imposable under the Customs Act for offences of this nature from $1,000 to $100,000. I agree that a $1,000 fine is ridiculous for a criminal act of this nature.
Mr Dawkins-Why not try to make it retrospective?
Mr NIXON-I agree with that. I am going to try to make it retrospective to pick up the people involved in this case and I just hope that the

Minister for Primary Industry

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 791

House of Representatives and the Senate will agree for once to retrospectivity in legislation because of the seriousness of this matter. My colleague the Minister for Blisiness and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) has asked the Trade Practices Commission to investigate allegations of false description in the trading of meat and this could result in additional penalties being imposed on the offenders. Wethe possible penalties including use of the Crimes Act, although this would depend on what evidence is produced. I repeat: We have at al1 times been in close communication with United States officials and are co-operating with them in every way.
Mr Keating-How come they made those decisions without you? Tel1 us that.
Mr NIXON-The al1egation that the honourable member for Blaxland makes is not even true. He should get his facts straight. That is the trouble with him; he is too busy always making wild al1egations in this Parliament without substantiating his facts.
Mr Keating-You are incompetent. We found you out.
Mr NIXON-Would the honourable member like a handkerchief? I will lend him a handkerchief to wipe the tears away.
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will resume his seat. The honourable member for Blaxland will remain silent.
Mr Keating-He is interjecting too.
.Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Blaxland will remain silent. I cal1 the Minister.
Mr NIXON-The United States has imposed some new procedures with which I agree entirely. If Opposition members had read my Press statement of early this morning they would have seen that there were consultations between the United States and the Australian Government on new procedures. That is contrary to their own ,knowledge or view. The first procedure is that al1 stocks of Australian meat at present in the United States are to be held and sampled for substitution infringements-and I agree with that. Futur,e consignments of Australian meat to the United States will be species sampled on arrival before releaseand I cannot argue with that. The Australian Bureau of Animal Health will set up an approved procedure for species testing in Australia before meat receives its final certification prior to loading-and I certainly agree with that. In other words, there is nothing in the American approach with which I do not agree entirely. We are going much further, as I have just said, in ensuring that the problem ca~lllot occur~gain. The reason why

the Americans have taken such a rational attitude to this serious matter is that we have kept them informed about the activities of the Australian Government.

Let me turn to the question of the judicial inquiry. I certainly gave very serious consideration to the possibility of a judicial inquiry but I repeat that I was advised by the Solicitor-General that the best form of approach is to al10w the police to complete their investigations and for the normal course of law to fol1ow. Reasonable penalties would certainly be better than a royal commission which could be dragged on, perhaps for two or three years. I do not abandon entirely the idea of a royal commission. Perhaps at the end of the day when final advice comes from the police such an idea can be picked up. But at this time. I am advised that the best thing to do is to al10w the normal course of the law to fol1ow.

Final1y, I am determined to clean up this matter. The only meat works so far where substitution of meat has been found is 140C. Tests are occurring in al1 States and in other works in Victoria to see how widespread it is. The Opposition ought to understand that if only the l40C works proves to be substituting meat, it will be a minimal portion of the total meats involved. After al1, we are exporting meat to the value of $1,OOOm this year. About $600m of that meat is going to America. If Profreeze at the 140C works is the only works involved that represents a minimal share of the market. I cannot say whether it is the only works involved until the investigation by the Bureau of Animal Health in other States and other works is completed. The Australian meat industry-I have had discussions with al1 its leaders-knows the action that has been taken to ensure the future and the safety of the industry. I reject the censure motion moved by the honourable member for Werriwa because I do not think he understands the facts relating to the matter.

Question put:

That the motion (Mr K~rin's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

48

Noes

68

Majority

20

Armilage, J. L
Beazley, K:. C. Blewell,N. , Bowen, Lionel 'Browri, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G.

AYES

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kent,L

792 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Health Care

AYES
Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Dull"y,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. e. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J. Innes, U. E.

Kerin,l.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo
M"Mahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Uren,T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. WiIIis,R. Young, M.J.

NOES

Adermann, A. E.
Anthony, J. D.
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J.
Bourchicr,J. W. Bradfield, J. M.
Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A.
Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J.
Chapman, H. G. P.- Coleman, W. P.
Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B.
Dean,A.G. Dobie,J. D. M. Drummond, P. H.
Edwards, H. R.
Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, Bj. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J.
Hodges, J. e. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D.
Hyde,J. M.
Jarman, A. W. Jull,D. F:
Katter,R.e.
Killen,D.J.
Lloyd, B. Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M. J. R.
MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M.
McMahon, Sir William
McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M.
Moore,J.e.
Newman, K. E.
Nixon, P. J O'Keefe, F. L.
Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C.
Sainsbury, M. E. Shack P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. Mce. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson D. S. Tuckey, e. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

Question so resolved in the negative,

PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE
Reports
Mr BUNGEY (Canning)-In accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, I present the reports relating to the following proposed works:
Extensions to international terminal facilities, Brisbane Airport, Queensland; and Garden Island, New South WalesModernisation stage 2.
Ordered that the reports be printed.

HEALTH CARE
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) proposing

that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussions, namely:

The confusing and chaotic transition to a more complex, re-

actionary and regressive health scheme.

'

I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.

More than the number afmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-

Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (3.28)-The Opposition is totally opposed to where the Government is going as regards health cover and it is also appalled by the manner in which it is going there. In the wording of this matter of public importance we have tried to define quite precisely why we object to where the Government is going and to comment on the manner of getting there. We have described the scheme to which the Government is going as reactionary, complex and regressive. As the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) has quite frequently avoided debate in the past on the substance of issues by playing around with the meaning of words, let us be quite precise about each of the terms we are using to describe the Government's scheme.

Firstly, it is reactionary. The term 'reactionary' means a return to a former system. The Government has ended the universal protection against the costs of catastrophic illness. It has done so in two ways: Firstly, by ending a universal Commonwealth medical benefit and, secondly by compelling the States-or trying to compel the States-to impose means tests in their public hospitals. By those two actions it has ended the universal cover which has existed against cata-
strophic illness since the introduction of Medibank. The health scheme which the Minister is now desperately and somewhat incompetently trying to get into place by next week is a throwback, a return to a former system. It is a return to the system that prevailed in this country in the late 1960s and early 1970s. It has all the features of the pre-Medibank system, some of them in slightly modified form.

First of all, it involves a gaggle of competing pfivate health funds collecting flat rate taxes in lieu of the Government collecting the same sorts of taxes. Secondly, it involves means tested public hospitals excluding all but the very poor from open access public provision. Thirdly, it involves no health benefits or cover by right of being a taxpayer, but simply as the result of being a member of a private fund. Fourthly, it involves disadvantaged groups being stigmatised in a rather arbitrary way and being defined for special charity

Health Care

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 793

care. The term 'reactionary' is an accurate description of the system to which we are moving, although it might also be somewhat too polite a description of the system which the Government is endeavouring to put into place by next week.
It is a system which was thoroughly condemned by the Nimmo Committee of Inquiry into Health Insurance a dozen years ago. I wish to echo briefly what was said 12 years ago: The system was complex and incomprehensible to many; the contribution rates were beyond the capacity of some members of the community and involved considerable hardship for others; and there were excessive administrative costs. I simply ask the people of Australia to consider the cost of the present splurge of health advertisements, as all of the private funds busily battle each 'other for the bodies. We are going to inherit with the new scheme all those problems which the Nimmo Committee pointed out 12'years ago.
Secondly, we have described the scheme as regressive. By a regressive tax we mean a tax which takes a higher proportion of the income of a low income earner than of a high income earner. What we have under the new system is a nearcompulsory levy. In other words, it approximates to a flat rate tax paid not to the Government, but to the privThe Minister would like to see it as close to covering everybody as possible. It is a regressive tax because it lays a heavier burden on the shoulders of those least able to bear it. For instance, it will constitute 5 per cent of the income of a family on $200 a week, but only one per cent of the income of a family on $1,000 a week. Now, of course, the Minister has argued that the governmental subsidies for the insurance system and the public hospital care come out of general revenue raised by progressive taxation and that if we are to make a fair assessment of this new system, those elements should be encompassed, as well as what he himself admits is a regressive flat rate contribution paid by all those over the $160 mark ..
There are three responses to the Minister's point. First of all, it ignores at least one of the sets of subsidies; that is, those to private hospitals. These subsidies overwhelmingly go to the well-off. Secondly, it ignores the fact that under private insurance systems much greater use is made of health services by the well-off than by the less well-off. Indeed, one could sustain a plausible argument that one reason for forcing lower and middle income earners into the present health insurance system is to keep down contribution rates for the better-off. But even if the Minister's argument were without those flaws, it is. still no excuse

for the direct contributions-that is, the contributions that directly affect the weekly family
budget-being flat rate contributions unrelated to
income. Indeed, taking the Minister's analogy of
the virtues of a progressive type of system, the Minister should surely argue that the same pro-
gressive principles he has talked about in the subsidy system should apply to the direct insurance payments just as much as to the indirect subsidies.
Thirdly, it is an excessively complex scheme.

Any honourable member in this House who doubts the complexity of the scheme should read
the 12-sided pamphlet entitled "In Sickness and Health' which, according to the Minister, 'explained the new arrangements in simple terms'. If the pamphlet is too much to cope with, as many are finding, one can phone the hotline where,
when the information provided is not plain wrong, it is often obscure and frequently far from simple. I am not blaming the hotline operators.
One cannot blame these people, who have been suddenly thrown into this task with this excess-
ively complex scheme. Many of the people working on the hotline are frequently without any background whatever in health insurance and
have been given a quite impossible task.

This pamphlet brings us to the second aspect of the debate; that is, the confusion and chaos envel-
oping the transition from the fourth to the fifth
Fraser health scheme. I use the term 'chaotic'
with regard to this scheme because 'chaotic' means utterly confusing. I am a little chary about
discussing the chaos and confusion accompanying
the transition because the Minister yesterday and in recent times has developed a new thesis that
somehow we in the Labor Opposition are respon-
sible for the confusion. However I think the
answer to that is simple and direct. We did not
write this explanatory pamphlet; the Minister did. We did not design this apaUing scheme; the Minis-
ter did, or at least he designed those parts of the
addled mess which the Prime Minister (Mr Mal-
colm Fraser) permitted him to design.

Firstly, this pamphlet is very confusing arid the

confusion begins with the title 'In sickness and in

health

better value for your dollar'.

Better value for whose dollar? The family with a

small child and a gross income of $185 a week will

have to pay $10 a week for family health in-

surance. The pensioner who just misses out on the

health benefit card will have the same payment to

meet. Those with chronic illnesses but with in-

comes just above the poverty card level are the

people who supposedly will get better value for

their dollar. Fully half of the pamphlet-one

whole side-is designed to explain the nightmare

maze of the disadvantaged scheme. A person

o

794 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Hefllth Care

needs at least a university degree to comprehend that part ,of the scheme. Yet some of the people most lacking in skills to find their way through the bureaucratic maze and some of the most inarticulate members of this society are required to cope with that scheme. I was much impressed by the comment of a senior social worker in South Australia who said:
lthought I understood the disadvantage scheme until I read the Government's pamphlet. Now I am more confused than ever.
Throughout the Commonwealth, social welfare and voluntary agencies have found the Governments pamphlet so unsatisfactory that they have considered it necessary to print their own explanatory pamphlets. One of the results of this is that we are a week away from the scheme being introduced and only a minuscule proportion of the working poor have applied for the health care card. But the pamphlet is not merely confusing; it is also dishonest. It is dishonest about the options open to people. The bottom of page 4 states.
Those who do not insure with a registered health fund miss out on these benefits and will have to pay all their medical and hospital bills.
That ignores entirely(the non-registered commercial funds. The claim simply is not true. People who take out insurance with these commercial funds will not have to pay all their medical and hospital bills, as a former Minister of Health in a Liberal Government in New South Wales is busily advocating the scheme all over the New South Wales newspapers. It is simply not true to /1lake that claim. The Government and the Minister may not like the particular commercial option but that seems to be no reason (or simply lying about it. Again the pamphlet does not canvass the merits of any option except combined medical and hospital cover through the registered funds. One would not gather, from. this piece of governmental propaganda, that hospital only insurance was a viable option for many people. The merits of hospital only insurance are never canvassed. Indeed, the reverse is done. The pamphlet strongly recommends against it by stating: " ,
YQU should strongly consider' taking out both forms of insurance.
Yet the Australian Hospital Association, the" Doctors .Reform Society, the New South Wales Health Commission and many other organisations have suggested that hospital only insura\1ce is a viable form for many people. Indeed I am pleased to see the New South Wales Government producing a much more effective and clearer pamphlet than that of the Commonwealth Government. In that pamphlet it points out:

Basic hospital insurance completely covers accommodation charges at the shared ward rate; charges f6r all medical services-provided you choose to be treated by doctors nomi-
nated by the hospital; and all casualty. and out-patient
treatment.

Such is the feeling for the pamphlet produced by the Minister that the South Australian Health Commission, even under a Liberal government, has found it necessary to produce a pamphlet which discusses low cost health insurance. It felt the necessity to put out such a pamphlet to correct the misleading and dishonest propaganda of the Minister. This pamphlet makes it very clear that basic hospital insurance is a sensible choice for many people. The Commission states:

For about $7 a week. you and your family are fully covered. in all situations.,and you need not fear having til find hundreds of dollars for large hospit<ll bills. which most simply cannot afford. Unpaid hospital bills can result in legal action.

The pamphlet states earlier:

You cannot afford to be without at least basic hospital insurance.

'Basic hospital insurance gives your family cover felr the cost of hospital and medical services,

So there has been a real effort to combat the misleading propaganda of the Government. I admit that these pamphlets also make the qualifications about basic hospital cover, but at least they present that as an option to people which is not done in the so-called simple explanatory pamphlet put out by the Government. .

There is a week to go, and uncertainty remains

about the exact level of contribution rates for

some of the funds. With eight days to go we dis-

covered yesterday that Medibank private rates in

three States have been rejected as too low. I am

not disagreeing with this decision. I have argued

that rates right across the board have been pitched

too low in the battle to pull people into private

funds. These rates are not sustainable for more

than 12 months, if that. I think the Minister has

doubts as well. At least I expected the rates to sur-

vive the weekend when Imade that prediction.

.

'

There remains a mystery on the Medibank Pri-

vate rates issue which the Minister now has a

chance to clarify. His evasive answers to date have

not done so. Why did Medibank Private produce

thousands of pamphlets with th(! non-approved

rates which have now been scrapped? Was itan

appalling administrative blunder by Medibank

Private, or was Medibank Private led to believe

there would be no problems with its rates, an

understanding on which the Government or the

Dep~.rtment of Health reneged? I take up the

answer that the Minister gave to a question yes-

terday. l1'nfortunately the Hansard is .not yet

available. In answer to that question the Minister

Health Care

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 795

said that it was routine for the registration committee to make adjustments to the rates. I therefore challenge him to name the fund and the occasions on which the committee has made routine adjustments to the rates since the 1976 changes. I also remind him of the decision in December 1977 of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal which gave the Minister power to accept or reject but not to amend rates. So perhaps the Minister can explain the answer that he gave to the House yesterday.
I have brought the question of the viability of contribution rates to public notice because I am concerned at the likelihood of a repeat of the 1976 health change experience. There we had exactly the same situation. All of these companies were battling to get bodies on their books becau/ie once they had safely captured them they could start pushing up the rates. In 1976, in the washout, when Medibank Private was forced to lower its initial contribution rates-it announced them first; other funds then undercut it-Medibank lost $20m but all the funds together lost a staggering total of $194m as a result of those very. low rates. The funds survived this experience only with the reintroduction in 1978 of a 40 per cent Commonwealth subsidy, an expensive bailing out indeed. I ask the Minister: Is he not concerned that the kind of competition which took place in 1976, when a lot of loose bodies were around as Medibank was broken down and destroyed, represents exactly the same danger as that which is now threatening the whole system in this country? Health insurance organisations are undercutting low rates in the battle.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (3.43)-At least the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) said one thing which cannot be disputed, and that was his opening statement that the Opposition was totally opposed to the Government's new health arrangements and would do everything that it could to make that opposition plain. That is really the only thing that I agree with in the honourable gentleman's presentation today. Over the last few weeks the Opposition has been increasingly desperately seeking a line of attack on the Government's new health insurance arrangements. It has been, as we have heard again today, pecking away at the peripheral and administrative aspects of the implementation process of these new arrangements. But there has been very little comment. from the Opposition on the substance of the new arrangements. Sure there has been criticism about rates,

timings and the content of leaflets, but there has been very little criticism about the substance of the new arrangements.
This search by the Opposition for some feasible line of criticism has led it into what I regard as a most reprehensible position. Over a period the Opposition, including the honourable member for Bonython, and his cohorts in some of the State governments and in some of the State oppositions have sought to create misunderstandings amongst the community. Obviously, it is in the best interests of the honourable member for Bonython and the Australian Labor Party to create that misunderstanding. It is in their political best interests. Their attitude is: 'To blazes with the best interests of the people; let us create confusion, let us try to convince people that something is complex when any calm, considered analysis of the arrangements would refute that suggestion'.
Let us look at the most recent attempt, which has been centred on health insurance fund contribution rates. The honourable member finished his speech by talking about fund contribution rates. Everybody in this House will be aware from recent statements that when an insurance organisation wishes to vary its contribution rates it makes an application to my Department. The proposed new rates are examined by a registration committee. Let me point out again to the honourable member, so that he will get it utterly clear in his mind, that a registration committee is an expert body the membership of which includes a representative of the Government Actuary. If he is suggesting that those people are anything less than utterly responsible in the carrying out of their duties, let him say that publicly. That committee is charged with the responsibility to consider whether the rates sought are viable and are in the best interests of contributors to the funds. If the Department considers that the proposed rates are inappropriate it will convey its concern to the funds and agreed variations are made. That is a routine process. The rates set vary between funds. They vary according to membership structure, financial reserves and other factors which are taken into account. When the rates are settled it is up to each fund, and not the Government, to announce the new rates. The Government does not decide when the funds announce their rates. It is the funds themselves which make that decision.
Here we have. an extraordinary situation. Members of the Opposition have been daiming simultaneously that the new rates as they are announced are qangerously low~we heard that from the honourable member for Bonython-or that they are artificially high. they cannot have it both ways. I think it is a preposterous situation.

796 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Health Care

Of course, Opposition spokesmen are competing for media space and kudos within their own party, but when they make sweeping statements about the appropriateness of contribution levels without any shred of financial or documentary support for their claims, it is sheer mischief-making and the honourable member for Bonython, in his heart of hearts, knows it. They have sought to spread concern in the community about the viability of particular funds. That, in my view, is, to say the least, a most unworthy approach. Similarly, Opposition spokesmen have criticised the Government, again simultaneously, for spending too much and too little on advertising and information programs about the new arrangements. Obviously, the name of the game is two bob each way-an approach requiring a minimum of commitment and revealing a cynical disregard for the facts.
Perhaps the most glaring example of these politically motivated attempts to cloud issues and to create confusion has been the campaign by the Opposition to push hospital only insurance as the best option for cover under the new arrangements. I have consistently advised the public carefully to consider the coverage offered by the various insurance policies and consciously to select that most suited to their needs. To say that I have not acknowledged the possibility of a hospital only cover as an option is simply not in accord with the facts. One of the great benefits of the sorts of insurance arrangements that we now have is that there is an element of choice or freedom to choose what best suits an individual or a family. But here we have the Opposition, aided and abetted by the New South Wales Government, irresponsibly urging the hospital only option upon everyone, whether or not it be appropriate to their needs. Responsible authorities from the major metropolitan hospitals have warned of the desirability of full insurance coverage for those not covered by the guidelines for free health care. I think it was most revealing that a most senior physician in a New South Wales public hospital wrote a letter to the Sydney Morning Herald pointing out the dangers of accepting without question the hospital only option.
I shall provide one more example of what I regard as a cynical, politically motivated approach by the Opposition to the new health arrangements. It concerns its support for the political con trick of the year-the New South Wales Government's extension 'of eligibility for free hospital care'. Let us look at how generous the New South Wales Government really was. Having been placed in a position under the new hospital funding arrangements whereby it will have an extra $SOm to play around with, the New South Wales

Government's action was little more than political grandstanding. Let me illustrate that point. The New South Wales Government grandly announced that repatri!ltion pensioners would be eligible for free hospital care-something they already get in the Commonwealth repatriation hospitals. One wonders whether these confused and confusing efforts by the Opposition stem from the fact that it cannot find anything to criticise in the policy and substance of the new arrangements. I acknowledge that the honourable member for Bonython believes that he has criticised the policy and the substance of the new arrangements, but he has not had a great deal of support for his efforts from his party. If we look around the Opposition benches in this chamber this afternoon we can see how very seriously the Opposition regards this debate. There are about three members of the Opposition present totally supporting the honourable member for Bonython.
One wonders whether the Opposition is seeking to practice diversionary tactics in an attempt to conceal the paucity of its policies in this area. We have been hearing for quite a long period from the honourable member for Bonython that the Opposition is going to come up with a new health scheme. In fact, he spent some time overseas studying the Canadian situation. We are anxiously looking forward to his putting forward these new policies which will reach a new millennium under a Labor dominated government.
The Government has undertaken a major information exercise in publicising the I September arrangements. Millions of copies of explanatory literature have been printed and widely distributed. Heavily advertised telephone hotline information services were set up in each State. The honourable member for Bonython sought to deni-. grate those. Again, I think that that action was unworthy. I have rung those hotlines myself and have been impressed with the objectivity and the depth of knowledge displayed by the people answering the telephones. All medical practitioners have been contacted and provided with full information. Welfare and community groups and individuals have been provided with briefings on the changes. Any change to an existing arrangement will cause problems for some peoplebut I believe that the Government's informaion program has in this case helped to minimise any
such problems.
I turn to the meat of this debate. The Opposition claims that the 1 September arrange" ments are reactionary and regressive. We have had a little lecture from the honourable member for Bonython as to what he means by reactionary and regressive. In one sense the new arrangements

Health Care

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 797

seek to shake off the lingering legacy of the opencheque philosophy of the Labor Party. The Australian voter wiII find it hard to forget the emphasis placed during Labor's period of government on big government, big taxes, a denial of choice and a distortion of Commonwealth and State priorities. This Government's actions in formulating the new health arrangements are based on the following objectives: Access by all to high quality health care; a pluralist approach to health care delivery; preservation of freedom of choice by both providers and users of health care; small government; acceptance by the State governments of their proper role in planning for and providing efficient and economic health care services; wherever appropriate, a personal financial moiety in each health transaction to encourage responsible usage; for those in genuine need, complete protection against health care costs; encouragement of the private sector; and fostering of a sense of responsibility among the providers of health care.
Let us compare those objectives with those of the universal, compulsory, centralised government health schemes favoured by members of the Labor Party. They prefer to have a health scheme run by a large monopolistic organisation. Such organisations can and do become insensitive to the needs of individuals. They tend to offer fewer choices. Their performance and cost effectiveness cannot be measured against that of their competitors because they have none. I point out that there is an air of unreality about this aspect of the debate. As I have already mentioned, the Opposition does not yet have a health policy. One is promised, or threatened, but we still have not seen it. I wonder why the honourable member for Bonython is being so shy-he is not normally a shy person-about revealing all, telling the Australian public the details of the new grandiose health scheme that the Labor Party wishes to bring in.
There is no better example of the effect of the Labor Government's philosophy than its intrusion into the State's health responsibilities. Everybody will remember that a major component of the Medibank scheme introduced in 1975 by Mr Hayden was the hospital cost-sharing arrangements. Under those agreements the States had little incentive to economise in their hospital services, as in effect half of the net costs of operating those services was met by the Commonwealth. Each dollar of public hospital expenditure cost the States only SOc. No restraints were built into these agreements. The Commonwealth was committed to match, dollar for dollar, public hospital

operating costs. On gaining office this Government moved quickly to renegotiate these openended agreements. We acted to ensure that the States had to operate their public hospitals within the context of agreed budgets. These agreements perpetuated divided financial responsibility. We have acted to overcome that situation.
The incentive for States to rationalise the provision of public hospital services and to eliminate wasteful duplication had been diminished. The potential for the private hospital sector to plan an increased role with the resultant saving in public funds under the Australian Labor Party was substantially ignored. We have restored that incentive. What is more, agreements provided for free treatment not only for those in special need but also for all those who simply chose not to take out private health insurance. People who could afford to pay a private doctor started to go to hospital out-patient departments to get their treatment without charge. We have seen the effect that has had. The Jamison Committee of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals looked into this situation in great detail. It concluded:
The Commonwealth should not normally interfere in the internal proceedings of the States and territories in their provision of health services. Health services should be based on needs and the States and territories themselves are the best judges of what their needs are . . . the probl~ms, inefficiences, disincentives and restrictions associated with the existing cost-sharing agreements and fragmented funding for' other health services should be avoided or at least minimised in any future funding arrangements.
We have acted in the face of that sort of statement and the recommendations of the Jamison Committee because we believe that the existing situation was not in the best interests of good medicine and responsibility and was not encouraging either to the deliverers or to the receivers of health care in terms of financial responsibility. One of the great things which has emerged as a result of the changes has been that the dire predictions of the Labor Party, particularly those of the honourable member for Bonython, about the extra cost have simply not been realised. This is a cause for great chagrin on the part of the honourable member and on the part of his party and its supporters. The fact is that the cost of private .health insurance to the people of Australia, taking into account the !full range of support offered by the Federal Government, wiII be less in a full year than is presently the case; not more but less. The cost of basic health insurance announced by all the funds so far demonstrates that this is in fact the case. This is a responsible health scneme. It will come into effect on 1 September. Medical practitioners and allied health practitioners will

798 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Health Care

have an incentive to act responsibly in the delivery of high quality health care. People in genuine need will be protected but others will have an encouragement to ensure that the treatment they get is not wasteful and that they have the opportunity of choice which is not available under the scheme offered by the Labor Party either now or in the
future.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The Minister's time has expired.

Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh)(3.58)-I make the point that the question raised by the shadow Minister was never answered by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar)-

Motion (by Mr Hodges) put:

That the business of the day be called on.

The House divided.

(The Chairman-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

67

Noes

46

Majority
AYES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony. J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N.A. Bungey, M. H. Cameron. Donald Cameron. Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles;G.O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom, R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges. J. e. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

21
Hyde,J. M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. e. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. Mackenzie. A. J. Mclean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. . Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. Mce. Spender, J. M. Street. A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. e. Blewett, N.
Bowen, Lionel Brown, John, Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass, M. H.

NOES

Jenkins. H. A. Johnson, les (Teller) Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J. e.
Klugman. R. E.

NOES

Charles. D. E. Child,J. Cross, M. D.
Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V.
Fry,K. L. Holding, A. e. Howe,B. L. Humphreys. B. e. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R.

Mcleay, leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L.
Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous; A. C.
Uren,T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young, M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

GOVERNMENT BUSINESS
Precedence
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (4.4)-1 move:
That, unless otherwise ordered, government business take precedence of general business on each day of sitting until the Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1981-82 and the Appropriation Bill (No.2) 1981-82 have passed all stages in the House.
This motion is one which normally is moved at this stage. It is one that reflects the fact that members are able to canvass any issues which concern them or their electorates within the Budget debate and, in the light of that, we believe it is appropriate that the motion again be put to the Parliament this year and passed.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

ESTIMATES COMMITEES
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (4.6)-1 move:
That the proposed expenditures for the departments and services contained in Schedule 2 of the Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1981-82 be referred, as indicated, to Estimates Committees A, B, C, D, E and F for examination and report by 23 September 1981:
Estimates Com.mittee A Parliament Prime Minister and Cabinet Foreign Affairs Defence
Estimates Committee BSocial Security Health Veterans' Affairs Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Aboriginal Affairs
Estimates Committee CCapital Territory Home Affairs and Environment Science and Technology Communications Administrative Services Attorney-General's
Estimates Committee DTreasury Finance Advance to the Minister for Finance Transport

Estimates Committees
Primary Industry
Estimates Committee EEmployment and Youth Affairs Industrial Relations Education Housing and Construction
Estimates Committee FIndustry and Commerce Business and Consumer Affairs

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 799
Trade and Resources National Development and Energy
I also seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a schedule of the proposed sitting pattern of the Estimates committees.
Leave granted. The document read as follows-

Estimates Committees

Date

Time House business

A

B

C

D

E

F

Tuesday, 8 Sept.

A

E

Wednesday, 9 Sept.

A

E

Thursday, 10 Sept.

M

A

E

Tuesday, 15 Sept.

A

E

Wednesday, 16 Sept.

A

E

Thursday, 17 Sept~

M

A

E

Tuesday, 22 Sept.

A

E

Wednesday, 23 Sept.

A

E

Thursday, 24 Sept.

M

Parlt. Soc. Sec.

Treasury
D.C.T. Fin/Advance

I.R. T.&R.

P.M.&C. F.A.

HA/S. & T.
Health
Comms.
V.A.'s

Education P.1.

I. &C.

N.D. & E. E. &Y.A.

I. & E.A.

Defence

A.A.'s

D.A.S. A.G.'s

Transport

H. & c.
B. & CA

A: Tuesday 4-6, Wednesday 4-6, Thursday 3-6. E: Tuesday 8-10, Wednesday 8-10, Thursday 8-10.
The schedule has been circulated to.the Whips. Honourable members will note that the pattern provides for 54 hours of consideration of proposed expenditures by Estimates committees. This compares with 44 hours in 1980 and 49 hours in 1979. Committees are required to report to the House from 23 September. I urge honourable members to nominate for particular committees as soon as possible to allow timely distribution of papers to them and for early consideration in the Estimates committees of which they are members.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (4.7)-Arising out of earlier considerations of Estimates committees in this House, there was a request from one of the committees that the operations and the procedures of those committees be reviewed by a committee of this House prior to the appointment of those committees this year, That has not taken place. I believe that a number of members feel that the present operation of those committees is less than satisfactory and could be improved. I do not want to delay the House at this stage but I urge the House to give consideration to carrying out the request of last year's committees in that some review of the committees' operations could be conducted, probably after the committees have

reported, so that members can express an opinion and also suggest meanS by which the committees' operations can be improved and can better fulfil the function which they are intended to perform.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY STAMP DUTY AMENDMENT BILL 1981

Second Reading

Debate resumed from 18 August, on motion by

MrMoore:

.

That the Bill be now read a second time.

Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Mr Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill, the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Bill, the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Bill and the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Bill, as they are associated measures. Sep\lrate questions, of course, will be put in regard to each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.

Mr SPEAKER-Is it the wish of the House'to have a general debate covering these three

800 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

ACT Stamp Duty Amendment Bill

measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (4.9)-The Oppo-
sition is concerned about the means by which Australian Capital Territory finances are handled and what in fact is a fairly ad hoc set of financial arrangements. Most revenue matters in this area are determined either on a reflection of some action by one or other of the adjoining States or on a basis which does not take into account the overall revenue commitments or the benefits which often are available in other areas. The Opposition believes that it is unfortunate that the commitment was entered into some time ago to have the Commonwealth Grants Commission study the finances of the Australian Capital Terri. tory and to bring down a report on what subvention grants should be made in the Australian Capital Territory to bring it into line with the practices of the Commonwealth and the financial arrangements with other States. From the report it can be clearly seen what the relative input of funds is in the Australian Capital Territory compared with that which could reasonably be expected, given its population and size and also the responsibilities which primarily rest with the Commonwealth in respect of the development of the area as the national capital. The latter aspect adds significant costs to the local community in respect of its operations as an area, whether it be 'viewed as an area sif!lilar to a State or a municipal
area.
From the figures that appear in the municipal accounts including municipal water and sewerage accounts there are also significant costs as a result of the intervention of the Commonwealth or the Parliament into the affairs of the Australian Capital Territory. For instance, water supplies
schemes came before the Parliament some time in the early 1960s with an estimated cost of a little over $20m. In fact they cost in excess of $200m not because the schemes-could not efficiently be implemented and constructed at the time but because of interventions by State Governments and by committees of this Parliament which sought to resolve the problems or the seen disabilities of the water flow throughout the State of New South Wales, in this instance, to the cost of the residents of the Australian Capital Territory. Those residents also are faced with costs resulting from advanced planning for the size of the Australian Capital Territory has brought about the erection of facilities in this area which are not designed to serve the local community but in fact are designed to serve afar greater community and reflect what is in fact a national capital attitude. These are not costs which normally would be expected to be

borne by a local community but rather are national costs.
The Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Bill and the associated Bills pose some questions for the Opposition. It would be very easy to come into the Parliament and say that the Bills should be opposed. I must say that the feeling that they should be opposed is extremely strong amongst members on our side of the House. But because of the location of the Australian Capital Territory and the relative rates of stamp duty and other charges such action, if successful, would mean that the Australian Capital Territory would continue to be a tax haven for the signing of documents and the avoidance of stamp duties which normally would be paid in other areas. Therefore, the Opposition has resisted the temptation actually to oppose the Bills. However, we will seek to express an opinion on the finances of the Australian Capital Territory and bring before the House what we see as a matter of considerable concern. I note the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman), in answer to a question today, said that he also was concerned about it. That matter is the examination by the Commonwealth Grants Commission of Australian Capital Territory finances and financial arrangements and what would be a reasonable arrangement between the Commonwealth and the Australian Capital Territory. In order that that can be done, the Grants Commission reference must be made and we believe that it is of sufficient importance that it should not be further delayed. We also believe that the imposition of additional taxes of this nature on the Australian Capital Territory should subsequently be considered in the light of that report. I do not intend to take the full time allotted for my speech because the Government has indicated that that is the time we are allowed for this debate. Two local members wish to take part. I think that is a fairly good reason why the affairs of the Australian Capital Territory should not be directly part of the debates of the national Parliament but should in fact be the responsibility of the residents of the Australian Capital Territory. Mr Speaker, I move:
That all words after That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'the House-
(I) is of the opinion that(a) it is not appropriate to consider increases or changes in the rates of stamp duty and similar tax in the Australian Capital Territory until the financial arrangements for the Territory have been inquired into and reported on by the Grants
Commission. and
(b) the operation of the Principal Act should cease on I July 1982 prior to which all rates of stamp duty and similar State and municipal type taxes in

ACTStamp Duty Amendment Bill

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 801

the Australian Capital Territory should be reviewed in accordance with recommendations of the Grants Commission,
(2) . noteS that the reference to the Grants Commission promised over 2 years ago has not been initiated, and
(3) calls on the Government to refer the matter to the Grants Commission immediately for early report '.
The purpose of the amendment is to highlight the limbo situation relating to the Australian Capital Territory's finances and the ad hoc nature of decisions regarding the Australian Capital Territory's finances. It is not the Opposition's intention to oppose the motion for the second reading of the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Bill. If this amendment were carried, we would facilitate the passage of a subsequent second reading motion, which is possible under the Standing Orders. I think the limitations of the Standing Orders prevent an expression of opinion motion being accepted at the second reading stage without, in fact, defeating the Bill. 1 want to make that clear because in the past this type of amendment has sometimes been misrepresented as seeking to defeat a Bill. It is not. We do not want to create a tax haven situation.
Quite seriously, I believe and, I think, my party believes the Australian Capital Territory is now big enough to be required to accept responsibility for its administration and to determine its own priorities. Obviously, there will never be a total transfer of powers because the Australian Capital Territory is the national capital. It was structured as such. Functions such as the planning and layout of the Australian Capital Territory and the national capital aspects of the Australian Capital Territory will always remain the responsibility of this Parliament or will be subject to the overriding authority of this Parliament.
No other group of people in the Commonwealth have no significant input into the governing of the area in which they live. No other area of the Commonwealth has no municipal or State-
like authority which will put a point of view on
behalf of that area. In each case this puts the Australian Capital Territory at a significant disadvantage. Whilst it is probably proper to say that if stamp duties or other aspects of local taxes in the Australian Capital Territory are lower .than they are in the States some considerable advantage can be had by transferring operations to the Australian Capital Territory, residents of the Australian Capital Territory as a community do not have the types of advantages which exist. in the States whereby tax laws are varied to promote the advent of significant industries.

I am aware of the matter relating to the silicon chip industry. I will not go into that matter because it has been debated here already. For instance, in Victoria payroll tax concessions are available to industries which locate themselves outside the city of Melbourne. Payroll tax concessions of 100 per cent are available in certain areas. Industries being established in my city of Geelong, an area which is not altogether incomparable with this area-this area is slightly larger but Geelong has some advantages as it is a portcan get a 50 per cent concession.
We are all suffering from the fear of the Russians. The national capital is located here because we were frightened that the Russians would raid the national capital if it were situated on the coast. 1 do not know whether that is a good or a bad thing. 1 think we probably would have been better off if the national capital were located on the coast. Nevertheless, Canberra has significant disadvantages in the taxation and financial areas. It has no body which is structured or has the financial resources to act as a promotion agent. It has no mayor, no city council and no State premier and it is largely dependent on a group of people who are fty-by-nighters-the members of the Federal Parliament. Most of them do not know any more about Canberra than where Parliament House and a few of the restaurants are located. That is not any condemnation of the members of the Federal Parliament. They have responsibilities elsewhere, as have the Minister for the Capital Territory and I.
I do not intend to delay the House further. The Opposition is concerned about the financial arrangements in Canberra and believes that even though there may be difficulties this House should insist on the reference to the Grants Commission being made so that the facilities and the information which would come from an independent assessment of Canberra's finances would be available to the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (4.20)-1 second the amendment. In seconding the amendment, I wish to point out the effects that the increases in stamp duties contained in the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Bill 1981, the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Bill 1981 and the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Bill 1981 will have on business and consumers generally in Canberra. These Bills will increase stamp duty on all business transactions. This will add hundreds of dollars to the cost of buying cars,

802 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

ACT Stamp Duty Amendment Bill

houses, insurance and other necessities-items which are already more expensive in Canberra than they are in the States.
The Treasurer (Mr Howard) tells us that the rationale for this latest levy on Canberra people is the need to bring the Australian Capital Territory into line with the States. That is a reasonable argument. But it is strange, is it not, that that rationale is used when we are looking at other aspects of the Canberra economy? For example, Canberra;s air fares were increased by 38 per cent when there was a national increase of only 7 per cent. Canberra's petrol prices are higher than those over the border in New South Wales. The Government is saying that it wants to treat Canberra equally with the States and I think that is fair en'ough, but we need to be treated equally with the States on all different levels. The same argument has been used to increase rates by an average of 13 per cent despite the fact that there is an accumulated surplus in the municipal accounts of $6.8m. What appears to be happening is that increased burdens are being imposed on the Canberra people before the Commonwealth Grants Commission gets down to examining the Australian Capital Territory's finances.
Why is the Goverriment not waiting for the outcome of this inquiry before extracting more and more revenue from the people of Canberra? Is it afraid that the report will show clearly-I believe it will be shown clearly-that Canberra is indeed paying its own way? The revenue collected by means of these increased stamp duties on business transactions will go into Consolidated Revenue. It is estimated that approximately $6m will be netted in a full year. Where is the money going? How will it be spent? Can the Government give us' a guarantee that the money collected from Canberra citizens in this way will be spent on improved services for Canberra? A problem that we !:!onsistantly face when we look at increasing charges in Canberra is determining. what is the basis on. which. these charges are being assessed and where the money will go.
There have been comments about comparable amounts being paid in the:States but these comments ignore the fact that the States have control over how the money th~y collect is spent. The
J people of Canberra hav no such control. It/is rap-
idly becoming apparenD \0 all Australian Capital
Territory residentsthatuntilwe get scimeform of self-government we will continue to bear the brunt of short-sighted money grabbing policies designed to make-a quick buck out of the Canberra com~unity.The Government cando that because, Canberra citizens have no way of appealing against it.

Let us look at the effect the stamp duty increases will have on, for example, houses-the largest purchase made by most people. Almost overnight in Canberra the cost of buying a house has increased beyond the reach of ordinary families. In Canberra there has been an increase not only in interest rates and the sales tax on building materials but also in stamp duty. The average price of a house in Canberra is between $50,000 and $53,000. Stamp duty on the purchase of a house will now cost between $500 and $765. If that were not bad enough, in another sudden decision the Government has decided to destroy the system of land development which has operated here since the beginning of the national capital. Overnight land development has been given to the privatesector. There has been no feasibility study or analysis of what this will mean to the home buyer. In fact, the move has taken the real estate industry by surprise. There is also considerable confusion now on how this is to be implemented. When all these factors are combined we see that they add quite substantially to the cost of buying a home because there is no doubt that land prices will rise despite the Minister's quaint and naive belief that land prices will not rise and that land developers will be prepared to do this for the good of their health. I do not believe that he can give a firm guarantee that there will be no increase in the price of land in Canberra. So the Canberra home buyer is faced with the prospect of expensive finance, escalating land p.rices, increased building costs and now this increase in stamp duty charges. This will add thousands of dollars to the cost of buying a family home. As if this is not bad enough, there is to be an increase in all rates in the Australian Capital Territory. Again, on what basis have we made an. assessment of the increase. in rates? All this highlights the fact that we really do need to have a serious examination of the whole financial basis of the Australian Capital Territory.
These Bills will also have an effect on small business in Canberra. The Australian Association of Independent Business and most other people involved directly in Australian Capital Territory business are aware that cheques are used for everyday purposes in Canberra more than in any other part of Australia; Cheques are not accepted in the States as readily as they are accepted here. Consequently, the raising of cheque stamp duty by 100 per cent is merely another revenue raising device which the Government has introduced with no thought, I think, being given to the repercussions on local business. Not only do small businesses have to bear increased burdens resulting from these stamp duty Bills, but also they have been disturbed by recent announcements of

ACT Stamp Duty Amendment Bill

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 803

deregulation. That is another decision which again highlights the need for self-government in Canberra. So we have deregulation, we have had recent decisions on stamp duty and sales tax is up to 30 per cent on some items. No evidence is available yet as to the effect this will have on turnover but most business people with whom I have had discussions on this matter feel that there will be consumer resistance especially as many goods sold in the Australian Capital Territory are already more expensive than those in the States.
The Government provides us with a lot of rhetoric about support for the private sector. But in Canberra we can see what this means in practice. Here we have public and private sectors which are interdependent. Such sudden changes in one have immediate repercussions on the other. We all saw the reaction of business and industry groups to the possibility that the building of the new parliament house would not be kept to schedule. If the private sector is to be encouraged-I believe it should be-then it must receive encouragement and assistance to operate within a stable framework where commercial viability cannot suddenly be jeopardised by hasty and ad hoc government decisions. There has been far too much of this in recent months. Canberra's economy has suffered badly as a result of it.
These stamp duty Bills constitute another burden for business and consumers in the Australian Capital Territory. It would have been preferable, I believe, for the Government to have considered constructive incentives for encouraging business in the Australian Capital Territory. If it is going to impose the same sorts of taxes on the people of the Australian Capital Territory it must give them the same sorts of benefits. Why not have the same sorts of incentives for business to be established in Canberra as they have in New South Wales. There are other possibilities, for example, that could have been examined before this legislation was introduced. One such possibility is that first home buyers be exempt from paying stamp duty.
The whole question of stamp duty in Canberra is clouded by the fact that there is no clear understanding about the collection and disbursement of Australian Capital Territory revenues. The Government appears to have no difficulty in collecting taxes but it has great difficulty in explaining to the Canberra community how the funds are spent and whether they are spent in the Australian Capital Territory. Clearly we do need, as a matter of urgency, to have the Grants Commission examine funding in the Australian Capital Territory. I hope the Minister gives this matter urgent consideration.

Mr SAINSBURY (Eden-Monaro) (4.31)-1 wish to speak briefly on the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Bill, the Aus-
tralian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Bill and the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Bill. First, I agree substantially with a number of points made by the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) and the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly). I agree especially with those points relating to the need for detailed analysis of the revenue and expenditure items relating to
Canberra. I appreciate that some Canberra people believe that there are some hidden costs. The honourable member for Canberra mentioned, for instance, the fact that the price of petrol is not regulated in Canberra as it is in New South Wales. I appreciate that some Canberra people may believe that there are imposts that they have that other people do not have. I have no doubt that that is accurate.
On the other hand, there is a general feeling
throughout Australia-maybe misplaced but, nevertheless, a general feeling-that Canberra people, in total, get a lot more than is raised from
them. Perhaps one of the reasons for that feeling is that it is well known that the general economy of Canberra is based on a very large Commonwealth Public Service which has, in Australian terms, very high average incomes which gives this population of a bit under a quarter of a million people the highest average income for any similar population in Australia. Given that, because we have always had a philosophy in this country, re-
gardless of who is in power, that the relatively better off people will support the relatively worse off' people, it does not seem unreasonable, in the total analysis of Australians, that Canberra pays more than it gets. Given all that,- I support the proposition that the detailed analysis is required.
I also support very much the principle that Canberra ought to be normalised as much as possible. In that context there is a conflict in the present argument. The normalisation of Canberra, I think, cannot proceed properly until there is some reasonable form of self-government. J;>ersonally, I was disappointed when, given the opportunity two or three years ago, the residents of Canberra rejected that proposition. I appreciate why many people did. There was some'thought that the terms of the proposition were not framed in a way that gave sufficient guarantees. On the other hand, I believe that many people were
encouraged and did vote along the lines that if they did have self-government in some form perhaps they would have (to do a little bit more to help themselves. There was that other element.

804 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

ACT Stamp Duty Amendment Bill

Self-government is a must for Canberra as a positive step in normalising the financial arrangement.
The honourable member for Canberra impliedly touched on the fact that within the region it is. important that we have similar charges for similar things. The honourable member for Canberra impliedly touched on this merely by saying that just outside Canberra there are some situations where fees are lower already than they are in Canberra. I have a very strong view that the people of Queanbeyan, which is located right next door to Canberra, are positively disadvantaged or advantaged, depending on which case it is, if there are separate charges. I remember some four or so years ago raising with the then Minister for the Australian Capital Territory the question, for instance, of liquor licensing charges in Canberra. In the climate of the day, when I said to him, 'Look, the publicans in Queanbeyan see themselves as being disadvantaged in competition with Canberra because they have to pay to the New South Wales Government far higher liquor fees', it did not take much convincing for him to change the arrangement in Canberra. No doubt the people of Canberra did not like that, but I did that. I would like to see charges of all descriptions on either side of the Australian Capital Territory borderbetween Canberra and Queanbeyan-the same. Then we are competing on the same terms.
Finally, I wish briefly to disagree with one matter that the honourable member for Corio raised and that was the capacity for Canberra people to have an input into the Government. Personally I have been very gr<\tified by the attitude of the present Minister. As 1 move around Canberra, as I do on occasions because of its close relationship with my electorate, I find that he is an incredibly well-known person who really has come to terms with not just the groups but also with the individuals who are the leaders, the decision makers and the movers in Canberra. I would think that all honourable members who have an interest in Canberra would recognise this fact. As I said, the Canberra people will have a better input to the Government when they have a better degree of self-government. That is quite imperative.
Mr FRY (Fraser) (4.35)-The headline of the
editorial in the Canberra Times after the Budget came out .was 'More Stick Than Carrot'. I would go further than that and say all stick and no carrot as far as Canberra is concerned. The Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Bill is a typical example of that. The Government is going all out to extract more revenue from the people of Canberra and it is giving them virtually nothing in return. In fact, it is taking measures which will undoubtedly l~ad to a lower standard

of living for the people of Canberra. The emphasis is, as I say, on revenue raising and I understand that these three Bills will raise new revenue. Something like $5m will be taken from the people of Canberra. This will be reflected throughout the business community and will affect professional people in accounting, real estate agencies and in the motor vehicle trade. It will affect home buyers and vehicle buyers; in fact it will affect people right across the board. That $5m has to come out of their pockets.
I think it is very unfair that the emphasis should be on taking money away from Canberra when the Government will not come to grips with the question of setting a formula for giving some money to Canberra on the basis of per capita grants as is done with the States in the rest of the Commonwealth. This is not something that has been going on for only two years. One of the main recommendations of the 1974 report on self government was that the Grants Commission should be given a reference to come up with a formula that would give the people of Canberra a fair share of the revenue that they pay to the Commonwealth. This would include not only the per capita grants that the States receive but also the grants made to local government which Canberra does not receive and which is a set part of the revenue collected from the people in the particular States concerned. The failure of the Government to ask the Grants Commission to make this report has led to many misconceptions about the Australian Capital Territory and I take no comfort at all from the statement today of the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman). He gave no assurance; all he said was that he would do his best. We want something better than that; we want a timetable. After six years it is time the Government made up its mind to give the Grants Commission the task of producing a report in a certain time. It is not a big job, I do not think, but it is terribly important that it be done in order to give some justice to the people of Canberra, to give them a little bit of carrot and not just apply the stick to them all the time.
I was interested this morning to hear the Minister's response to the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) about the justification for increasing the water rate. What he did not say, of course, was that we are oversupplied with many resources. We are oversupplied with our water resources; the water facilities that we pay for are quite adequate for over half a million people, I understand. Similarly, the sewerage facilities are adequate for a million people. Canberra has little more ,than a quarter of a million people, yet we are being asked to carry an undue burden of the

ACT Stamp Duty Amendment Bill

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 80S

rates for those facilities. If the growth of Canberra had continued at the rate it did throughout the 1960s and, early 1970s Canberra would have needed those facilities. I do not blame the planners for putting the facilities there-it is as well to have them there as to be short of them-but I think more allowance should be made for the fact that we are oversupplied in relation to the number of people who are at present paying rates in Canberra. I believe that if allowances were made for local government grants, for the oversupply of
water and sewerage facilities, for the costs of the national capital and seat of government elements of Canberra and for the Parliamentary Triangle and if we were given reasonable per capita grants something along the lines of those received by the smaller States-indeed Canberra would be paying its own way.
This Bill just imposes new burdens on' a wide range of people in Canberra. As I say, it is not giving Canberra any carrot. It is denying the city enough money to maintain its standards and, in fact, standards are being deliberately lowered. It is denying the people of Canberra the opportunity to retain effective vehicle safety standards by closing down the vehicle testing stations. It is denying the building industry enough money to hold itself together by denying funds to the National Capital Development Commission. It is denying staff to maintain adequate water quality standards in Lake Burley Griffin and it is denying citizens adequate recreation facilities. This is particularly so in Belconnen in my electorate where there is no public indoor swimming facility. The new pool, I understand, will have only very limited use for the people of Canberra. I just make the point that if the Government were really being fair to Canberra, as well as ripping money away from it it would be doing something more positive to see that we have a proper formula to ensure that we get a reasonable share of the revenue that we pay to the Commonwealth of Australia.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (4.42)-No brand new Minis- 'ter enjoys participating in a revenue debate in which stamp duties or other tax imposts are increased, but it is part of the role of government and it is a responsibility which I do not shirk on this occasion. When one looks at the picture and puts it into proper perspective it is not nearly as gloomy a picture as has been predicted both inside and outside this chamber since the announcements on Budget night. We are looking at an increase in revenue from the' stamp duty area 'of $4m this year and $S.2m next year. That represents a very small proportion of the turnover in the private enterprise sector in the Australian

Capital Territory. Whilst we would all rather

have the $4m, $Sm or $6m in our pockets-I must

say in fairness to my colleagues sitting opposite

that they did not put it this way in this debate-if

this was regarded as the great stumbling block to

the economic future of Australia's national capi-

tal, then I can only say that its economy is so

fragile that its future would not be anything like

that which we would all desire to see attained: I

repeat: This is Australia's national capital.

'

One of the interesting things that came out of the revenue decision, and I suggest it is an open secret, is that for some time there has been pressure from the State Premiers that the stamp duty in the Australian Capital Territory should be brought roughly into line with the position which applies in their States. I indicate, for example, that prior to the introduction of the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Bill, stamp duty on cheques in the Australian Capital Territory was Sc while in Victoria it is 12c. On hire purchase agreements, stamp duty is 1.2S per cent over $100 in the Australian Capital Territory but it is as high as 2.1 per cent in Victoria. Stamp duty on the conveyance of marketable securities through a broker is 7 per cent here, but uniform in all the States and the Northern Territory at ISc per $100 or part thereof.

Very broadly, without going through all the comparisons, from the point of view of the States, the Australian Capital Territory was in an untenable position in that the disparity was very significant. But is there not a quid pro quo to this ar. gument? If the Premiers wish the Australian Capital Territory to be treated as if it were a State in respect of stamp duty, does that not open the
door for the Australian Capital Territory to argue that it should be entitled to some of the benefits that come to the States? Let me say from the outset that I believe a precedent is being established with the passage of this legislation which basically puts the rates in the Australian Capital Territory on a par with those in New South Wales and at about the same average level which applies throughout the States. I note the presence of my friend from Victoria, the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child). I point out to her that Canberra's stamp duty rates are still below those cur-
rently applying in her home State of Victoria: I want this debate to be recorded as an historic debate in this Parliament because the Government has responded, inter alia, to the representations of the Premiers that in respect of stamp duty in the Australian Capital Territory there should not be a disparity. I say that to my mind that does bring a quid pro quo.

806 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

ACT Stamp Duty Amendment Bill

It may well be that some will have the fortitude-I certainly have the fortitude-to argue that if the States want it that way we are entitled to put an alternative proposition. Why should not the Australian Capital Territory, for example, participate in the infrastructure borrowing program? Why should not the Australian Capital Territory have available to it venture finance such as is available in the States? Why should not the Australian Capital Territory have available to it payroll tax concessions and, last but not least, why should not the Australian Capital Territory have some participatory role in respect of the 2 per cent of personal income tax collections that go to local government? Whilst I cannot in my own capacity guarantee that these things will come to pass I certainly believe-I hope it will be' taken up by those who have spoken already by others on my own side of politics and by members of t~e Bouse of Assembly-that what is good for the goose is good for the gander. A quid pro que argument may well be applicable.
I thank the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) for the way in which he presented the amendment by the Opposition. The Government, for obvious reasons, cannot accept it and we will vote against it. But I say to him, the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) and the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry) that nobody wants the Grants Commission report on Australian Capital Territory finances more than I do. Opposition members must be fair before they pillory me. I do not have a magic wand which can tell the Grants Commission where to go, on what matters to sit, and what to do. I have had numerous discussions with Mr Justice Else-Mitchell. I have brought home the utter importance of having the Grants Commission report before we can have a'ny proper and rational discussion on self-government. In .1931, fifty years ago, the Federal Capital Advisory Council asked the then Feder,al Government to give a detailed report on the finances of Canberra. It wanted to know how much was national and how much was municipal. .
Mrs Kelly-Haven't we waited long enough now?
Mr HODGMA,N-To be quite frank l know that the honourable member for .Fraser was not blaming me for something that has gone on for 6 years when I have been the Minister for a little over 6 months. I give a firm commitment to push as hard as I can for that report because I recognise, perhaps more than anything else, that it is critical before there can be a proper debate and rational discussion on self-government. To conclude, the current situation is that two out of three employees in the national capital are on the public

payroll. We must strive for and seek to achieve a mixed economy with a greatly increased private sector involvement. I am sad that myoid friend, the honourable member for Fraser, was unkind enough to say that the Budget for the Capital Territory was all stick and no carrot. I totally reject that proposition. It is grossly unfair.
Mrs Kelly-He was quoting from the Canberra Times.
Mr HODGMAN-The Canberra Times credited me with having put up a real fight for this city. That is the nicest thing anyone has said to me since I became Minister for the Capital Territory.
Mrs Kelly-It said you had not had any success; that was the only problem.
Mr HODGMAN-Before I become distracted by the beauty and the eloquence of the honourable member for Canberra, I remind the honourable member for Fraser that we have gone full speed ahead on the Parliament House. The Parliament House Construction Authority got every cent for which it asked. Construction of 300 new homes will commence this year. The tourist promotion budget is $500,000 which is five times what it was last year. The A.C.T. will have $80m worth of capital works in the N.c'D.c' programme this financial year. Total Commonwealth spending will be over $220m. That works out at a bit below $lm for every working day of the year. Last but not least would members of the Australian Labor Party, particularly my friends in this cpamber, adopt a more positive approach? We are getting bogged down by their negativism and socialism. We on this side of the House support and maintain the private sector. It is a sad reflection on the Parliament that the importance of the private sector, particularly in Canberra, is simply not appreciated, understood or ~dvanced by the socialist republicans who sit opposite.
Mr Scholes-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I with your indulgence point out that it is not the Opposition's intention to divide the House on this Bill. We are very disappointed that the Minister has not seen fit to adopt the amendment which we felt was a practical means by which the finances of Canberra could be forced to be brought back to the Parliaipent within a reasonable period. The amendment will be pressed in another place.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

Departure Tax Amendment Bill

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 807

Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY TAX (INSURANCE BUSINESS) AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 18 August, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a thhd time.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY TAX (CHEQUES) AMENDMENT BILL
1981 Second Reading Consideration resumed from 18 August, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time.
DEPARTURE TAX AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Se.cond Reading Debate resumed from 18 August, on motion by MrMacphee:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister forthi.: Capital Territory)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this BilI and' the Departure Tax Collection Arnendment Bill, as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on .each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER(Dr Jenkins)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two .measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.

Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (4.54)-The Opposition wishes it to be known immediately that it is opposed to these Bills. We are opposed to them for a number of reasons, not the least of which is that in the speech given to the Parliament last week by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) no reason was given why the departure tax has been increased. Apart from allying the age limit with that applying to child fares under the rules of the International Air Transport Association, no reason was given on why the age limit was dropped from 18 to 12 years.
A Budget has just been presented to this country which, as Eric Risstrom, the Secretary of the Australian Taxpayers Association said, is the worst in 34 years. It has been made very clear to every Australian that, on average, taxation will increase by 22 per cent in 1981-82. The tax burden can be found in almost every area of Government policy. Not one area has been left out, not even departing Australia, because in the Bill before us we are told it is now going to cost every person leaving Australia $20. Whereas the tax applied only to 18-year-olds and above prior to this Bill, now it is going to apply to 12-year-olds and abo\:,e. The Government wants to raise an additional $34m from the people who have to go overseas on business, the people who want to go away for a holiday, and the migrants who want to return to their home countries to see their families. All of these groups of people are now being penalised at the gateway out of Australia. The departure tax in the last three years has raised for this Government $49m-not enough, according to this Government. It now wants to raise $34m in the one year out of this tax. Perhaps it will continue to find different ways of imposing hefty taxes in other areas. But what is the situation in Australia? For the last two years we have heard nothing from the Ministers of this Government other than that Australia is in the midst of a great economic boom and that all Australians are going to have a living standard unprecedented in this country as a result of the economic boom derived from the mineral resources which are to be exploited in this country. This Bill represents the thinking of a banana republic in charging $20 to leave the country.
Mr Hodgman-J will pay your$20.
MrYOUNG-It does not matter to the businessmen or to the loud-mouthed Ministers who get sent free of charge. If a Minister gets sent overseas, he will present the bill to his Department and the Sir Humphrey of his Department will give him the $20 and he will put it back in his kick. That situation will not apply to the average

808 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Departure Tax Amendment Bill

citizen from Denison because the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) does not worry about the people from Denison. They will have to pay their $20 if they want to go overseas. They also are being told that they are living in the midst of a great economic boom and that from here on in we are going to have a standard of living which has never been thought of before in this country. We will be raising another $34m this year and it will not come just from the business people who leave Australia, because they will just pass it on. The Government is not inflicting any great difficulty on them. It is inflicting the difficulty only on families. Now it has taken the matter one step further by imposing the tax on the children. If a family of four or five people turns up at Mascot Airport to go on a holiday or to visit relatives overseas, the Government will want another $80 or $100 from the family before it leaves Australia. \ Not only are they having imposed upon them the \ greatest income tax levels of all time and increased charges on health insurance as from 1 September, and having to bear the enormous increase in the cost of petrol, but also now the Government has devised a new one-'Tax everybody who wants to leave Australia. Irrespective of the reason they want to leave, let them all queue up and get a $20 tax ticket at Mascot, Tullamarine and Brisbane'.
Who is in favour of this tax, apart from the Treasury? Is there any association, group of people, family or individual in this country that favours such a scheme? What type of mentality do we have operating in Treasury that it keeps putting forward such abominable fund raising schemes? Three years ago we had the tax on newsboys' earnings. It was not until there was outrage throughout the community that the Government dropped the scheme whereby it was going to impose taxes on the moneys being earned by schoolboys and schoolgirls. Now we have a new one-'Let us tax everybody who is going to jump on a plane or a ship or is in any way going to leave the country'. Why does the Government not justify it? If it is such a legitimate scheme for fund raising, why does the Government not say something about why it is doing it? Let me repeat what the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs said in his second reading speeches:
The purpose of the two Bills is to increase the rate of departure tax from $10 to $20 with effect from I October 1981 and to bring down the taxable age from 18 to 12 years with effect from the same date. The age limit has been varied to bring it into line with that applying to child fares under the rules of the International Air Transport Association. Honourable members will recall that the rate of departure tax has not been varied since 1978 when the departure tax legislation was enacted.

According to this legislation we have had 100 per cent inflation since 1978. The only justification for going from $10 to $20 is the three years which separate the two Bills. That is not the attitude the Government takes to family allowances. We did not hear the Treasurer (Mr Howard) saying in the House that the Government was going to boost family allowances for all children, irrespective of the size of the family, because they had not been lifted for six years. That is the argument it is prepared to put forward when it is raising money, but it has a very different argument when it has to spend money. What a lousy, miserable tax-to have people queueing up at airports especially to raise these additional funds which people have to payout of their pockets when they get to the airport, when they feel they have met all the requirements needed for them to travel! My friend the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull), who takes a deep interest in the matter and who obviously will speak in this debate, would be aware of the telegram sent by the Australian Travel Industry Association. The Association is very alarmed at the way the Government sees these taxes creeping in as a new fund raiser for it. The telegram states:
The travel industry strongly opposes doubling of the departure tax to $20. The Government's short-sighted action could adversely affect tourism especially as latest official statistics indicate some fall-off in rate of growth of overseas visitors. AT1A urgently request the Government to consider exempting overseas visitors from payment of the tax in the interest of boosting employment, fostering a more competitive industry and foreign exchange earnings and capitalising on growth opportunities arising from other Budget initiatives for tourism.
Graham Tucker, Executive Director, Australian Travel Industry 1ssociation.
Mr Tucker refers to the raising of foreign exchange earnings. There are some Third World and developing countries which do use a departure tax as a way of raising foreign currency. Do not tell me that Australia has entered that race of raising a few millions dollars in foreign currency from those who make that decision to spend their holidays in Australia. Let me remind honourable members of what the Treasurer told us last Tuesday night: We are already getting $6+ billion invested in Australia. We do not need to do anything extra to attract finance to Australia. A lot of companies overseas are already finding Australia attractive enough, especially with the high interest rates applying, to invest their money here. We do not have to ally ourselves to the developing countries in the raising of these funds.
Everybody associated with tourism, whether he has been on the committees of this Parliament or he has just taken a notional interest in it, would know that it is very difficult to get people to make

Departure Tax Amendment Bill

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 809

a decision to visit Australia. We are a long way from the main routes of holiday travel throughout the world. It is very difficult to get people to come here. The Japanese prefer to go to Honolulu or the West Coast of the United States of America. Other people prefer to travel around South East Asia or to go to Europe. We get only a very small proportion of the people who take their holidays in some other country. This tax does nothing at all to appeal to people to come to Australia. If a group of people are being told that they need not only additional fares to travel the long distance to Australia but also $20 each to leave the country, it is not an incentive for those people to make up their minds to visit this country; as Graham Tucker says in this telegram.
We must condemn this move as a miserable move which is well in keeping with the tax which was placed on the paperboys' earnings three or four years ago. The same mentality of this Government and of the Treasury still exists. That fellow who is head of Treasury-Clyde Cameron calls him the Sir Humphrey of Australian politics-is up there dictating all these stupid ideas and all these boof-headed Liberal Ministers who believe him say 'Yes, this is a good way, John. We will get another $ISm this way. We will just poke it on those who are going overseas'. This tax affects particularly the thousands of migrants who travel overseas every year to their home countries to see their relatives. Now we have to tell them it is going to cost them $20 for each member of their family to go overseas and see relatives. It is a puny and objectional tax. It is a tax which ought to be condemned by every thinking person in this country. The Opposition intends to vote against it.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (S.S)-It is now some three years since I spoke on the legislation that implemented the departure tax. I think it might be worth our while this afternoon to go back in history and see the background of how a departure tax was introduced into Australia. In actual fact it came from a recommendation and consideration of the House of Representatives Select Committee on Tourism on which the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) served. I have the greatest respect for and the greatest memories of the Honourable Frank Stewart who was the gentleman who proposed the departure tax. He had one simple reason in mind, and that was to be able to provide money for promotion overseas to bring tourists to Australia. Honourable members might recall that following that House of Representatives Select Committee on Tourism report, funds in the 1978 Budget for the promotion overseas of Australian tourism were increased by a massive 98 per cent. Those levels

have been maintained and increased. Already we are seeing a tremendous inflow of tourists into Australia.

The negative attitude taken by the Australian Travel Industry Association is fairly typical Of that organisation. Quite frankly I did rec:eive the telegram mentioned earlier, and it did not ,hold too much cognisance. If the ATIA and members on the Opposition side are really interested in making Australia a viable destination for overseas tourists, the first thing that they can do is get Ol,1t of bed with Qantas Airways Ltd and the oth'er regulated airlines and 'join the campaign' for
deregulation of airfares into Australia.' Despite the price drops, we are once again already experiencing some of the highest airfares in the' world. Departure taxes exist in a number of countries. In fact, III countries impose a departure tax of varying amounts which range from about 10 per cent of the fare, in places such as New Zealand and the Philippines. In many respects ours is riot at all near the highest departure tax. Landing charges in Great Britain are much higher, than here. The charges that are made for the use of the airport, in the form of a tax, are written into the
ticket.

The thing that worries me, of, course, is the

crass stupidity in which the departure tax is col-

lected in Australia. I mentioned this in'my speech

three years ago. We have set up apileof pocket

bureaucrats to sit in little cages at every departure

point in Australia. We pay them money to issue

stamps to people who are going overseas. In the

first full year of the operation the tax cost the

Commonwealth Government $880,000 to collect.

We are the only country that has people sitting in

cages at our departure points taking the departure

tax from travellers. Tome that seems to be an

absolute waste of any revenue we might get. 'It
seems strange that we are the only country to col-

lect tax in that way. I think if we are going to

maintain the principle of a departure tax~1 am

certainly not again$t it; it is a good 'form of rev-

enue whether directly Or indirectly, to fundQur

tourist development-we should d,efinitely look at

a way of changing its collection.

'

In most countries departure tax is handled either by the travel agent who sells the departure tax at the point of ticketing or by the airline officers as they pull the voucher for:a particular
journey at the airport. A check is made on the way through by the ,migration authorities and the documents duly stamped: But in Australia in 1978-79 it cost $880,000 to collect the departure tax. I think it would not be an exaggeration; considering the increased number of departures and the number of gateways that have opened, to'say

81 0 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Departure Tax Amendment Bill

that it will now cost Australia well in excess of $lm to collect that departure tax. That is not good economics; in fact it is plain stupid. I urge the Government to reconsider the whole aspect of the collection of departure tax.
The honourable member for Port Adelaide quoted the telegram from ATIA and mentioned the fact that there had been a decrease in the number of overseas travellers. That is quite true. Around the world there is a slight. decline in the number of people who are travelling. It is not true in the case. of Australia. Australia has become a most desirable tourist destination. Last year 900,000 people visited this country, and I am more than confident that we will have one million visitors here this year. They are coming for two reasons. Admittedly there has been a loosening in the nature of charges for airline. tickets into Australia, but most importantly concerted advertising and promotional campaigns have been undertaken by the Australian Tourist Commission in conjunction with State governments to get people here. A tremendous amount of interest has been shown on the west coast of the United States. That is obvious from the fact that two flights a week now serve Townsville, North Queensland and Brisbane. They are completely new services. On 1 September we will see the operations of direct Tokyo to Queensland services. The Japanese are ready to take full advantage of that tourist dollar.
The plain fact is that the Japanese are the most travelled tourists in the world. and they are looking for new destinations. They have started to go to Fiji. I suggest, from looking at the figures, that one of the biggest market increases has occurred in New Zealand. Let me set out the reasons why Australia is not benefitting from Japanese tourism at the moment. The first reason is the number of services that operate; every flight is virtually full. Secondly, continuing negotiations on the level of airfares between Australia and Japan have not been fully resolved, and thirdly, with the brilliance of the Department of Transport, we have now finally managed to negotiate an excursion fare but of course a person must stay in Australia a minimum of 21 days before he can take advantage of it. Of course the Department of Transport failed to realise that the average Japanese holiday is of 14 days duration. So at this stage that fare is next to useless. However, I am confident that very soon we will seethe implementaion of a proper excursion fare between Tokyo and Australia.

We can see the results of exactly what tourist development here does to our economy. That development is a direct result of this tremendous increase in the number of visitors. In just over three years 100 per cent more visitors have come to Australia. This year in Queensland alone $535m will be spent on tourist development projects in the form of new hotels and new infrastructure. This year around .Australia 29 new accommodation units in the form of luxury hotels and middle range hotels are being constructed purely to take advantage of this tremendous increase in the number of visitors who are coming into this country. I think so much of this can be related back to the fact that three years ago we finally got. our act together and started to promote Australia overseas and to get our infrastructure right to take tremendous advantage of all the benefits tourism can bring to Australia.
I have said many times but I think it is worth repeating that tourism, probably more than any other industry, is a beacon to the employment of semi-skilled and unskilled people in Australia. We have unemployment in those areas, but we must realise that for every extra 25,000 international visitors who come into this country another 1,400 jobs are created. That is a most significant figure. The proof is in the pudding from the latest surveys conducted by the Queensland Tourist and Travel Corporation which indicated in 1980 alone, because of the increased tourists, 3,500 new jobs were created in the tourist industry. They were jobs that were never there before. I think this gives a fine example of the advantages that tourism' can give. We must continue to promote Australia overseas, we must continue to make sure that our airfare structures into Australia are right and we must continue the search forward to try to get some recognition of the tremendous advantages that deregulation of international airlines can bring. When we finally get all that together we must be absolutely sure that we can provide the infrastructure for those visitors who are coming to Australia.
It is true that the departure tax will apply to people 12. years of age and over. That slots in with International Air Transport Association regulations. This has been very difficult for airport officials to police. I suppose we could probably employ another few hundred public servants to check every passport. The situation will be much easier to handle because children over the age of 12 do pay the full adult fare in accordance with lATA regulations. While I admit that $20 is a large amount, it is not massive by any means. The advantages certainly far outweigh the disadvantages in terms of what the tax can give to Australia.

Departure Tax Amendment Bill

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 811

I make one serious suggestion to the Government. For goodness sake let us get away from the cages and the stamps. Let us write the value of that departure tax into the ticket or at least sell the tax stamp at the' point of sale of the ticket. If we wanted to save just a little money it would certainly be much easier to pay a commission to travel agents to tear out those stamps, put them on their tongue and then stick them on the ticket than to go through the most incredible bureaucratic bungle that we have now to get the $20 stamp put on to the ticket. I commend the Bills to the House. As I have said, the advantages are there. The real growth in tourism is there. It will continue to be there and to provide that wealth and employment for Australia provided we have the capacity and the funds to promote tourism. I believe that in a most indirect way it is this departure tax that is helping to promote Australia around the world.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (5.l6)-The Departure Tax Amendment Bill proposes to increase the departure tax from $10 to $20, which will increase receipts from this tax to $34m during the current financial year. In addition, the exemption age will be lowered from 18 years to 12 years. The Opposition opposes the legislation because the departure tax is nothing more than an indirect tax, having as its main aim the raising of revenue for Consolidated Revenue. The original legislation was introduced into this House in Augl,lst 1978 because, in the words of the then Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs:
In the present tight budgetary situation it has been necessary for the Government to consider avenues for raising additional revenue. The tax on departures will make a useful contribution in this regard.
The imposition of the departure tax at that time meant that Australia joined 111 other nations in imposing such a surcharge. The big difference, of course, is that whilst receipts from Australia's departure tax go into Consolidated Revenue, the re" ceipts from such taxes in many of the other countries go towards the promotion of tourism and the development of tourist attractions in those countries. ] was amazed a few minutes ago to hear the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) commend the Bill to the House. That same honourable member, when he was speaking to the original legislation in 1978, as recorded on page 1204 of Hansard, said:
I am disappointed that, despite all the publicity given to the public hearings of the Select Committee on Tourism, the Government has not made any real effort in this Budget to divert some of the funds that wi\1 be raised. from the imposition of the departure tax into promoting and he.lping the tourist industry generally. Nobody is going to suggest that there is a nexus between the revenue collected and the funding of the tourist industry-I think we all realise that that is probably

undesirable-but about $13m will be collected In the coming 12 months and the Fact that only an extra $Im or so will be poured into the Australian Tourist Commission is no't a very good record.
He went on to say:
If one considers the revenue involved, with an annual growth in the industry of 10 per cent, in five years time the amount collected in departure tax will be most substantial indeed. Such a sum would do a great deal to help a /lagging industry, and unFortunately the Australian tourist industry is /lagging to a degree at the moment.
He went on to talk about the situation in Denmark. He described how Denmark was encouraging tourism in that country. He said:
What is that country of 8.5 million people spending on promotion this year? It is spending $A40m. I think we shou Id make a study of what is happening in Denmark.
I think I have quoted the honourable member for Bowman sufficiently. He made a complete farce of the situation in the House a few moments ago. In 1978 he condemned the departure tax because it was not being put back into the tourist industry, yet he'had the hide in this House today to praise the tax and to commend the Bills to the House. The increase from $10 to $20 has been imposed for conveni'ence and revenue reasons only. If the increase from 1978 were to be in keeping with the cost of living it would certainly be-less than $15. This, of course, would involve the printing of new departure tax tickets. The increase of $20 means that the issue of two $10 tickets can easily be made at the point of departure. So much for this Government's credibility.
The departure tax is basically a tourist tax. It affects not only Australians' going overseas but also every visitor who comes to Australia when they leave this country. What, then, is the situation in Australia? Promotion of Australia overseas by the Commonwealth is carried out by the Australian Tourist Commission. The Budget allocation this financial year to the Australian Tourist Commission is $9.2m-an increase of $300,000 over last year's allocation. That means that in real terms there has been a decrease of the order of some $600,000 this financial year in the allocation to .the Australian Tourist Commission. In the last financial year the Australian Tourist Commission received $8.9m. That was quite an increase over what it had received in previous years. As I pointed out to the House on 25 March this year when speaking to the Australian Tourist Commission Bill, if the Australian Tourist Commission had received yearly increases in keeping with the cost of living-in other words, in real terms-last year, instead of getting $8.9m, it would have received about $16m.
What can we see? Nothing whatsoever has come into tourism from the departure tax. Surely,

812 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Departure Tax Amendment Bill

if the Government is to impose a departure tax on people who tour overseas from this country or who come to this country as visitors, that money should go back into tourism to help promote and improve that industry. It is not good enough for the Government to point to the increased growth in tourism to Australia over recent years as an excuse for maintaining funds at a low level, because other factors have been the cause of that tourist boom. The enormous drop in international air fares a couple of years ago and changes in overseas currency rates have combined to make Australia a more enticing tourist destination for many overseas visitors. That is why during 1979 a total of 793,000 short term visitors came to Australia-an increase of 25.8 per cent over the previous year. In 1980 the number of visitors continued to increase and 893,000 people came to Australia on short term visits. The growth rate between 1979 and 1980 dropped to approximately 12 per cent. Obviously, unless we devote more funds to promoting tourism to Australia the rate will drop further.
Tourism is big business to any country and some smaller countries rely on tourism for their basic wealth. It is estimated that during 1979 overseas visitors added $650m to the Australian economy. When we take into consideration the tourist and visitation pattern of movement within and between the States and Territories of Australia by our fellow Australians, revenue to Australia from tourism is around $1,OOOm. In my State of New South Wales during 1979-80 domestic tourism generated 16.3 million trip~, 83 per cent of which were within New South Wales. There is great potential for domestic tourism within Australia but the small amount set aside in the current Budget for the Australian Tourist Commission to promote such activity is insufficient to get across to Australians the message that they should see their own country first. Almost half of the Australian people do not take a holiday away from their usual place of residence, so there is still a lot of promoting to be done if we are to realise our full tourism potential. Many of these people, particularly the low income families, cannot afford to go away on holidays. I believe that to help overcome that problem the Australian Government should provide funds to nonprofit organisations such as local councils and youth hostel associations to enable the construction of low-cost accommodation facilities for use by low-income families and the youth of our community.

Additionally, there is a great need for the allocation of funds to update and improve our existing tourist attractions and facilities at such attractions. If the Government is sincere about imposing a departure tax it should do so on the basis that receipts from such a tax would go towards promoting tourism to Australia and improving our tourist attractions. As my colleague the honourable. member for Adelaide (Mr Young) pointed out, the genuine tourists and those people going overseas to visit their friends and relatives will be the ones who will bear the costs involved. The businessman, of course, will pass on the costs. The lowering of the age of exemption from 18 years to 12 years means that the family unit will be hardest hit by the increase. The tax on a family of four leaving Australia for a holiday-sometimes families travel on very modest budgets-will be $80. This legislation is nothing more than another means of raising money for Consolidated Revenue by an indirect tax. It must join the long list of broken promises by this penny-pinching Government which said only earlier this year that it had no intention of introducing indirect taxation. For that reason I oppose the legislation.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5.26)-1 do not want to delay the House any longer than is necessary. I do not want to let this seemingly innocuous Bill be passed without saying a few words about some of the simple ironies involved. Since the Budget was presented the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has spoken about modest increases in sales tax of something like $900m and generous increases in allowances of something like $500m. It strikes me that that is a strange use of language. I therefore detected a certain amount of similar irony in the remarks of the honourable member for Bowman (Mr lull). This honourable member certainly has an abiding interest in tourism. He has been a very eloquent exponent of the Government's view in the tourism area. Honourable members on this side of the House have an innate respect for the honourable member for Bowman and his interests in this area. They respect the work he did, along with several other honourable members, on the House of Representatives Select Committee on Tourism, which he referred to in his speech. I find an enormous amount of contradiction in the argument he presents.
The amount of money the Government raises from departure tax has gone from an average of about $16m over the previous three years to an estimated $34m this year. This is a healthy increase -of about $18m. The honourable member for Bowman used the logic that this money would

Departure Tax Amendment Bill

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 813

be used to provide publicity for Australia overindustry. To use the departure tax as a method of

seas. That is all very well. Nobody will argue with improving that industry is simply beyond me.

that. Let us have a look at the facts. An amount of There is no way in the world that anybody will be

$9m has been set aside in this Budget for the proattracted to come to Australia for the mere joy of

motion of Australia as a tourist venue. This is an paying another $20 to leave. That simply staggers

increase of $lm on last year, but there is an inme.

crease of $18m in the amount being generated by departure tax.

I am disappointed that the contributions from the Government side have been so bereft of any

Mr Young-Where is the logic in the people justification for the implementation of this depar-

who leave Australia paying the tax, and nobody ture tax. We are left with one simple fact; that is,

else?

that people who are leaving Australia-be they

Mr JOHN BROWN-I do not disagree with the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young). In his speech he asked: What is the point in Australians leaving Australia having to ~ay this tax? That is right. There is a real contradiction in the argument of the honourable member for Bowman that this tax will attract more Japanese people to Australia. No one can convince me that
a Japanese tourist who comes to Aust~alia and

migrants who have settled in Australia and are going home to visit their home country, be they businessmen who are leaving Australia on business or, more importantly, be they overseas visitors who have come to Australia to try to boost our tourism industry-will be charged $20 and that simply reflects a defeatist attitude. The Government can in no way justify the imposition of this tax. We will oppose it vehemently.

finds that he has to pay another $10 to go home Question put:

will consider that a great attraction to come here. How anyone can put that up as a feasible argument is beyond me. I hope the honourable

That the Bill be now read a second time.
The House divided.

member never goes to the Bar to defend me in a (The Deputy Speaker-Mr P. H. Drummond)

criminal case. You would be hanged for shoplifting with him as an advocate. I would rather have to defend me the Minister for the Capital Terri-

Ayes Noes

68 45

tory (Mr Hodgman), who is at the table, and for God's sake, that is pretty desperate. It amused me

Majority

23

that the honourable member for Bowman used

AYES

that as an argument. It shows the paucity of Adermann. A. E.

Hunt, R. J. D.

thought the Government put into this tax before Anthony, J. D.

Hyde,J. M.

it brought it on. There is simply no doubt that what the honourable member for Port Adelaide has said is absolutely correct, that this is just

Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M.

Jarman, A. W. Jull,D. F.
Kaller, R.e. Lloyd, B.

another specious and cynical form of raising revenue. There is no justification in the Budget, in the Budget Speech or from any spokesman on the

Brailhwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A.

Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J.

Government side since the presentation of the Budget to justify this except as a means of raising money.

Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, IBn

McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, l. M.

The Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) is, I am sure, a very keen exponent

Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P.

Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. O'Keere, F. L.

of improving tourism to Australia. I am sure that he sincerely wants that. This tax shows that he is fighting a losing battle in the Cabinet. I am sure he is getting more support from his Cabinet in terms

Connolly, D. M. CowBn,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D.M. Edwar~, H. R.

Peacock, A. S. Porter,J. R. Robinson, Jan Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.

of wanting to develop a real tourism industry in Australia. The honourable member for Banks (Mr Mountford) has pointed out quite eloquently

Falconer, P. D.
Fire,W.C.
s. Fisher, P. (Teller)
Giles,G.O'H.

Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC.

in his speech that the real importance to Australia of a tourism industry is in terms of employing unskilled labour. It is a most labour intensive indus-

Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele
Harris, G. McD.

Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.

try. I think we have a moral commitment in Hicks, N.J.

Australia really to promote this country and to .

Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

make sure that we have a viable, strong tourism Howard,J. W.

Tuckey, e. W. Viner,R. J. White, P. N. D. Wilson, J. B. e.

814 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Bowen, Lionel Brown. John Brown, Robert
Campbell,G. Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross,M. D.
Cunningham, 8. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duify,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Jacobi, R..

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry
Jones, Chari!" Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. .
Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. SColl, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J.
Willis,R. Young,M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time,

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith, Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time,

DEPARTURE TAX COLLECTION AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 18 August; on motion by Mr Macphee:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative,
Bill read a second time.

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith, Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time,

AIR NAVIGATION (CHARGES) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 18 AugUst, on motion by MrHunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (5.37)-,The purpose of the Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Bill is to reduce by 5 per cent the rate of air navigation charges payable by the international aviation sector, increase by 12t per cent the rates payable by domestic trunk route operators, increase by 25 per cent the rates payable by regional air route operators and increase by 20 per cent the

rates payable by the general aviation sector. The changed rates are to operate from 1 October 1981. The Opposition does not oppose the Bill.
The charges made under the principal Act are in respect of services provided by the Department of Transport to the aviation industry, including use of aerodromes, air routes, airway facilities, meteorological services and the provision of search and rescue facilities. The new charges, a departure from the usual practice, are to operate from 1 October 1981 rather than from the traditional date, 1 December. The overall cost recovery rate for the year 1979"80 was 66.1' per cent, however the cost recovery rate for the internationa'l operations section WaS 159.4 per cent. In these circumstances the reduction of 5 per cent provided by this Bill for the international sector is little short of tokenism. It is appropriate in this debate to give consideration to the context in which the legislation is being introduced, the adequacy of the services provided by the aviation industry, the efficiency of those services and the costs to the industry ofthose services.
Members will recall that during that last parliamentary session we ,-,,:itnessed the controversial debate on the new two-airline policy and the passage of that policy becomingin effect an extension of that lucrative licence to print money. It became clear during that debate and in decisions since that the aviati<;>n poHcy of the Fraser Government is formulated to protect the financial interests of the AbelescMurdoch axis., This was not better illustrated than by the recent takeover of Masling Airlines by the TNT News Corporation group. The takeover of Masling Airlines gave the Ansett group~ineffect the TNT News Corporation group-a monopoly of commuter air services between Sydney and Newcastle, the fastest growing and most profitable commuter service maJ,'ket in Australia. But the aim of that takeover also was to continue the actions of the Ansett group under its new proprietors to choke off on-carriage to the publicly owned airline, Trans Australia Airlines.
In this action there arises a conflict of interest on the part of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt). The conflict arises because those opposite are bounden, because of support from the Murdoch group, to fulfil the wishes of that group. The responsibility of the Minister and the Government is to protect the public investment in a statutory corporation~the Australian National Airlines Commission, It is clear from the silence of the Minister for Transport on this issue of the takeover of Masling by the TNT News Corporation group that the Minister chose once again to acquiesce to the Abeles-Murdoch axis.

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 815

On 29 July, as one of the local Federal members interested in the outcome of this takeover and the most damaging effect it will have on the provsion of air services to people of the Hunter region, I telegrammed the Minister for Transport in these lines:
Believe acquisition of Masling Airlines by Ansett TNT group will detrimentally affect provision of NSW country air services and create undesirable concentration of private ownership of public air transport services.
Please exercise any powers within your jurisdiction to stay change of ownership of Masling pending full public examination of impact of such change of ownership on provision of air services in NSW and the protection of public interest.
I am yet to receive an acknowledgmt;nt from the Minister for Transport of the telegram, let alone an indication of his decision whether to support the request I made. Naturally, in the time that has elapsed since, the takeover of Masling Airlines has proceeded and now the Ansett group has a complete monopoly of the provision of commuter air services between Sydney and Newcastle.
In contrast, on 5 August the Minister for Transport found time to write to me about a Press statement. I issued on 22 july-it was not a telegram which I sent him but a Press statement which was issued-drawing attention to the deterioration of air safety standards in Australia arising from the loss of experienced key personnel of the Department of Transport associated with the Canberra transfer program from Melbourne. There we have the contrast in interest of the Minister for Transport. He was able to respond, without invitation, to a Press statement and provide a long, detailed response to me by letter of 5 August. But in regard to an important issue affecting the interests of the Abeles-Murdoch transport axis my telegram of 29 July to him still remains unacknowledged and unanswered and is now of little interest.
At times I have been critical of the performance of airlines and I believe justly so; but I recognise, and the Opposition recognises also, that the real responsibility for the performance of the airlines lies with the Government and with the Minister for Transport. We recognise also that the airlines have to operate within an industrial environment created for them by the-Government. On this occasion I want to express some sympathy for the airline industry in the face of the Government created financial burdens and operational difficulties that have arisen from time to time. I want to express sympathy for the enormous costs that are generated by the lack of competence on the part of the embattled Minister for Transport and his Government's mismanagement of the aviation industry.

Let us look for a few minutes at four areas-the air traffic controllers, the radar technicians, the Department of Transport's transfer program to Canberra and departmental cutbacks, and Mascot Airport. In all four cases massive avoidable costs have been created for the aviation industry which have, in turn, been passed on to passengers in the form of higher air fares. Let me turn firstly to air traffic controllers. The problem with air traffic controllers and the shortage of air traffic controllers arose originally out of the long standing animosity of this Government towards the air traffic controllers' organisation. It goes back as far as 1977 when the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the then Minister for Transport managed to taunt the air traffic controllers into going on strike for a week. The then Minister for Transport and the Prime Minister managed to ground Australia's domestic airline fleet for a week at enormous cost to the airlines and to the travelling public. That bitterness has carried through from 1977 until this day.
In 1977 it was clear that there was a shortage of air traffic controllers. It was clear that the training programs would have to be expanded to make sure that there was an adequate flow-on of experienced personnel and that proper time was made available to air traffic controllers for rest and relief and for leave requirements. If one looks at the resignation figures provided in an answer to a question asked in this House last session, one will find that 20 per cent of the resignations in recent years of air traffic controllers were due to psychiatric reasons which obviously were related to the pressure of the duties of their job and to nervous tensions associated with their responsibilities. As I said, in that period it was evident that there was a shortage of air traffic controllers. Yet in 1977 the Minister for Transport of the day was claiming that there was not any problem. He was claiming that the air traffic controllers were simply exploiting their position and that there was not any difficulty that could not be overcome by their adhering to their proper responsibilities.
Earlier this year-in the previous session-I drew attention to the shortage of air traffic controllers and the fact that Brisbane Airport was being closed for several hours per week because of the shortage of air traffic controllers. I also drew attention to the fact that the Federal Government was attempting to recruit air traffic controllers abroad at the same time as several foreign governments were advertising within Australia to recruit air traffic controllers and were offering conditions and salaries considerably in advance of those available to air traffic controllers within

816 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

Australia. On that occasion, I instanced the advertisement of the Hong Kong Administration:, which was offering salaries considerably above those available to air traffic controllers employed by the Federal Department of Transport. We have had in recent days an admission from the Minister for Transport that Brisbane Airport is to be closed for several hours per week from September due to an unavailability of air traffic controllers to man the airport. This means an added cost to the industry. It means an unavailability of the airport. It means also that the Minister has confessed the abysmal failure of himself and his Department to ensure that these key experienced personnel are provided to ensure a proper operation of airline services in Australia. As I said, this is not something that has just arisen; it is a situation that has been evident for years. It is a situation that the Government originally attempted to cover up and since refused to. act upon in a prompt fashion to ensure that sufficient air traffic controllers are available.
The Minister made comment in recent days that the Government has been recruiting air traffic controllers abroad. I noticed in the Public Service Board's report that the Government expects to recruit 30 air traffic controllers from the United Kingdom. The fact is that at the moment there is a deficiency of something like 180 air traffic controllers in the Department of Transport. The recruitment of 30 air traffic controllers will do \i.ttle to overcome that deficiency. The Government and the Minister have to show a little bit more gumption, a little more activity, and a more positive application to their responsibilities to ensure that the pick-up of air traffic controllers is accelerated beyond the rate at which it is being carried out at the moment.
In May 1981 the leave entitlement of air traffic controllers employed in Queensland alone amounted to 576 man weeks. That was the equivalent of 11 air traffic controllers being on annual leave for one year. That indicates the enormity of this problem. It also shows that the Minister is fiddling when he suggests that closing down Brisbane Airport is a solution to the problem and that the low rate of recruitment of air traffic controllers abroad would in some way overcome the difficulty we are facing and the enormous costs being incurred by the airlines.
I move to the subject of radar technicians. Earlier this year we had the radar technicians dispute. The shortage of radar technicians was well known to the Government. It had been evident for some years. It had been evident also that the salaries being paid to radar technicians were so far below the market rate paid to people of those

skills in the general community that our radar technicians, who cost the taxpayers something like $100,000 each to train, were being poached, rather ironically, by organisations such' as the news corporation. Because of their technical skills, these people were being poached by outside organisations. Last year the Minister for Transport indicated that he was aware of the deficiencies in the -air traffic controllers' salaries and conditions. He said that he was sympathetic about it and that the Government would move to remedy the situation. The Government did not remedy it. The Government, in full awareness of the problems and the justness of the case of the radar technicians, led us into an industrial dispute which again severely affected the provision of air services and forced airline operators in'to incurring substantial avoidable costs. There we have two instances of massive avoidable costs to airlines and the air service operators that were brought about by a lack of Government action, by Government incompetence or by Government insincerity.
The third matter that I referred to was the transfer of people from Melbourne to Canberra.
Mr Hunt-And Queanbeyan.
Mr MORRIS-To Canberra and Queanbeyan-I am just trying to shorthand it. It has been said by the Minister and by his Department that this is not really causing any problem because those people are being replaced. In fact, when the Minister took the time to write to me a letter on 5 August in answer to my Press release of 22 July, he pointed out that the staff of the Airways Operations Division as at 30 June was 19 greater than those who received transfer notices. In other words, the number who dropped out of the Department due to the transfer from Melbourne was more than offset by the increased number that was picked up when that section was transferred to Canberra. The Minister made a similar comparison with the Ground Facilities Division. He referred also to the Flying Operations and Airworthiness Division of the Air Safety Investigation Branch. I want to refer specifically to the Flying Operations and Airworthiness Division of the Department. The people in those sections of the Department who are presently located in Melbourne and who are about to receive notice of transfer, if they have not already received it, are people with considerable service and specialised skills in their fields of responsibility.
It is quite evident that safety standards will reach disaster levels before the 1981-82 transfer program is completed. Many experienced officers

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 817

with long and dedicated service have chosen to show their disgust by resigning from the Department of Transport. To a man they know this and the industry knows this. The industry is saying this privately, not pUblicly. If the Minister is getting the right advice from his Department he will know that what I am saying is based and grounded in fact and is not intended as a political accusation. It is based on the part of the Opposition, on the part of industry and on the part of the officers involved, on a genuine concern with the increased dangers involved in the loss of these key experienced personnel. I emphasise that I am not making a political point I am making a point of public safety. These people know, to a man, that the continuing loss of experienced technical officers will continue in the future and the decline of safety standards will continue at an accelerating rate until the respective sections of the Department of Transport become totally ineffectual. This loss of expertise is irreplaceable in the short term.
The Department .has admitted that it is incapable of maintaining a training program for continuing replacement of experienced operational and technical personnel. One of the key sections involved is the Airways Operations Division as I have mentioned. It is not enough for the Minister to write me a letter which somebody has drafted for him and which the Minister has obviously looked at and signed in good faith. I suggest that he go back, have another look at that letter, check the advice and talk to some of the people involved. I am convinced that the people who are involved in the transfer program are not expressing comments about this subject because they are concerned about their own private location of employment. They have a genuine belief and a concern about the future of public safety in the aviation industry of this country. I believe that, at this stage, because of the critical nature of what is happening, it is time that a halt was called to the program and a review of the efficacy of the program and the possible implications for ~he standards of air safety in .this country was carned out. This does not mean that the program should be abandoned. But I am concerned enough about it that I am saying to the Parliament that a halt should be called to the program so that we can have a look at it.
Related to this subject is the shortage of people within the Department and the staff ceilings. I do not have to quote officers of the Department. In this case I want to quote two sources, that is the Secretary of the Department of Transport and the

Public Service Board. The Secretary of the Department of Transport, Mr Halton, in a spe~ch reported in the Canberra Times of 26 March sald:
Transport safety standards could be threatened and private air operations hindered under increasing pressures From Canberra For public-service cuts-
Mr Halton then raised a very important question which, I hope, never arises for the Minister. He asked:
'Who will have to ansWer the hard questions in the event of a catastrophe?' . . . 'Where should the onus of prooFlie when proFessional views are being questioned in an area that does not lend itselF to quantitative jUdgment?'
That is what I am saying, that is what the Opposition is saying, that is what the people in the Department of Transport in Melbourne are saying and that is what the Secretary of the Department is saying. So, it is not a political view. It is a public safety view. The article continued:
Mr Halton said he might have to bring in 'demand-restraint measures' on some private transport operations because 'the resO\lrces I have pressed for are not available'.
He continued:
'And the irony of it all is that the airline industry would meet most of the costs of providing the service'.
He is referring to the services that would be required to ensure a proper standard in the provision of safety services. The demoralisation within the Department at the transfer program, at the rundown in the standard of service provided by the Department, at the loss of the valuable interfac ~ connection between the servicing sectors of the Department and the industry and at the general malaise within the Department are all reflected in the Public Service Board's report. At page 51 of the report under the heading 'Grievances and Appeals Bureau' it states that the Department of Transport with well below the largest employment has, by far, the highest number of grievances and dissatisfactions within the Department which have been brought to the Public Service Board for attention and solution. The report states:
Not unexpectedly, large departments tend to generate the greatest number of grievances. In 1980-81, most grievances were received From the Departments of Transport (sixty-eight), . . .
The Australian Taxation Office with considerably more employees had 13 grievances and the Department of Defence, with many more employees, had 68. The figures are there for honourable members to look at. So there again is the evidence of the malaise, dissatisfaction and demoralisation within the Department of Transport. That is reflected in the provision of services and runs right downthrough the stream of services to the industry.

818 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Air NaVigation (Charges) Bill

Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr MORRIS-Prior to the suspension of the sitting for dinner, I was commenting on the areas of failure of the Minister for Transport and this Government in respect of the services provided to the aviation industry. I referred to the severe shortage of air traffic controllers and radar technicians and to the loss of key technical personnel in the transfer of the Department of Transport from Melbourne to Canberra. In a moment I will refer to the News Digest of the General Aviation Association in leading up to a comment on the general aviation study report. But before doing so, I point out the debacle we witnessed recently concerning a very expensive report prepared by officers of the Department of Transport, a report which took almost two years' preparation. The report was presented to the community by the Government as a factual document and a document which reflected Government thinking. Yet a few weeks ago the Minister for Transport rejected utterly the recommendations of the report in the light of unprecedented criticism from the general aviation industry of the accuracy and content of the report. The August 1981 News Digest of the General Aviation Association had this to say in its editorial:
We are also a private enterprise industry-willing to pay our fair share of the costs of Government facilities and services that we need and use. We have told the Government this provided-
These are the conditions-
There is a proper assessment of the costs that general avaition should pay. Our contention is that the costs currently attributed to the general aviation industry are unfair arid unrepresentative of the real cost to the Government of providing the services and facilities which our industry actually needs.
Therein again is a condemnation of the performance of the Department under the superintendence of the Minister. The industry is saying: 'We don't believe the contents of your expensive report. We cannot accept that the substance of it is accurate. Therefore, go back to the drawing board and carry out a proper inquiry'. What the industry is calling for is an inquiry or an assessment into all aspects of the Department of Transport staffing levels, regulatory controls, functions and procedures. Here again we have the users of the services provided by this Government and this Department to aviation condemning the quality of those services and the inaccuracy of the information provided by the Department, as was the case with the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares. In that context, wherever we look in the aviation industry we have this chorus of objection and condemnation of the performance of government and its inaccuracies.

Before I conclude my remarks I want briefly to make some reference to Mascot airport. It is a brief reference because it seems that the Minister has suddenly discovered that there is an airport at Mascot, unlike his predecessor and unlike his predecessors. For over a decade conservative governments have fiddled and faddled and bungled and manoeuvred around the subject of Mascot airport-what seats they might win and what seats they might lose. But suddenly, on the eve of an election in New South Wales the Federal Minister for Transport has discovered that there is an airport at Mascot, that there is a need for additional capacity and that something should be done. Let. me put the matter in its perspective. That problem has been known to conservative governments for well over a decade-some say two decades. At the Federal election in 1977, which was the year in which the Major Airport Needs of Sydney Study was to report, the then Minister for Transport, the present Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), was absolutely silent about the subject of Mascot. There was not a word, not a whisper as to the Government's intention or proposal and the Government saw to it that the MANS report did not come forward until well after the 1977 election, in fact it was into
1978.
Mr Hunt-In 1979 the report came to hand.
Mr MORRIS-I thank the Minister. Between the receipt of the report and the 1980 election there was again a deafening silence from the Minister. Not a word was to be heard. It was not an issue; it was not important then; there was no problem of congestion then. But once the election was over, and in the approach to the New South Wales election suddenly the Minister made the great Rip van Winkle discovery that there is an airport at Mascot, there are congestion problems and the Federal Government has a level of responsibility for it, but it does not want to act without the New South Wales Government. So now we have the Minister reverting to threats and scaremongering about the airport. It is his responsibility. It was his predecessor's responsibility and it is not acceptable that in the few weeks before a New South Wales general election the Min-
ister now seeks to make some sort of political capital out of the matter. On this side of the chamber I have deliberately refrained from exploiting this issue from a political standpoint because of the importance of that problem. I am saddened to see that the Minister has chosen in this way to try to get some sort of cheap political gain out of what is a serious national problem. I say to the Minister: 'Go back to the stance you
had before, look at it from a national position of

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 819

responsibility and look at it in a. spirit of cooperation in trying to find a solution. Don't fall for the teJTlptation of trying to score cheap political points out oUt', which is what has been happening in recent weeks.
What is the Government's achievement in respect of the provision of services to the aviation industry? Brisbane Airport is to close periodically. Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport is congested and in need of new construction. The whole airport program around Australia has fallen behind one year. The Minister was refusing referrals to the Public Works Committee in respect of airports because of the shortage of key personnel and also because of the transfer of key personnel from one airport program to another. We have the enormous increase in danger-the degrading of public safety in the air because of the severe shortage of air traffic controllers. Officers are working long periods of overtime, working-on their days off and working without proper leave. In Queensland alone, the backlog inannual. leave amounts to II traffic controllers each taking one year's continuous annual leave. We must take into account the effect upon their health and the resig~ nation rate. Then we have the severe shortage of radar technicians and-the implication that holds for the provision of navigational aids and the servicing of those essential aids. We have from throughout the industry a lack of confidence and that lack of confidence and' the Government's performance generally in respect of aviation have been reflected in the latest figures on aviation. These show that in the quarter ended June 1981 there was a 10.1 per cent downturn in Trans Australia Airlines passengers and an 8.3 per cent downturn in Ansett Airlines of Australia passengers compared with the quarter ended June last year.
Finally, the higher charges for the industry proposed in this Bill will be reflected almost. immediately in higher charges in passenger fares to the people who use airline services. In essence, the air passengers of this country are paying more and are getting less in terms of service. Nevertheless, at this stage the Opposition does not oppose the Bill.
Mr EWEN CAMERON (Indi) (8.8)-As the .Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) said in his second reading speech, the Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment. Bill is a machinery Bill affecting charges payable in respect of the use by aircraft of air route and airway facilitis, meteorological ser~
vices and search and rescue services maintained, operated or provided by the Commonwealth. The Bill proposes to vary the rates of air navigation

charges payable for aircraft operating in all sectors of the aviation industry.
I will confine my remarks to the general <\viation industry and the general aviation study conducted by the Department of Transport. The Minister for Transport at that time, the present Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), ordered this study in May 1979 to provide a better understanding of the structure, operations and economics of the general aviation industry and various sectors of it. It was also necessary to establish a better basis for government decisions in providing general aviation infrastructure and a better basis for implementing regulatory matters. The study will assist also in achieving appropriate levels of cost recovery for airways and aerodrome facilities provided by the Government-the user p~ys philosophy.
The general aviation study was tabled by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) in March this year. The Minister indicated that a response from the industry would be needed by the end of April. Strong representations from the industry and the Government Members Transport Committee extended this response date to the end of June. On 13 April 1981, Sir Brian Massy-Greene chaired a meeting of representatives from all sections of the general aviation industry. The meeting agreed to form a body to represent the industry in examining the general aviation study and in negotiations with the Government. The body was named the General Aviation Industry Conference. Mr Brian Deveson was elected chairman of the steering committee. Members of the Conference are the Aeriill Agricultural Association of Australia, the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association, the Australian Federation of Air Pilots, the Australian Licensed Aircraft Engineers Association, the Australian Women's Pilots Association, the Aviation Safety Advisory Panel, the Regional Airlines Association of Australia, the General Aviation Association, the General Aviation Distributors' Association, the Gliding Federation of Australia, the Royal Federati<;:>n of Aeroclubs of Australia, the Royal Flying Doctor Service and the Guild of Air Pilots and Navigators-the entire sector of general aviation.
Mr Deveson and members of the General Aviation Industry Conference executive met with the Government Members Transport Committee and considerable discussion took place. Likewise, considerable discussion took place between Mr Deveson and me as the Chairman of the Transport Committee. I believe the majority agreed that the study was a very useful document. However, some very strong concern was expressed by the industry regarding the figures and

820 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

recommendations expressed in the study. It became quite apparent that agreement between the General Aviation Industry Conference and the Government could not be reached prior to. the finalising of the 1981 Budget considerations. I therefore wrote to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on behalf of the Government Members Transport Committee drawing his attention to the importance of agreement being reached and a very probable threat to the economic viability of the general aviation industry. I cannot stress how important this industry is to Australia as a whole and the more isolated areas in particular.
It was a most welcome message I received from the Minister which informed me that the Cabinet had decided to reject the cost recovery recommendations made in the general aviation study. That is the reason why we are dealing only with air navigation charges and not further cost recovery charges tonight. Some real gains arise out of this exercise. The general aviation industry is now represented by a unified body which will be able to negotiate with government. I urge it to continue strong support for the Conference. Likewise, I feel that the general aviation study in itself is a most valuable reference document. It will be most useful in the future, only requiring updating from time to time.
During the often critical discussions I had with members of the general aviation industry over recent months, I received considerable criticism of the Department of Transp6rt and its operations. It is only -fair that I should give some information regarding the Department and the aviation industry to help keep the books balanced. The Minister has supplied me with some inf6rmation. Aviation operational staff is less now than it was in 1975. Overtime expenditure has been reduced to 60 per cent of that incurred in 1973-74 in real terms. Operational and administrative expenditure has not increased in real terms in the same period. However, since 1973-74 the level of aviation activity has increased as follows: Registered aircraft

numbers are up 70 per cent; pilot licences are up 76 per cent; hours of flying are up 33 per cent; international passengers are up 93.6 per cent; freight is up 140 per cent and domestic passengers are up 34 per cent. The total cost recovery of the provision of aviation services by the Commonwealth has increased from 49 per cent to 64 per cent since 1973. I commend this Bill to the House.
Mr CHARLES JONES (Newcastle) (8.16)-The Bill before the house is the Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Bill. What concerns me about the second reading speech of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) is not the information that it conveys to the Parliament but what it does Rot say. Unfortunately second reading speeches are becoming briefer. The second reading speech on this Bill works out at almost $lm a word in expenditure by the Department, excluding the table on the civil aviation cost recovery rate. The Parliament has been working towards full cost recovery for some years. It is pleasing to see that at least the international airlines are paying the full cost recovery. In fact, we are making a profit on them. I hope that the in" crease of 12t per cent in charges contained in this legislation will bring'the cost recovery from trunk route operators to 100 per cent. After aU, the Government is entitled to recoup those costs. The runways navigational aids and all the things that this legislation provides for in the long term, should. be treated in the same way as railway tracks, the signalling system and railway infrastructure, and the costs incurred in road and sea transport. Why should not the airline operators pay the costs of providing the wherewithal to operate the runways, navigation aids, et cetera? Full cost recovery is justified. It is for that reason that the Labor Government initiated this measure in .1973. This Government is continuing it. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table which spells out in clear terms the expenditure and revenue for two financial years.
Leave granted.
The table read as jollows-

Revenue
Air navigation charges Airport rentals and business con-
cessions Other

Actual 1980-81
95.9 35.8 10.2
141.9 154.5

Estimate 1981-82 Expenditure
115.8 Administrational and operational
37.0 Building and works 11.0 Plant and equipment
Air transport subsidies Aerodrqme local ownership plan Other
163.8 200.9

Actual 1980-81
240.9
38.2 11.7
.7 4.2
.7
296.4

Estimate 1981-82
276.7
54.S17.7 5.3 9.6
.9
364.7

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 821

Mr CHARLES JONES-I thank the Minister and the House. The figures are taken from Budget Paper No. I. In 1980-81, actual revenue was $141.9m. Expenditure was $296.4m. The deficit was $154.5m. This year, the estimated revenue is $163.8m. The expenditure is $364.7m. The deficit is $200.9m. On that basis, the taxpayer is making a very substantial contribution towards the cost of civil aviation. The Parliament is entitled to be given a second reading speech in excess of a page and a half of Hansard. This is a major expenditure with which the Minister should have dealt in much greater detail so that the public could see where its money was going and what it was costing. In recent weeks we have had Press statements from the Minister for Transport showing the amount of money that is being expended on Brisbane Airport. In his statement of 19 August this year he said that $98m had been already approved for site preparation and that the Government had authorised a further $18.8m for the project. That sort of expenditure will be going on for quite some time to provide a new airport for Brisbane. Expenditure of quite substantial. proportions, although not the type of expenditure in respect of Brisbane Airport, is to be provided for Adelaide and Perth airports.
Aviation is not a cheap industry. It is expensive, and a lot of money has to be poured into it. At the same time the people who use it have to be prepared to accept full responsibility for financing it. The Opposition does not oppose 100 per cent cost recovery for aviation, particularly on the international and domestic trunk routes, for the simple enough reason that it is the large aircraft-the Boeing 747s, the Boeing 727s, the DClOs and the Airbuses-that require long runways and heavy pavements to cope with the stresses that they apply to the airports when landing and taking off. They are the aircraft which really bring about the need for these major airports. For that reason more sympathetic consideration has to be given to the contribution of general aviation-the little blokes, the rural operations. If they were required to pay 100 per cent cost recovery, there would not be any general aviation aircraft or rural services operating. So, it is not an easy situation. For that reason I do not object to the proposition that the general aviation operators be required to pay only a limited percentage of the cost recovery.
Another matter which involves this Parliament is the question of airports. I was disappointed to find the Minister and a Country Party colleague bringing into this Parliament .on Wednesday, 19 August, a week ago-on the eve of the New South Wales elections-a question regarding Sydney Airport. There is no mileage in it for the Minister

and there is no mileage in it for us, because one has as bad a reputation and record as the other.
Mr Cadman-That is not right.
Mr CHARLES JONES-That is true. The honourable member for Mitchell should not buy into it, because I have documentary evidence here tonight. I have letters between me and a State Minister in August 1973. I have a statement. I made in this place on5 April 1973. I have a letter from the then Prime Minister to the then Premier of New South Wales in 1975. I have a report from -the Department of Transport dated June 1975. I repeat: We are all in trouble on the score of Sydney Airport. The question is: How do we solve the problem? That is the question that should be looked at on a non-political basis.
Let us look at the record of governments in the mid-1960s. The then New South Wales Minister for Local Government conned the then Federal Minister for Civil Aviation, Sir Reginald Swartz, into agreeing that Towra Point was the most suitable site for a second airport in Sydney. The honourable member for Cook (Mr Dobie), the Deputy Speaker in the Chair at the moment, knows of the problems associated with that proposition. The then honourable member for Barton, Len Reynolds, knew of it and objected. The Opposition Whip, the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson), really bucked his brand off when the prpposition of Towra Point was thrown around. It was not until 1969 when I got the leak on it and let it go to Jack Gorton on the eve of his going overseas that he said it was not on because a federal election was due. So, that was Towra Point down the drain. Whitlam made sure it did not get up again by buying it and deClaring it a national park. So there was 'fowra Point gone we:at: We can go on and on. We had trouble with Askin-I should probably give him his full title, Sir Robert Askin-when he was Premier of New South Wales. It did not matter a damn what decision one put up, the answer was no.
Mr Cadman-That is like Neville Wran.
Mr CHARLES JONES-No different from Wran. I told the honourable member that we all have a problem. For God's sake, get politics out of it, get down to the facts of life and try to solve it. These letters tell of the problems we had with politics. Every time we got to the point of making a decision, up came the old political warhorse. The only reason I did not pop a question to the Minister last Wednesday was that the Speaker would not give me the call to blow the whole thing again.

822 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Atr Navigation (Charges) Bill

- Mr Les Johnson-Weren't you going to put it at Galston?
Mr CHARLES JONES-I was not going to put it at G a l s to n . '
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Order! We have enough interjections coming from both sides of the House. While the Chair finds them interesting, he thinks the honourable member should speak to the Bill.
Mr CHARLES JONES-This is all relevant to the Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker. It is all tied up with air navigation charges. It is the air navigation charges that pay for these damned things.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I was suggesting that the honourable member not answer interjections.
Mr CHARLES JONES-With due respect to you, Mr beputy Speaker, 'where the air navigation charges are going to be spent is what it is all about. That is the name of the game. I ask you to look at the table. The item is buildings and works-$38m last year, $54m this year-and the works are airports. That is what I am talking about. We have to talk about airports and find solutions to their problems. As I said, I ~ould go on and quote Whitlam's letter to Lewis of 24 September 1975 literally begging him to come up with some sites that we could look at in an impartial manner and at the same time saying to the Premier that the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party was completely and totally opposed to parallel runways at Sydney Airport. So there is nothing new in the Labor Party being opposed to parallel runways at Sydney Airport. I an! not saying all the members of the Labor Party are opposed to them because I am satisfied that parallel runways can have the effect of deferring for a period the need to construct a fully operationa~ydney airport that will cope with the requirements of Sydney for many years to come. That is the Jones attitude; it is not the Labor Party's policy. At the same time. I draw attention to the fact that in 1975 the then Premier of New South Wales was told by the then Prime Minister of Australia that parallel runways were not on. I can show another report that says that that is correct-that there is an alternative to parallel runways. The permanent head of the Department, in a long report to me dated 25 July 1975, said:
A proposal currently being examined is for a short north south runway usable by STOL aircraft such as the DHC 7:
It would defer the need for a second airport to about the same year as a conventionalclose-spaced parallel runway-1995 or 1996.
I have not time to deal wih the matter in detail, but for some time in this place I have proposed

that stubby runways be built at Sydney Airport. That is the advice to me from experienced airport operators, such as men of the class of the former manager--
Mr Hunt-Crampton.
Mr CHARLES JONES-Reg Crampton, who was a great supporter of the stubbies and the open-V after I'had discussed the thing with him. Stubbies can solve the problem for a short time. But we as a parliament have to come back to the issue, as I said a while ago, that the problem of Sydney Airport will be solved only when we can get it out of the political arena. Many things have been done when political parties have got issues out of the political arena. Honourable members should look at the great progress that was ,made by the Victorian Parliament when it got road safety out of the political arena. Compulsory wearing of seat belts and random breath testing have saved thousands of lives in the short time the measures have been operating. That is the only way that we will get anywhere with this measure.
I am concerned about the decision to grant approval to Ansett Airlines to operate B737s and B767s instead of forcing it to use wide-bodied jets. As far back as 1974 pressure was put on Ansett to bring down recommendations and make decisions on the early introduction of wide-bodied jets. Wide-bodied jets would help reduce the congestion that exists over Sydney Airport and would put back the need for a second Sydney airport. But no, the actions of this Government in the last week of the previous session in relation to the arch corporate crook Murdoch-I refer to the three Bills which went through this Parliament-netted that man and his. company about $25m.
Mr Hodgman-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Order! The honourable member for Newcastle will resume his seat. I call the Minister for the Capital Territory.
Mr Hodgman-I take the fundamental point of order that the honourable member has just made an imp1,ltation involving an allegation of criminal practice against a 'person. The honourable member would well know that the proper way to do that, if it has to be done, is by a substantive notice of motion. I submit that you, Mr Deputy Speaker, should call upon him to withdraw the remarks. I do not know.Mr Murdoch and I have rio' contact with him, but I will not sit in this Parliament and hear the honourable member for Newcastle making statements which are out of order:

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 823

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.

Mr CHARLES JONES-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I know the propositions which Mr Murdoch put to our Cabinet. When he was unsuccessful he set about destroying the Whitlam Labor governments in 1975 and 1977. Government members paid him off in the last week of the autumn session of this Parliament by passing Bills that were worth $25m to him. So honourable members opposite arejust as bad as he is.

Mr Hodgman-I raise a point of order. Mr Deputy Speaker, you did not direct the honour~ able member for Newcastle to withdraw the remark regarding a certain person being a corporate crook. He is now imputing bribery on the part of this Government. That clearly is contrary to the Standing Orders.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.

Mr Hodgman-Why not?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order under the Standing Orders. I counsel the
honourable member for Newcastle to moderate his approach. I think the result will be in the interests of the House.

Mr CHARLES JONES-Yes, Mr Deputy

Speaker, it is on the record. I return to my re-

marks about Sydney Airport. The airlines should

have been forced into the wide-bodied jet. Evenat

this point, with the congestion that has reached

serious proportions, the two airlines should be::

required to share the time and space available. If

Trans Australia Airlines wants to operate air

buses which carry 269 passengers and Ansett

wants to operate 737s with a capacity of 102, 767s

with a capacity of 216 or B727s with a capacity of

150 let them do so, but Ansett should get the same

access to the airport as TAA is given. If the

Government is fair dinkum-I question whether

it is-that is what it will do.

.

I refer now to the takeover of Masling Airlines, the commuter service between Newcastle and Sydney by, once again, the corporate monsters, Murdoch and Sir Peter Abeles. I have no great bitch about Sir Peter Abeles. I think he is a pretty good businessman; it is the other fellow who needles me. I am in the happy position to point out that on 21 November 1980 I objected to the takeover of Aeropelican Intercity Commuter Air Services Pty Ltd by Masling, so my question is not one of politics. I want to see some degree of competition in the commuter iridustry in Newcastle instead of what we have at t~e moment, a inon" opoly by Ansett Transport Industries with its

ownership of Masling and Aeropelican. I call on the Minister to do something positive. In the main these people are using public facilities that are financed by this appropriation of air navigation charges. This year they will cost the taxpayer over $200m. I want to see this Government carry out its policies of competition and free enterprise, in the market-place. If the Government is fair dinkum-honourable member opposite can nod-it will force Ansett Transport Industries to disgorge the ownership of these two companies and let them operate singly.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (8.38)-Whilst the Opposition does not oppose an increase in air navigation charges, I think a few points need to be raised tonight. I particularly want to relate my comments to the Australian Capital Territory. The 12+ per cent increase in navigation charges on the main trunk routes will definitely put further pressure on air fares. General aviation will, of course, be affected more significantly as its operations are on a much smaller scale. I believe it is very important at this time to consider again the effect that the recent air fare increases have had on the Canberra economy and the extent of those air fare increases.
The air fare between Canberra and Sydney has increasedby over 40 per cent in the last nine months. The problem that has arisen is that the increase has taken air travel out of the pocket of ordinary consumers. Even the business community now cannot afford to use that air link because of the high costs. I think this is a point to which the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) must give consideration. On the one hand it is all very well to look at the application of a magic formula but on the other hand we have to see what it means in practice. The most recent figures I have-the Minister may have later figures-indicate that there has been a downturn in the usage in particular of the Sydney-Canberra leg.
The air transport statistics that I have for June 1981 from a Department of Transport publication show a downturn of 11.3 per cent in air movements to the year ending June 1981. In the last quarter when we really felt the effects of this increase aircraft movements were down 17.7 per cent. Passenger rates were also down 9.4 per cent. The Minister has pointed out to me in correspondence that I have had with him on this issue that he feels that the situation is temporary. I hope that he is right. I think we are getting to the stage where many business people and local residents in

824 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

Canberra are looking at alternative ways of trav- $300 to fly from Canberra to Sydney. Will they do

eIling to Sydney. So, we have to assess the viability it? What will they do instead? They will probably

of that link.

get in their car and drive.

1.et us look at the services that are provided at This Government has been trying to encourage

the 'airport. There has been discussion over the people not to use the car, not to waste energy but

years 6n the 'need to upgrade the air terminal at we find that instead people are being forced into

Canberra. After all, Canberra is the national capitha,t alternative. If the Government makes it its

tal. i think honourable members forget about policy to force people out of using the aeroplane,

that. Too many people regard Canberra as it should be looking at alternative links to Can-

nothing more than a country town. They do not berra. Canberra is an inland city but it is still the

think of it as a national capital. This Government national capital. Any government has an obli-

and the Minister for Transport have to give gation to look seriously at transport into Can-

serious consideration to the role of Canberra as berra. One thing to which we must give absolute

the gateway to this nation. It is the national capitop priority is the upgrading of the rail link be-

taL It should have an airport terminal befitting a tween Canberra and Sydney. That was not pro-

national capital. The airport should be a centre vided for in this Budget. The Minister has said

which attracts international tourists to Canberra. that this is one of the things he lost. I hope that

So we mustIook at it. What impressions do we get that will not be the situation next year, because

of this country when people roll into Canberra that issue should be given high priority, particu-

airport and are faced with total chaos and larly if we are to keep air fares at their high level. I

shemozzle? The Minister,' as a consistent user of realise that increases in navigation charges actu-

that airport, should be very conscious of that fact. ally have only a small effect on air fares, but they

Mr Hunt-I quite agree. We are planning a new airport.
Mrs KELLY-The Government is planning a new airport. The thing is that we need it now. What provisions have we got for that in this Budget? That is what we need to consider. We 'have two issues to look at here: Firstly, the cross factor and secondly, the facilities that are offered at the airport itself. I think it is very important that ,we consider the air fare increases and their effect pn usage because of the direct effect this has on touri.sm, Tourism is so important to the devel- ,opment of Canberra. I see the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) nodding in agreement about this. What do'we do when we 'find, as is happening, that so many conventions are now moving out of Canberra because of the costs? The Minister frowns, but I have evidence of that occurring. People have come to see me to say that it is cheaper now to move their conventions to New Zealand because they get better package fares than they would get if they were traveIling on the Sydney-Canberra leg. I think that matter must be given serious consideration. We have to look at the benefits of keeping air fares at a reasonable charge, If the fares are reasonable they will act as an incentive to get people here~international and domestic tourists~and also as an incentive for the people

are a factor. I think one has to look at the viability of such increases, particularly in relation to the link between Canberra and Sydney, when the air fares continue to increase at the rate they have done in the past.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (8.43)-in reply-In closing the debate I wish to clarify a point in respect of air navigation charges. The increases that are to be imposed on the domestic routes will result in an estimated 0.5 per cent increase in air fares. In regard to the concern of the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) about the very substantial increase in air fares that occurred as a result of the decision by the Government to adopt the recommendations of the Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic . Air Fares headed by Mr Holcroft, I do not think we will again see cross subsidisation in air fares to the extent that that has occurred in the past. There is no doubt that air fares were kept artificially low on many of the short haul routes around Australia because of the cross subsidisation that occurred from those passengers who were flying over the long distance routes throughout the nation. Quite clearly, there is a responsibility on the State and Federal governments to improve the transport facilities provided by both road and rail to at least give that alternative to people wishing to travel to and from the national

of Canberra to use the airlines. After all, most of capital.

us have our families scattered all over Australia. In regard to the other matters that have been

Many of us have been able to use the aeroplane to raised in respect of this legislation, I think there is

get around but now for most people in Canberra a general agreement that cost recovery is a desir-

that is no longer an option, when we consider that able objective. As the honourable member for

it would now cost a family with two children over Indi (Mr Ewen Cameron) so clearly put it, there

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 825

is a maximum to which we can recover from general aviation because of the nature of that industry, its many diversities and its fragilities. As I have said on many occasions, the general aviation industry happens to be the cradle of aviation in this country and it would be very wrong for any government to impose impossible charges'upon that section of the industry. Without a viable general aviation industry we would not have the. facilities to train pilots, many ,of whom become the great international and domestic airline pilots in this nation. General aviation, apart from providing a social and an economic service to this nation, has provided a very important training facility to the industry as a whole. I thank the honourable gentlemen and the honourable member for Canberra for the contribution that they have made to this debate.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.

Mr MILLAR-The honourable member has
assessed the situation with his customary precision. My reluctance to engage in political debate within the chamber is based on the premise that the House has a right to expect its Presiding Officers to be demonstrably impartial. With all due modesty, I believe that the House appreciates
my efforts in this direction. I wish to digress briefly at this juncture to express my appreciation of the very loyal support and dedication of Deputy Chairmen of Committees who have ser-
ved this House very effectively and very loyally. I might also add that within the detachment of the Chair I have come to learn that all talent does not
reside on one side of the House. It is a sad commentary that within the divisions of oursociety so much of that talent is dissipated in political confrontation of dubious benefit. For those of my constituents who, for reasons which te~t the imagination, may be paying attention to the parliamentary proceedings, I would hasten to add that I have no reason to believe that their expectations
of a parliamentary representative. should be necessarily inhibited by that representative being an officer of the Parliament.

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed from 25 August, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time
Mr MILLAR (Wide Bay) (8.47)-Mr Deputy Speaker, there is perhaps just a touch of whimsy about my vacating the chair that you presently occupy in order to speak from the benches on Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1981-82. I spare a thought for those constituents and friends of mine who from time to time have been utterly confused in listening to parliamentary broadcasts because they have been convinced that their member is a man of half a dozen voices. Of course, they are unaware that I am blessed with the support of half a dozen Deputy Chairmen of Committees who, when they occupy the Chair, are. accorded the courtesy title of Deputy Speaker. I have a thought for them tonight for the simple reason that honourable members will not be unaware that since my election as Deputy Speaker of the House I have rarely made a speech. The Appropriation Bill offers a vehicle with sufficient latitude llnder the Standing Orders for me to offer in a well intended fashion an observation or two on the current circumstances that confront our nation.
Dr Jenkins-Are you warning uS'not to interject on you?

Yesterday the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling), in speaking to a matter before the House-I hasten to assure my colleagues that I
have no intention of transgressing the Standing Orders by alluding to a previous debateaddressed herself to the matter of the Community Youth Support Scheme. She quite accurately quoted a comment I made in public relating to the Government's decision to terminate CYSS as it is commonly called. I feel free to comment on the matter in this Budget debate because of the' latitude outlined in the Standing Orders in respect of this debate. Her quote was quite accurate insofar as she informed the Housethat I was reported in the media as having expressed shock at the Government's decision. Very recently.Ivisited a number of the CYSS programs in my electorate and was impressed at the very, high level of' per-
formance that was being demonstrated within those particular groups. For the record, I will go on to say that in addition to the actua,I quote she put forward I said to the media that I was persuaded to the view that the Government would have been well advised if ithad, in the first instance,perhaps terminated CYSS in localities where a level of performance had not been attained and putting on notice, as at perhaps 30 June 1982 or even 31 December 1982, CYSS in general. This could have been done on the premise that the alternative funding advanced in the Budget by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) had .the

826 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

effect that was confidently anticipated by government and thereby CYSS would become superfluous or redundant. On that premise I think that both schools of thought could have been well accommodated.
Mr Good luck-That is a good point.
Mr MILLAR-I thank the honourable member for Franklin for his comment. I am quite sure that latitude still exists for some compromise in the matter. I have had the good fortune-some may argue the misfortune-to listen quite intently to seven Budget Speeches in a row. It is a fact of life that no Budget achieves a unanimity of supporL It is in the natural order of our society that difference of opinion will manifest itself. It struck me as somewhat significant that on this occasion during the presentation of the Budget the Opposition seemed frustrated in its inability to immediately descend on elements of the Budget which appeared inconsistent with what it believed a Budget should contain. Quite naturally, subsequent to the event the Opposition took advantage of all facilities available to go through the Budget with a fine toothcomb. I give the Oppo~ sition its due. It has come forward with legitimate propositions which will fairly test the quality of the Government. That, of course, is the nature of democracy.
It is true that democracy has a shortcoming insofar as any democratic government is required to govern within the parameters of acceptability. In that respe<;t it may be argued that governments an:. not free to bring to a society or a country that which, in their judgment, they believe is good for the country. They are bound, because of electoral consequences, to give society substantially what it wal}ts. One might hasten to argue that that is what democracy is all about-that a society be accommodated by its government. I suggest to honourable members that the situation is somewhat analogous with the family situation-I do not intend for one moment, to be condescending in this proposition-w,~ere one's children never, at any time, have any d01,lbt as to what they want but the parents presumably with acquired wisdom and judgment nmst make a decision as to what is good for the children and what the family can afford. Natu.rally if the parents' decision is not in accord wIth the ambitions of the children they incur the displeasure of the children. The essential differences between a family and a government is that the children are not in a position to vote parents out at the next election. But they can vote the government out at the next election. Perhaps that is the proper order of things.

Mr Scholes-That is three years. That is a long while to wait.
Mr MILLAR-The honourable member for Corio properly says that three years is a long time. He has advanced a comment that I might have otherwise made. I have a mind to say that any government-I speak as apolitically as I cangiven the mandate of the people should allow boldness to be its friend. Whilst this does not ignore the views of the society or of the nation, members of a government should have the strength of conviction of what they are about. Being charged with the responsibility of administering the affairs of the nation they should apply themselves with diligence and conviction to doing what they believe is good fqr the country. Having done that, they, with the effiuxion of time, can go back to the people to receive judgment on their efforts. If they have not the runs on the board, quite properly the people will dispatch that government and try their fortunes with an alternative government. I think this country is not particularly well served by a hypersensitivity in government in responding to the ripples of discontent within the community. It is axiomatic that at all times there will be discontent within the community. There will always be discontent. For heaven's sake, inany ordinary general election the result is determined by a very small percentage.
With the deep political convictions that most people in the country have, it stands to reason that there must be a continuing antipathy to what the government-not of their choice-may do. I am suggesting that any government-I emphasise that I am talking in the broad-once elected should address itself to the charge it has undertaken and govern. There is no room for governments retreating before the onslaught of public opinion. I am not suggesting that it should be ignored, but they must-
Mr Dawkins-The tyranny of the majority.
Mr MILLAR-That is true. The honourable member for Fremantle says 'the tyranny of the majority'. It is within our democratic concept that the majority rules and, therefore, the government, once entrusted with that charge, must govern. It is impossible to aspire to a situation where there is a unanimity of view. I will give a very modest illustration. I recall speaking recently to a constituent whom I would like to regard as a friend. He lives at Elliott Heads in the electorate of Wide Bay. He and I are virtually contemporaries. We both joined the Royal Australian Air Force at a tender age and we went off with noble intent to serve our country. We finished up at a desolate location in the Northern Territory, a place called Comalee

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 827

Creek. We were both in an intelligence unit and were going off with the drive through Indonesia and through the Malaysian Peninsula. We thought we were going to war. In actual fact, the thrust of the campaign and the counter-attack went. through the islands in the Pacific and we were stranded in the Northern Territory. Admittedly, we were regarded as having been on active service. We were not, in fact, regarded as having been in a theatre of war. To this day, being in that category we do not have full access to the benefits attaching to veterans who served in the theatre of
war.
This gentleman, whom I shall not name-if he ever gets to hear of this he will know exactly whom I am talking about-is utterly convinced to the point of total anguish that he is being effected a great mischief. As far as he is concerned, he went off to war to serve his country. There should be no discrimination between the gentleman to whom I refer and others whose circumstances took them into more hazardous areas. On the other hand, in identical circumstances, try as hard as I can, if for no more that to accommodate this point of view, I cannot convince myself that there is any such entitlement. It is one of those idiosyncrasies of human experience.

There are two chaps with identical experiences

and with totally divergent views on that aspect.

This example is but a microcosm of the broad so-

ciety in which at any time one can find people of

total veracity, with a total conviction that this or

that should be done, and governments cannot ac-

commodate all of those views. How often have

members on both sides of the House been ap-

proached by people with quite laudable prop~

ositions related to the Budget that they want ad-

vanced in the Parliament? Inevitably. they call for

the expenditure, through government, of tax-

payers' funds. More often than not the schemes

are totally laudable in concept and immediately

would attract the instinctive support of the

member being supplicated. But if, on the premise

that the cake is only so big and the slices are lim-

ited in size or number, one proposes the question

to these people how they want their proposal

funded-one may ask whether they could care to

indicate from what area of present government

expenditure commitment the Government should

retire to make the funds available to them for

their project or whether they propose that the

Government increase taxation to make the funds

available for their project-they are invariably

mute. They just do not think of those aspects.

They do not think their proposals through. That

tends to emphasise the insularity of view of most

Australians.'

.

In this comfortable society, Australians tend to become insular and our community fragmented. Life is in very stark contrast to the post depression days when bread and beef and dripping and tomato sauce was good tucker. One was supported by the friendship of all those in the street; one knew them and drew strength from them, as they drew it from one. Today we live comfortably and securely in our own castles. We have deluded ourselves into thinking that our expectations rnust be met, and our entitlements, in a strict assessment, are of litpe consequence. Therefore, we can drive around the new suburbs in any city in Australia today and find street after street,- houseafter house, of most superior aspect. ,We can see handsome homes occupied by public servants, bank clerks-I have a son who is a bank clerk who lives in such a residence-and tradesmen, manifesting a standard of living which once would have been the sole preserve of the lord of the manor. They are living in these homes because these. homes equate with their expectations; and society has strained itself to match those expectations. Their entitlements may have been far more modest. In essense my argument is simply ,that a country should not delude itself into believing that more can be derived from the cake than we put into the cake. I have a particular affinity with the work force having started work on my thirteenth birthday dragging bags of charcoal around an assay office in a mine in western Tasmania.
Mr John Brown-How long ago,Clarrie?
Mr MILLAR-Further back than I really care to remember, my friend. I have an affinity with workers but I am mystified at their attitude which would suggest that somehow or other they should be immured from the diversities or vicissitudes of life. They have a commodity which they ate properly entitled to market, but I cannot accept that, if they cannot sell their commodity on the market, they should be able to close the market down~ Conversely, the employer is equally dependent on his employee; In brief, noting that my time is fast moving, I emphasise the point that this country urgently requires a realisation that employer and employee need each other and that no Budget this Government or an alternative government' Call bring down will override the irresponsibility of a society that seeks to derive more from the cake than it is prepared to put into it.
,,Mr Deputy Speaker, I have attempted to ad. dress this House in terms that will not savage the sensitivities of the Opposition. I have not attempted to deal in detail with the Budget because that invites political confrontation. I am mindful that I return to the chair you presently

828 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

occupy, and I am mindful of the challenge perpetual in that position and would not wish to disadvantage myself by incurring the rancour orany member of this House. But all I ask for is some honesty in the presentation of the facts. The people outside will judge the Government and the Parliament. Let us give them the facts so they can be better informed. It is pointless to stand up on either side of this table and quote figures which are not wrong but which are not totally right.
Mr Dawkins-Who does that? Name him.
Mr MILLAR-It would be far quicker, acknowledging the interjection of the honourable member for Fremantle, if I named those who did not; it would save the time of the House. But it is foolish, for example, to cite that in 1935 one could buy a Ford V8 vehicle for  300 and today one pays $10,000 to $20,000, whatever it may be, and therefore, by extension, say that the motor car manufacturers are ripping off the society. One should at the same time introduce the fact that the relativity between car cost and salaries has changed considerably. It is that half truth to which I refer. If our society is to contribute to the quality of this Parliament, and the Parliament can address itself to its responsibilities, mindful that the society trusts it, perhaps we will advance the state of our nation at a rate greater than that at which it presently is being advanced.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.7)-It is not my intention to try not to ruffle feathers. I wish to draw attention to what I see as serious deficiencies in this Budget and the very high degree of hardship which arises from this Budget for a substantial section of the Australian community-not the section which normally would support the people opposite, but, nevertheless, people who are entitled to consideration and who are entitled to be considered when a government is drafting its Budget. An examination of the taxation statistics which are presented with the Budget will indicate that the most substantial income from income tax groups in this Budget will be from those people who are in the middle to low income groups.
The history of this Government's policies in its term of office reveals that these people who earn something approaching the average wage or less have suffered a marked increase in their taxation burden whilst the taxation burden of those who el!-rn double the average wage or more has been substantially reduced directly and through concessions. That fact, more than anything else, I think, portrays the attitude of the Government to most Australians. But in addition there are all sorts of hidden charges which are built into this

and previous budgets brought in by Liberal National Country Party governments. For instance, as part of this Budget, the interest rates payable on capital advances to Telecom Australia and to Australia P9st since Federation are to be increased. That means that, combined with the Government's withdrawal of the right of Telecom to go on the market to borrow funds for its future works, current subscribers will pay additional telephone charges and additional postage rates as a direct form of taxation to the Treasury. Those bodies also will have to raise from current subscribers by adding to the cost of those subscribers the amounts that are n'ecessary to maintain and increase the efficiency of the Telecom and postal systems in order that they can cope with the changes which will take place into the future and which normally would have been the subject of borrowings and would have been written off over a period. This is a hidden increase in tax.
On I' September most Australians will be faced by a new form of indirect taxation. We have yet to find out what the rates for medical insurance will be on that date, which is only a week away. The comparative information is not available. This would seem to indicate that either the scheme introduced by the Government was done without adequate preparation or someone in the system is fairly incompetent or tardy in providing information which is basic to the right of choice which the Government would suggest is involved in the new hospital and medical insurance policy of the Government. The facts are that on 1 September a new form of indirect taxation will be placed on hundreds of thousands of Australians. This tax will not be collected by the Government. It has appointed the medical insurance funds as its agents to collect that money. This money will be compulsorily taken out of the pockets of Australians and it will be done under the threat that if people do not pay those premiums they will receive no government assistance from taxation revenue to meet the costs which may be associated with a serious illness.
Recently a circular was sent to hospitals in Victoria-I think honourable members opposite should take note of this-stating that certain surgical aids and necessities of life were not covered by hospital and medical insurance, the Victorian Health Commission or any Commonwealth supplement to hospital or medical charges. I instance one item in that area. A person in the State of Victoria-I do not know about the situation in the other States-who requires a pacemaker after 1 September, unless some new arrangement is made between now and then, will have to pay for the pacemaker out of his own pocket. There will be

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 829

no insurance cover for that. It could cost a person $1,250. If one does not have $1,250, I presume that one will have to go out and find an honest broker or finance company which will give a loan on the basis that if one gets the $1,250 one might live loltg enough to be able to pay for it. That is not the act of a government which has seriously considered the rights of people in our society who are ill. It is a wealthy society for some. The Government has not considered the rights of those people and is not considering the cost to people who cannot afford medical treatment. It will cost in the order of $600 a year next year to cover adequate hospital and medical treatment and that is a-form of private taxation which is being imposed compulsorily on the community by this Government. The exemption rates for disadvantaged people are almost laughable. If, for instance, a family with two children earns $201 a week it will have to pay $600 a year in medical insurance. If it can get its income down to $199 a week it will get any treatment free. The anomalies in that area seem to be very broad.
I want to draw attention to another area which I think is of serious concern to everyone. For six years this Government has governed on slogans, changing philosophies, the latest gimmicks from the popular economists and the ever repeated promise that things are getting better. They are for Robert Homes a'Court, the Bell group, the Murdochs and overseas speculators, especially those who at the moment are causing interest rates to rise in Australia by bringing into the country money to buy up our real estate and other assets without providing any material benefit to the country. The Government prefers them to Australians. We are seeing now what is, I suppose, the greatest blow to what has been the greatest slogan of this Government. I remember how my predecessor, John Dedman, was slandered around this country for speaking of a country of little capitalists and home ownership. We have gentlemen opposite who have traded on the rights of Australians to own their own homes. A decision has been consciously taken to increase the interest rates on home loans to the extent of up to $40 a month for most Australian families, which will take the idea of home ownerships out of the reach of almost three-quarters of the Australian population. On top of that, the Government has decided that a few other minor costs should be imposed on those people on lower incomes who have the cheek to think they are entitled to be considered as Australians and own their own homes. I am sure that the Government looks on those people as interlopers in its private world. It is the old Athenian democracy: All Athenians had

the right to go to the forum but, of course, the workers were not citizens. That is the way that some honourable members opposite look on Australia. The people who are able to rip off, rob, cheat and steal are citizens. Those who go out to
work for their livings are some other form of being who are to be exploited but who certainly are ilOt to be protected under any circumstances. .

In this Budget we have a proposition which will

add $1,000 to the cost of a ne'Y home. I refer to

the imposition of sales tax on various building

materials, furnishings and other items which go to

make up a home: That effectively means for m()st

young couples $1,000 on top of the lllortgage. By

the time those young people meet the deposit gap

and the high cost of land and other services in

Australia they will be highly Ilnlikely to have

$1,000 to throw around. Not only will they bt;

charged for the first time $1,000 in sales tax but

also they will pay on current interest rates some-

thing like $l25 a year for possibly 30 years in ad-

ditional repayments on their home loans. That im-

position is being placed in the sales tax section of

this Budget on people who are seeking a hOllle. I

am dealing with the cost of a very moderate home

by today's prices.

.

Other items in the sales tax list bear examination, including the sales tax on the replacement television tubes, which will be applied ata rate of 30 per cent. Television tubes previously carried no tax. This will add something like $70 to the replacement cost of the tube in a colour television set. I refer next to safety belts for motor vehicles. I would have thought even the honourable members opposite would have been encouraging their use rather than discouraging it by raising the cost of them. In Victoria at least the use of safety belts is compulsory. Therefore, this is a compulsory additional tax on Victorians. I do not disagree with the proposition that their use should be compulsory. I think the use of seat belts has been an extremely successful life-s~ving measure, and it was brought in by a conservative government. But here we have another conservative government which has decided that because it is a successful measure, because people are likely to want to save their lives and reduce the .costs of hospitalisation, which they can no longer afford, by protecting themselves in motor accidents it will cash in and get a little bit of tax out of it. So the Government has decided to impose sales tax at a higher rate on motor vehicle safety belts. It has also decided to impose sales tax on certain. toilet goods necessary to women, goods which are far from being luxur.- ies but which are norms in our society. Again, the Government is cashing in on the necessities of life. Sales tax, of course, is an insidious tax because it is

830 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

. paid by everyone at the same rate. It does not matter whether a person is the poorest pensioner or the richest millionaire as it is likely that that person will use the same sorts of razor blades, the same sorts of toiletries, the same sorts of household insecticides and the various other items which are in this list.
I have said in the House before that it seems that the Government feels that there should be some discouraging of people using soap or washing as these are listed in the items which will have increased penalties placed upon them and therefore they will be harder for some people to get. Sales tax has no spin-offs and no ability-to-earn component. It is a tax which hits those on the lowest incomes hardest. The lower the income the higher proportion of income will go in sales tax on the normal household items which one has to buy every day. It is an insidious transfer of liability for the Government's own incompetence to those least able to afford it. Incompetent is the only word to describe this Government.
The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party and former Treasurer (Sir Phillip Lynch) always have been gonna fix it. They have been gonna get rid of inflation; they are gonna make the place prosperous; and they are gonna create jobs. But the jobs are not there. More people are unemployed today than there were when this Government came to office. De- .spite the rhetoric, the publicity and the misquoted figures, there is no stlggestion that that unemployment level will be significantly reduced. The Government is making it harder for the young people of today to gain the high level of skills which will enable them to compete for jobs in the future. Sure, we have training schemes. In the main they are subsidies for employers, not employees. In the main they are used as a substitute for employing someone who would normally be paid by the employer. Very few of the training schemes are substantive schemes designed to increase the skills of the person concerned.
Those honourable members of the National Country Party should be ashamed of themselves. People who live in the country and who wish to send their children to institutions find that such institutions are not readily available. Certainly children cannot attend them without staying away from home. The Tertiary Education' Assistance Scheme allowance for a student living away from home, even though he 'may be 22 years of age at the end of the course, is $800 a year. That is the allowance which is given to a student to live away from home during his tertiary education. The means test on that allowance is so tight that there

would be no prospect at all of assistance from the parents and earnings under TEAS by the students are almost impossible because of the means test. I would like to see honourable members opposite;; get up in this chamber and seriously suggest that it is possible for a student to obtain even reasonably adequate accommodation for $800 a year. If a student stayeQ at one of the colleges of the various universities he would be charged $2,000 a year, two and a half times the amount of the TEAS allowance. What are studentssupposed to do? They may be capable of the highest educational capabilities in this land, but if they have not got the money this Government says they should not be allowed an education. Certainly, it should be made far more difficult for those who have money. Hence, we have no changes in the statistics relating to those from low income families who are coming out of universities and higher education institutions.
I want to make some remarks about matters which directly reflect the substantial majority of people whom I represent in this place. I believe that a member of parliament is a representative of the whole nation. But I believe also that he has responsibilities to a narrower section of the :country, that is those who elect him and send him to this Parliament. There is a growing concern about the Government's inabilityto make decisions in respect of the manufacturing industries of Australia. In the last six years three major reports have come into this Parliament. Nothing has resulted from those reports. There have been a myriad of references made to the Industries Assistance Commission. Little or nothing has come out of any of those. References and lAC reports are now floating around in such a volume that we could probably build houses out of them. This would probably be more productive and effective than the reports or the preparation of them.
There are two reports which concern me and my electorate. The first relates to the motor vehicle industry. It is easy to throwaway slogans and make suggestions. One suggestion made at the weekend stated that if the motor manufacturing industry in Australia ceased to operate those employed in the industry could find work in the servicing and maintenance areas of imported cars. My understandingis that cars, whether or not they are manufactured in Australia, are already serviced and maintained. I suggest that that is plain hogwash coming from people who have neither the competence nor the understanding of what goes on in the real world.
The facts of life for the. city of Geelong and, substantially, for South Australia are that if the Governinentaccepts the recommendations o-f the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 831

lAC-it seems to have no capacity to understand the human problems that it is creating-either substantially or in any material way, at least 10,000 people will lose their jobs in my electorate. These are jobs which will not be replaced, jobs for which no replacement employment is likely. The only additional prospect for employment in that area, and it is fairly marginal, is in respect of the tactical fighter force program which wi1l be announced later this year. Most of those additional jobs wi1l go to people who come from outside the area because the high skills needed will not be able to be drawn from the local community.
The automobile parts industry is a kindred industry, but, again, one which can be seriously affected by tinkering and changes and uncertainty. One of the disasters for Australia is that in the course of the existing plan for automobile manufacture in Australia the Government decided mid-stream, at the request of one manufacturer, to cancel the perIod for which the guarantee of the plan was to operate. In the future companies will have to make investments on the basis of a judgment of whether the Government will be honest and carry through the plan for the term which was designated. That sort of tinkering and change is life and death for the people in my electorate. The result means whether they work, whether they will earn and whether they will be able to participate in what is said to be the lucky country. This is a bad Budget, a class Budget and a Budget which is certainly not acceptable to those who work for wages in this country.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HARRIS (Chisholm) (9.27)-1 welcome this opportunity to take part in this debate on the 1981-82 Budget. This Budget is designed to ensure continuation in the growth of the Australian economy. It has introduced measures which are necessary to deal with some of the problem areas which have developed-by way of example, high interest rates, or which threaten to develop, for example, inflation. 1 will begin with a look at the Budget as a whole. To put this Budget in its proper context it is necessary to look at the events of the past year. On almost any basis one chooses to test it, it was an excellent year for the Australian economy. The gross domestic product rose by some ~ per cent. Non-farm gross. domestic product rose by 4 per cent. Obviously, the drought affected the rural sector. Private business fixed investment was up by 20 per cent. Personal consumption expenditure was up by over 3.5 per cent. Those figures are all in real terms.

During the last financial year the employment position improved considerably. More than 140,000 extra jobs were found during that year. There was a steady decline in unemployment, especially for the young unemployed. During this period real wages rose by over 4 per cenfwhich in~ dicates a real share was being obtained by the average wage earner in the growth which was occurring. More particularly, and a point worth considering is that despite the dramatic growth which one might have expected to be accompanied by increasing prices, during the last financial year inflation declined by some 2 per cent to 8.8 per cent which, in the recent history of Australia; is exceedingly good. Compared with many of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development countries it was a remarkable result. These real improvements must not be put at risk. It is in this context that the Budget ought to be looked at and judged. Despite the good result there is no doubt that inflation is still a threat and the Budget, framed as it is; combined with other measures, should temper demands and, it iii hoped, .reduce inflationary expectation.
1turn now to interest rates. One of the truly un-. fortunate developments of recent times has been the increase in interest rates. None of us wants to see them remain at present levels. They will make it difficult for many businesses. They will make it hard for. people seeking to develop further, to borrow further capital. If these rates ,continue for too long they will certainly affect some areas of our business growth. More immediately; they will hit directly at those people purchasing homes. We can, at best, describe present intereSt rates as a regrettable necessity. The demand for money-'--'a product of our growth and development-has forced rates upwards. Government borrowing, including borrowing for the funding of government deficits, over recent times has been in heavy competition with strong private sector demand. The substantial reduction in the Budget deficit-the first Budget result of this type for, 1 think, some 10 years or so-should assist in easing the pressure. There should be a lessening of competition for funds. 1have no doubt that we would all welcome a reduction in the current interest rates.
I now turn to some particular items which appear in the Budget. The first of thesecpncerns defence. The appropriation this y~ar is $4,1 12m, an increase of 16.3 percent or 5.3 per cent in real terms taking inflation into account. This seems to be a very large amount of money and a very s,ub-, stantial increase, which it is. Butfor many years funding was quite imidequate in this area. This

832 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

expenditure now reflects the very low rate of acto give greater weight to the first child thanto sub-

quisition of major capital equipment over the last sequent children. It is a common experience that

\0 years. We are now facing the necessity of a the first child involves the greatest cost. Certainly

large program of purchases, although it must be these days the birth of the first child is the

said that this Budget. allocates less to capitill occasion of the wife's finishing work, at least for

expenditure than was first expected. HoweveJ;,-I some time. The allowance. payable for the first

point out that even this present appropriation child should, when budgetary conditions allow, be

represents only approximately 2.7 per cent of the made the largest amount, not the smallest, pay-

gross domestic product and is appreciably less able by way of family allowance.

than it was some years ago. The Government has pledged to increase this allocation to 3 per cent of
gross domestic product by .1984. This level of allocation will be needed. However, 3 per cent of what will be a growing gross domestic product should be sufficient to' fund the capital outlays that will be required over the rest of this decade. Happily, at least in this area, the Government and the Opposition agree; the Opposition spokesman on defence has made it clear that the Labor Party believes that 3 per cent of gross domestic product
is an appropriate percentage to be allocated for defence. For the rest of this decade we will need

I turn now to employment and youth affairs. This Budget includes very large increases in funding for a variety oftraining schemes. The increase
this year was $79m compared with $47m last year-an increase of, I think, some 67 per cent. This does not include sums which come through the education appropriation for some of the school to work transition programs and for the Education Program for Unemployed Youth. They are additional budgetary items. The Budget also, as is well known, announced the cessation of the Community Youth Support Scheme.

to ensure that this level is maintained. I look forMr Robert Brown-Disgraceful.

ward to the statement to be made by the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) later this year.

Mr HARRIS-The honourable member for Hunter says that is disgraceful. I do not agree

My next points concern the family and family though i can understand the concern felt in some

allowances. The family ought to receive special areas. I have had the opportunity, since I have

treatment. It is the fundamental unit of Ausbeen the representative for Chisolm, to have fairly

tralian society. Parents have a greater cost load close dealings with the two projects in my area. I

than those who do not have children. We ought to now take the opportunity of thanking those who

make greater allowance for them. Family allowhave taken part in those projects for the efforts

ances, whilst they have a welfare component in they have put in for the young people in the elec-

that, being a direct payment, they obviously are of torate of .Chisolm. Much has been said about greater benefit to people in need than to people these proposed closures and I regret to say th~t a

with greater means, are more than just a welfare lot of it seems to be misconceived. What has in

payment. These allowances are, in fact, a transfer fact happenc::d is that the Community Youth Sup-

payment from people without children to people port Scheme has been overtaken by events or, in

with children. I am glad to see that measures have reality, by other programs which are now larger

been taken to help families. The spouse allowance and, I think, better programs.

has been lifted to $800. The family allowance has

been increased by some $13 per month per child

for the third child and subsequent children. These

measures are welcome and I need hardly tell any-

one in this place that it has been some time since

there has been any adjustment. In the context of

this Budget. I accept that it would have been

difficult to have done a great deal more. It would

have been contrary to the Budget strategy to have

done anything really significant in the area since

this would have meant a great reduction in the

surplus we have obtained.

.

I recently attended a meeting with a number of CYSS project officers and they discussed the problems they have or, more particularly, the . problems the participants in their CYSS projects have. They discussed the need for these young people to have further education, the need of some for housing or homes and the need of others
for extra skills and training. I make no criticism of the concern these project officers showed for these young people and I certainly accept that the participants in the projects need this assistance. But the point is that these things were readily avail-

Nonetheless, I take this opportunity, in effect able through the Education Program for Unem-

to put in a bid for future appropriations in this ployed Youth-on this occasion there was one

area. As the benefits of future growth become s.uch project within a hundred or so yards of

available, an effort should be mlj,de to improve the where I was having this discussion-through the

situation regarding first and. second children. In school to work transition programs, and I do not

particular, when the opportunity o~ers we ought mean the in-school ones; I. mean those funded

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 833

through colleges of technical and further educhanged circumstances they must have a constant

cation; and through community welfare service and certain program. Once into it we cannot chop

officers who are ready, willing and able to arrange and change. We must stick to it. As I said at the

housing. All these people were there, in place, outset, this is fundamentally a very good Budget. I

with programs which were essentially larger ones am sure we could all think of things we would like

than the Cominunity Youth Support Scheine to have had handled differently, such as more

programs which we are all familiar with. When expenditure in one area or a reduction in another

CYSS programs started most of these other but in judging a Budget we must look at it in total.

programs did not exist. They now do.

We must look at it as the principal, although not

Although I understand the feelings of project officers who have been committed to these young

the only, document governing the direction of our economy for the next year.

people and involved with them, often for some Mr John Brown-God help us.

time, I think that on balance the best result will be achieved by ensuring that they are referred to the various other programs now in place. I note that

Mr HARRIS-I am sure that He or She will. I am happy to support'this Budget.

the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (9.45)-1

(Mr N. A. Brown) yesterday gave an assurance find it difficult to improve on the description of

that officers of his Department will visit every this Budget which has been provided so concisely

Community Youth Support Scheme program. and appropriately by the Newcastle Morning

They will explain the opportunities available to Herald. The Herald dc;:scribed it in these terms:

these kids in various other projects. They will give It was an all-take, virtually no-give, mean and nasty little

advice on training opportunities. The Gommunity Budget . . .

Youth Support Scheme is to be terminated at the end of October. I hope that every effort is made to ensure that these visits are made and these explanations provided as soon as possible. It is essential that the transition takes place with the maximum co-ordination between the other training programs, local welfare authorities, CYSS project officers and present participants.

It was engineered by people who are mean and nasty in their responsiveness to the types of serious and significant social issues which confront the Australian community. Mean and nasty the Budget certainly is. It is also little in terms of
the stature of what should be a responsive and responsible financial document designed to provide a suitable economic framework for Australia and

Finally, I mention the reference given in the for Australians to progress through this year and

Budget to the Industries Assistance Commission lay a firm basis for further progress in the future.

regarding levels of protection. I approve of this As an exercise in increasing inequality, withdraw-

reference. I am delighted that it is happening. The ing support and sacrificing the interests of ordi-

reference seems to be genuinely far reaching. nary Australians to those of the giant corporate

Other speakers have mentioned the number of sector and overseas interests, it is a magnificent

similar inquiries. I hope that this time when the success.

report is brought down it will be acted upon. Many areas of industry plainly require some adjustment in their levels of protection. Some are over protected and they clearly do not in any way meet the justification for protection which
resulted in the program first being introduced in this country. That does not mean that any program should be introduced in a hurried or precipitate manner. It is highly desirable that the people running any affected business and its em-. ployees be given the maximum lead time to make arrangements, either to find alternative employment or to adjust the industry to the new circumstances which will obtain. I see no reason why such a transition ought not to be phased in over a number of years.

The Budget as a whole provides for total taxation revenue to rise by 16 per cent when wages are expectedto rise by 13.5 per cent and prices by 10.75 per cent. In response to that contribution from the taxpayers in the Australian community wemight expect that they would get something in return, The truth is quite to the contrary, but not for all sectors of the Australian community. Direct assistance, for example, to industry in the form of grants, subsidies and tax concessions increases by 56 per cent in real terms to just under $1,OOOm. But. what kind of assistance has been provided to ordinary Australians? There is the reluctant, late and small increase in family allowances for the third child and subsequent children. It does not even cover the average Australian

The most important point I wish to make is that family of a husband, wife arid two children. There

whatever program of reduction of protection is are minor improvements to rental assistance.

entered into, once proclaimed it must be adhered There is an 8~7 per cent increase in unemployment

to. If we are going to give people time to adjust to . benefit for those over 18 years of age. For those

834 REPRESENTAfIVES 26 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

under 18 years of age, the unemployment benefit remains at the level it was in 1976.
This Budget in total is savage, callous and indefensible. It has made very serious cuts in Commonwealth services in education, health, housing and grants to the States. I wonder whether the lauding, applauding and the eulogy expressed by members of the Government in connection with this Budget, is in any way genuine. There have been minor, marginal improvements in a number of economic indicators over the previous 12 months but I sound a note of warning in connection .with the interpretation which has been placed on these apparent improvements and the course that they were taking at the end of the financial year, when the Budget was being framed, and early in this financial year. References were made to these by the honourable member for Chisholm (Mr Harris) who preceded me in this debate. He referred to the figures for private fixed busin!!ss investment, growth in the non-farm sec, tor. and an apparent improvement in employment. Let me look briefly at each of these. Forthe fuJI year 1980-81, private fixed business investment reached $12,667m, that is, an increase of 36 per. cent in money terms or 20 per cent in real terms. That was over the whole of the year but what was happening towards the end of the financial year? The rate of increase was slowing down. In the June quarter, the increase was only 2.6 per cent over the March quarter.
Let us look at the growth in the non-farm sector. Reference has been made to the yearly average which indicated that growth incre~sed over the full year by 4 per cent. But during the first half of that financial year the growth rate had been 6.1 per cent. In the second half of the financial year the growth rate was 1.6, per cent. So again in relation to that indicator, employment, the economy was gearing down. Unemployment was 5.2 per cent in June. That was referred to by the Treasurer (Me Howard) and by other spokesmen for the Government as representing a' significant improvement-we had turned the coiner as far as employment and unemployment were concerned. But during July, the first month of the current financial year, unemployment grew again by 25,000. The percentage unemployed at the end of July was 5.5 per cent. That indicates that in every week since the present Government came to office at the end of 1975 the number of people unemployed in Australia has grown by 250. We find, contrary to the assertions that have been made by members of the Government, that towards the end of the financial year-the situation in which this Budget was being prepared and for which it

was being prepared-the economy, far from being overheated, was in the process of gearing down.
We have a contractionary Budget at present. The most significant aggregate in the Budget is, of course, the deficit; and the total deficit has been reduced by almost $I,OOOm-from $I,127m to an estimated $146m. The most important part of that total deficit is the domestic part, which is now in surplus. It showed a surplus during the past financial year and, if the Budget objectives are achieved, it will show an even greater surplus during the current financial year. That domestic surplus will be increased by over $I,OOOm. It will go from $429m to an estimated$I,542m. In connection with this, I will also issue a note of warning. As a result of the very significant increase which the Government and the Treasurer have attempted to bring about in that domestic surplus for this year and in light of the situation in which the Budget was being prepared and with which the Budget was intended to contend, I believe that before the end of the current financial year either the budgetary objectives will be modified or significant changes will be introduced into the Government's approach to economic measures. I say that because this Budget is not the most appropriate one to deal with the situation that is developing at present. I am also concerned with the way in which the reduction in the domestic deficit has been brought about. Of course, it is now into surplus.. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard.a simple statement showing the Budget deficit from 1974-75 until 1981-82. It indicates the domestic and the overseas components of that Budget deficit.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-

Budget deficit

Domestic Overseas

Total

1974-75 1975-76
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

-1,949 -2,873 -1,865 -2,361 -2,258
-567
+429 +1,542

-618
-712 -875 -972 -1,220 -1,467 -1,556 -1,688

-2,566 -3,585 -2,740 -3,333 -3,478 -2,034
-1,127 -146

Mr ROBERT BROWN-In particular, I want to draw attention to the way in which the overseas deficit has increased year by year. The increase in the Overseas deficit has been one of the means by which the domestic deficit has been reduced or by which, over the last two financial years, the domestic surplus has been increased. The increase in the overseas deficit indicates that, probably to a

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 835

very large extent, there has been some degree of us compare the percentage increases in contri-

expenditure switching taking place within purbutions by various groups of interests within

chases by the Commonwealth Government deAustralia. Firstly, the net contribution from pay-

partments. If, in fact, that is the reason, and if it as-you-earn taxpayers will increase by 22 per

has been deliberate, then certainly it has been succent. The contribution from other individual tax-

cessful in reducing the domestic deficit. At the payers, such as the self-employed, the small

same time it means that the Commonwealth businessmen, the professional people, the doctors,

Government quite deliberately is increasing its the lawyers, the solicitors, the accountants and

purchases from overseas and quite clearly that has the dentists, will increase by 5 per cent. Those

been at significant cost to Australia's domestic infigures alone indicate the increasing degree with

dustries, Australian domestic. suppliers, Auswhich the burden of taxation contributions is

tralian firms and employment in Australia. I raise being placed on the shoulders of wage and salary

that as a possibility. I understand that one of the earners. Sales tax, as a result of the changes which

reasons for it may be that there has been an inhave been introduced, is going to increase by 39

crease in defence expenditure, but certainly the per cent. With that 22 per cent increase for wage

figures to which I have made reference are and salary earners and the 39 per cent increase in

not----.:..

the form of sales tax, most of which will again be

Mr Sainsbury-Overseas aid? Mr ROBERT BROWN-And overseas aid.

paid by wage and salary earners, we can compare the percentage increase in company tax collections for the current financial year. They are

MrSainsbury-And tourism?

intended to increase by only 10 per cent.

Mr ROBERT BROWN-Would the honourI have referred to the increased burden on wage

able member like to make his speech now? I am sure it would not be of the quality of the speech

and salary earners during the current financial year as a result of the provisions of the Budget.

that is being made. If the honourable gentleman wants to make a contribution, I am sure he will
have an opportunity to do so later. In the three

Wage and salary earners in 1965-66 contributed 61 per cent of total individual taxation. The business people and the self-employed to whom 1 re-

Budgets of the Labor Government from 1913-14 ferred contributed 33 per cent. Let us look at the

until 1915-16 the average foreign deficit was . way in which the figures have changed since then.

$611m. During the six Budgets of the present From 61 per cent 16 years ago, pay-as-you-earn Government the average foreign deficit has been taxpayers in this financial year will contribute

$1 ,296m; that is, an increase of over 100 per cent. 82.1 per cent.

It has grown every year. The table I incorporated Debate interrupted.

in Hansard confirms that it has grown every year from the first Budget which this Government was responsible for until the figue 'it is budgeting for this year-a foreign deficit of $1,688m. I appreciate that the real value of money has fallen in the intervening period, but a lot was made of the deficit incurred by the Labor Government during the three years that it was in office. It is interesting to note that the average total Budget deficit dur-

ADJOURNMENT Community Youth Support Scheme-Zone Allowances-Commonwealth Employment Service: Kiama,-New South Wales-Motor Vehicle Industry-Sutherland Committee:
Sutherland, New South Wales-Freight Shipping Rates-Vietnam Veterans
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

ing those three years was $2,148m.'1t is remarkOrder! It being 10 p.m., under sessional order 1

able that for the six months of the Fraser Governpropose the question:

ment the average total Budget deficit has been That the House do now adjourn.

$2,143m. It is a remarkable coincidence that they should be as similar as those figures indicate they have been.

Mr KENT (Hotham) (10.0)-1 was shocked and dejected to hear in the Budget Speech that the Community Youth Support Scheme is to be

The total receipts in this Budget are intended to abolished. 1 was even more disappointed yester-

increase by 16 per cent and the total outlays by day afternoon to hear the Minister for Employ-

12.6 per cent. I have already referred to the anticiment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) trying

pated increase in prices during the current finanto justify the abolition of CYSS by misleading ar-

cial year. Of course, those increases in total reguments. He accused members of the Australian

ceipts and total outlays are significantly in excess Labor Party of being sceptical about the value of

of the increase that is expected in prices. Who are the soheme in the beginning. When this scheme

the people in the Australian community who are was introduced it was rather a cynical act by the

expected to make this increased contribution? Let Federal Government to enable it to say that

836 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Adjournment

something was being done about youth unemployment. It was originally intended by this Government for window dressing. However, the scheme took Off. It took on a function of real support for the young unemployed and filled a real need in the community, despite the intention of this Government to pay lip service only to the problem.
Since its inception the scheme has performed its function in two main fields. Firstly, it has assisted in endowing young unemployed people with the necessary skills and techniques in job seeking. Secondly, it has given moral and psychological backing to young unemployed, thus alleviating their frustration which without CYSS would result in many cases of youth drifting towards vandalism and anti-social behaviour. As an example I can cite the Community Youth Support Scheme in my electorate which performs an excellent community service and on whose committee of management served many outstanding citizens of the area, including. the Mayor of Springvale, teachers, industrialists and businessmen. The success of the scheme islargely the result of their great dedication. and the dedication of our project officers.
Of course the new Minister, like his predecessor, has found youth unemployment politically embarrassing. He has waited for the occasion of the Budget Speech to bury this scheme, to sweep thousaridsof young unemployed under the carpet hoping that they would disappear. At the same time the Minister was cunningly hiding his inhuman .intention to deprive the unemployed youth of support. As recently as Jure this year the Minister toured the country and visited Community Youth Support Scheme projects. He made statements that changes in guidelines would be introduced. The new Minister for Unemployment was reported as saying in Adelaide on 2 June that the projects would continue--
Mr Sainsbury-Employment.
Mr KENT-Excuse me; employment or unemployment. He is presiding over the largest number of unemployed since the Great Depression. In Adelaide on 2 June .he said that the project would con~inue and that the lInemployed had nothing to fear from the changes. He stated that the changes would .be designed to make the scheme more effective. What a cunning, cynical humbug to use his. position to mislead. the unfortunate unemployeQ youth of this country! Had the youth that he was misleading been as dishonest as the Minister, he would be.the first to piously pontificate by asking 'Whatis the country coming to?' At the time when the Minister was trotting around the countryside misleading and covering up, he knew

very well that the scheme would be terminated in the August Budget. No amount of rationalisation by the Treasurer lMrHoward) or the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs can hide the fact that there is nothing to replace the Community Youth Support Scheme and its functions which it has fulfilled so well against the expectations of the Fraser Government.
The argument that increased assistance to the special apprentice training schemes and the school to work transition allowances will resolve the situation is futile as there are not enough jobs to go around. There are hundreds of applicants for each vacancy, a situation which is cherished by this Government as its policy is to perpetuate unemployment in order to keep wages down and profits up. It does not give a hoot about our young people and it has proved this by its Budget.
Mr KATTER (Kennedy) (10.5)-1 speak on a subject that is of critical importance to the future of not only the areas directly involved but also to this nation. I do not tolerate the argument of the city versus the country There is an inevitable link-in affinity-between the city and country that is absolutely essential. In the five minutes available to me I wish to speak about the possibilities surrounding the recent inquiry into zone allowances in inland Australia. I am delighted to see that our Treasurer (Mr Howard) has entered the House. It will probably save my having a few minutes with him tomorrow.
First of all I will build a scenario around the areas that are concerned. It is quite impossible to understand the living conditions of people outside the metropolitan and provincial city areas. Honourable members have to experience these conditions to really understand them. I am not referring just to the financial conditions under which we live in these remote areas. I am referring to the physical conditions-the heat, the dust, the roads, the way. of life that constantly challenges our men, women and children.
I do not know why God planted the great mineral wealth of this nation deep in the inland of the country. I have never had an opportunity of asking Him. I do not know why He produced in these areas the pastures which produce the great merino and other breeds of sheep which thrive. I do not know why He decreed that the great cattle producing areas of this nation shoJlld be away from the coast. I have mentioned just three industries which pour billions of dollars into this nation. When the Treasurer, in his wisdom, decreed that there should be an inquiry into zone allowances I am sure he intended that it go beyond a mere formal, clinical inquiry. I am sure that he wanted to

Adjournment

26 August 1981 REPRBSENTATIVES 837

evaluate and bring out in third dimensional form the difficulties and probably some of the advantages because there are one or two. For example, there is the advantage of kids having mud between their toes, of kids coming to grips with the real and genuine Australian way of life. Admittedly there are advantages, but they come at a price. I am sure that the Treasurer wanted to reveal all of this.
There are deep apprehensions in the inland of Australia at the moment as to what may result from the findings and recommendations of this committee of inquiry. If ever I have put an appeal before the Government I do so now. For heavens sake, when the Government comes to its final conclusions it should give the people what they hope for as a result of the inquiry-improved financial conditions. From that will flow an impetus to remain in those areas. There is a great wave throughout the world todaY---'-it is not confined only to Australia-for people to seek the bright lights of the cities. This is obviously disastrous to the nation. So, we do not have to transfer, for example, the city of Mt Isa from zone A to zone B or some other city of 25,000 people from zone B to a new ~rea where there is no advantage whatsoever.
Let me mention one or two commodities that affect our everyday lives. I refer to a small town named Richmond which is not far from the coast. If a person gets a sack of flour in Brisbane it costs him $20; if he buys it in Richmond it costs him $27.68. If a person in Townsville buys a tonne of cement it costs him $62. If a person buys it in Richmond or further out he pays more again. He is paying just for the freight, never mind the cartage. That tonne of cement which cost $62 in Townsville will cost $118 a tonne inland, and so I could go on. Electricity costs 2.7c a unit in the south-east of Queensland and 3.6c at Richmond. Petrol costs 32c a litre in Brisbane but costs at least 42c in the inland areas. I plead with the Treasurer that when this inquiry's report comes before the Government it will not in any way deprive us of advantag~ that may be enjoyed at the moment. I hope that we will see an infinitely improved advantage to those people who not only live under these financial and physical difficulties but also pour billions of dollars into the Treasury in Canberra.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (10.10)-Tonight I wish to take issue with the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) for his failure to speak out over the closure of the Kiama Commonwealth Employment Service agency in his electorate and for his personal attacks on me.in this House last week because I had the temerity to

raise this matter in the local media on the south coast of New South Wales, and for which he received the most adverse publicity. Kiama is a coastal town ancillary to the Wollongong satellite city of Warilla which has a population of approximately 40,000 and is in my electorate. Warilla has a big Department of Social Security office and a CES office. Three months ago both these departments operated agencies in Kiama which is in the electorate of the honourable member for Macarthur.
Since 1976 the CES Warilla office had operated a Kiama agency a couple of days a week. The Department of Social Security office at Warilla opened earlier this year. It was an opening I was happy to see. I had made representations for some time urging the establishment of a large regional office at Warilla. Three months ago the Department established an agency at Kiama which involved a Social Security bfficer visiting the town once a fortnight, initially to do pension interviews. Last month the CES agency was closed, despite the obvious need for it. It was a victim of the razor gang staff cuts. Last week in this place the honourable member for Macarthur justified the closing of the Kiama CES agency by saying that the unemployed can now get their benefit from the Department of Social Security. I find this to be an incredible argument. What about the provision of jobs? People now register for unemployment benefit with the Department of Social Security, but that Department has no responsibility for finding jobs for people. In fact, it is fiat out finding the resources to provide basic social security services.
The razor gang staff c.uts and the transferral of the registration for the unemployment benefit from CES to the Department of Social Security meant a cutting of staff numbers at the Warilla CES. But the staff numbers at the Warilla branch of the Department of Social Security increased. by only one. In the transfer staff, and consequently services, have been lost. Now the Department of Social Security agency at Kiama can provide only the barest service because of the lack of staff and its temporary premises. Its office is in a church hall and it does not even have a telephone. Basic functions such as checking files with the Warilla office cannot even be done. I was pleased to hear the honourable member for Macarthur acknowledge that there is a need to increase social security services. But what of the CES. The honourable member for Macarthur ignores the huge economic and social disadvantages of-being out of work and palms off the whole unemployment problem as being a simple matter of paying benefit.

838 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Adjournment

There is a very good case for an expansion of CES services and programs. As the honourable member for Macarthur is obviously not capable of seeing to this, he might care to follow up several suggestions. Is he aware that the Kiama CES office opened as a result of the cutting of the Regional Employment Development Scheme by this Government? The RED Scheme was introduced by the Whitlam .Labor Government and proved invaluable to such regional councils as Kiama. The Mayor of Kiama informed me that it was because of this scheme that the council became aware of the magnitude of the problems of the unemployed in Kiama, particularly because of the serious transport difficulties. As a result the Kiama council contacted the Warilla CES and asked for a branch to be opened in Kiama. Such was the council's concern that it offered free accommodation for the.office. For the past six years until its closure last month the Kiama branch of the CES operated successfully two days a week with free accommodation provided by the city council. The Mayor of Kiama assures me that it was well used. His office is across the road. He s~id that he could see the unemployed people queuing up for attention. There were 300 of them
in Kiama. It should have meant that the Government had responsibility for finding 300 jobs, but the honourable member for Macarthur infers that the unemployed can receive their unemployment benefit at Kiama and travel to Warilla for CES services.

I make the point, as the Kiama council has
done, that ther.e is a paucity of public transport in the area. Unemployed people are not usually in a position to afford the luxury of a car. They are forced to rely on public transport. When the system is poor the chances of getting a job are poor. Does the honourable member for Macarthur re- ~lise that there is no train service to Warilla, the nearest stop being miles aWIlY? The cost of the bus trip is $1 one way, or $2 return. Does the honourable member for Macarthur realise just how much of an inroad into, say, a $36 a week unemployment benefit payment is made by the $2 required to look for a job? Yet he tries to justify the closing of this agency at Kiama in his electorate.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

Order! The honourable member's time has

expired.

.

MrSAINSBURY (Eden-Monaro) (10.105)-1 wish to broach a subject which will be receiving an .increasing amount of publicity in Australia in the coming weeks. I certainly hope it will. I refer to the qllestion of the protection of the motor vehicle industry. Tonight as I walked into this House I heard the honourable member for Corio (Mr

Scholes) make some mention of the problems that would be created within his electorate if the Government were to proceed with the reduction of tariffs for the car industry. I appreciate his point of view and his concern for people's present
jobs in that industry. I also appreciate, however, that in other electorates in Australia thousands and-thousands of consumers are being forced to give a favour to a limited number of people employed in an industry located elsewhere. From the other side of the coin-that is all consumers of Australia-a favour is being given to a relatively small group of people in the community by way of tariff.

The car industry, like some other industries, re-

ceives favours from the Australian people far in

excess of what it produces. I for one would like to

see as much as possible in our country a breaking

down of any system that favours, with con-

comitant penalties, apart of course, from those

which would normally be expected in a humane

society, in order to help those who are in need.

The system of favours and penalties whereby tax-

payers who are quite capable are taxed in order to

provide pensions and to provide facilities for

handicapped people, for instance, are matters

with which none of us would disagree. But the giv-

ing of favours to a group of people merely because

they happen to choose to work in a particular in-

dustry in a particular place is very difficult to sup-

port, especially when in the net analysis, if those

favours did not exist, demonstrably there would

be not just a cancelling out of favours and penal-

ties but a net increase in efficiency, in jobs and in

average incomes for Australians.

.

What I said in that last sentence is at the crux of the argument. I know that all sorts of figures are being produced to support arguments against that proposition. Those figures are increasingly being produced in a very misleading manner by the car industry itself, which obviously seeks to protect its already protected position. It is a strategy in which no doubt anybody in a competitive atmosphere will be involved. One likes to protect a privileged position, if on.e happens to have one. But as a government we have to think of all the people of Australia, not just a few. Less than 1,000,000 people are in a privileged position, as distinct from the remaining 14 million people in Australia. I have talked about the favours, but who is penalised under the present system? Anybody who buys a motor car in this country, any working man who buys a--

Mr Scholes-What about the farmers who get tax concessions?

Adjournment

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 839

Mr SAINSBURY-Yes. I will talk about that pay after that and this crowd will be left holding

with the honourable member.

the baby to the tune of $4,550. I do not think any-

Mr Scholes-How much New Zealand butter do you let in?
Mr SAINSBURY-The honourable member

body in this Parliament would want to see that happen in respect of people of good faith who have made such a great sacrifice.

does not have to worry about that either. A workI have naturally been in touch with the State

ing man or anybody else in Australia who wants to Director, Mr Harold Kay, who is well regarded.

buy a car will be up for something like $2,000 or He feels that there is no prerogative on his part to

$3,000 on average more than he would be paying resolve this problem and is hoping that the Minisif we had no protection. That is just the start of ter for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr,N, 1\.

the argument. I do not have time to proceed with Brown) will make a quick decision to relieve the

it in detail. Suffice it to say that many honourable anxiety of these people. I have communicated for-

members in this place will be arguing and fighting mally with the Minister. I take the opportunity of

for a gradual and, with notice, breakdown of the placing the issue on the record of this Parliament

barriers. that are discriminating against conI think it would be adding insult to injury if this

sumers, against exporters and against people in all management group were left holding such a heavy

other jobs in Australia because of the very high financial obligation. I appeal to the Minister to

tariff protection that is given to a very privileged look into the mater, I hope tomorrow, and pro-

industry.

vide me with a decision. The young people con-

Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (10.20)~Four and a half years ago I,like many other members of this House, responded to an appeal by this Government and established in my electorate a Community Youth Support Scheme organisation. It has flourished and, I think like all the branches of CYSS, has done a great job.
Mr Tuckey-It was against your better judg-

cerned are tremendously impressed with the effort that has been made on their behalf by the
voluntary committee. A total of $4,500, roughly speaking, needs to be accounted for by this Government rather than the CYSS people dipping into their pockets, which are already empty enough having regard to the sacrifices they have already made.

ment, though, wasn't it?

Mr GILES (Wakefield) (10.23)-Some tiqie

Mr LES JOHNSON-I did it consciously, positively and co-operatively. I have not complained about it. I have a complaint to make to this effect: This organisation, which has been strongly supported by some decent people in the electorate, skilled people making great sacrifices as members of their local management committee to ensure the well being of the local unemployed and to give themopportunities, suddenly finds that it is left in the lurch. This Sutherland committee operates from a centre called the Hub in Sutherland, New South Wales. It has attracted

ago-in fact, in August 1980,-;1 brought before

the Parliament on a similar occasion such as this a

matter of, in my view, poor judgment by the'Aus-

tralian Meat and Livestock Corporation in the

designation of vesselson the Australia-United

States route. At that time a firm called REL-

Refrigerated Express Lines'---was undercutting

the current rates by 11.5 per cent, a mattet of

some consequence to primary producers as the

end result was reflected in the price they gonot

their produce. Nobody appeared to take an awful

lot of notice of what I had to say.

.

five grants and, in every respect, has, given a very good account of itself. Recently it has entered into a lease of premises. As honourable members may be aware, the Government is not a party to leasing premises under these arrangements.

I will repeat the principle involved. I think it is a very short-sighted statutory authority, in this case the AMLC, that wilfully does awaywiththe designation of a .firm that can cut shipping rates offered by the present four designated shippirtg

It so happens that the people at Sutherland are . lines by up to 11.5 per cent on this route. It might

left holding the baby in respect of a considerable be all right to squeeze the market into four big

amount of money. The lease, which is a commeroverseas owned container lines for a period of a

cial one, was entered into by four of the voluntary year or two. One could probably negotiate 'well

committee members on 8 June 1981 for a period because one has cut out a firm such as REL. 'The

of one year at a price of $650 a month for very adtime will come, and I reminded the House of this

equate new premises, which I had the priv.ilege of on the earlier occasion, when it will not work

opening a short time ago. The amount of rent over necessarily in the interests of the primary pro-

a year is $7,800. With seven months of the lease to ducers, particularly those breeding cattle, if'this

run the scheme is winding up at the end of sort of action were to be continued. In fact, at that

October. There will be seven months of rent to time. I argued that if every statlItory-authority

840 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981

Adjournment

acted in this cavalier fashion we would. have little primary producers and other shipper interests competition left as a trading nation in the future. involved.

At this point there has been a move by a firm partially owned by Australian interests called the ABC Container Line. It has been lobbying hard for inclusion as a designated carrier. It is offering freights which are 10 per cent b~low the current price. It is a container line. The firm REL was not; it was a conventional line. I suppose one could argue in some airy fairy fashion that there was a health consideration in relation to carting Australian goods by container rather than by conventional methods; I do not agree with that. Never- .theless, I suppose one could argue that way.

MrMILTON (La Trobe) (10.27}-It is a matter of record and regret that many Vietnam veterans consider themselves neglected by the Federal Government. I wish to draw attention to the plight of one of my constituents' who is in possession of a 30 per cent disability pension for bronchial asthma, dermatitis and allergic conjunctivities. Following his recent marriage and desire to have children and being. aware of reports concerning the possible link between birth defects and the effects of agent orange exposure in Vietnam, he sought medical advice. The medical practitioner advised him not to commence having chil-

At this stage, prior to the decision that has to be dren for two years or until the results of a

made by AMLC, we have another application by government study were known. At a later consul-

REL. Again, I believe it undercuts by considertation it was suggested that he have a series of

able proportions those four big container lines sperm tests, although it was not asserted that

that are currently moving our meat. We have the these tests would reveal any possible

Belgian-flag ship and partially Australian owned abnormalities.

ABC ContainerLine which I believe, from what I read in the Press, is offering to cut the rates by \0 per cent. We have K Line of Japan offering to cut the rates by 15 per cent and we have Bank and Savi\l which I gather is another shipping firm that has applied for designation and which evidently, according to the Press, is prepared to cut costs by
10 per cent. I know this is not entirely the responsibility of the Government; it is really the responsibilityofthe AMLC to make a recommendation to the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) who would, no doubt, consult with his colleague the Minister for Transport(Mr Hunt}. I hope that this time some wisdom will apply and people will realise that competition should be allowed to apply on' these routes. Interestingly enough .REL was a Conference line but was cutting the rate by 11.5 per cent. ABC, with its offer of 10 per cent, is anon-Conference line although it is containerised.

Subsequently, my constituent applied to the Department of Veterans' Affairs for a reimbursement of the additional medical and travelling costs which he and his wife might incur, over and above the costs of a normal pregnancy. Both the Department of Veterans' Affairs and sub-
sequently the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) have refused to reimburse my \constituent on the grounds that the possible birth defects were not the result of an accepted war disability. I submit to the Minister that the plight of Vietnam veterans who were themselves victims of the immoral mass spraying of agent orange and other poisonous chemicals and herbicides is a dis.,. grace. These veterans are being disregarded by the Government in a most inhuman way. At least let the Government make legislative provisions to cover the safeguard measures which Vietnam veterans are taking to avoid the calamitous consequences of possible birth defects. Lack of legislat-

At this stage, no doubt it is a very tough decision for the AMLC to make. I hope it is' not duchessed by the big firms that no doubt are able to look after it. I hope it has the interests of the

ive provision need in no way pre-empt the findings of the Government inquiry. I call on the Minister to recommend to Parliament that the necessary legislation be approved.

primary producer and cattle producer in its heart Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

when it, makes this decision and makes reOrder! It being 10.30 p.m., the debate is

commendations to the Minister for Primary interrupted.

Industry. Of all the bone-headed stupict actions I can think of, I cannot really recall anything which has irritated me over the. years as much as this closely held designation system that aims to have a monopoly on the moving of Australian beef to

Mr N. A. Brown-I require the debate to be extended.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate may continue untillOAO p.m.

both the east and west coasts of the United States Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley-

of America. I hope tite wisdom will prevail, that Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs)

the line will be opened up to proper marl\et forces (lO,30)-The honourable member for Hughes

and that competition can apply to the interests of (Mr Les Johnson) paid me the courtesy, for

Adjournment

26 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 841

which I must thank him, of advising me beforehand that he intended to raise a matter relating to the winding up of the Community Youth Support Scheme. I thought it appropriate that I should make a few remarks about that subject. The particular point that the honourable member raised was that certain difficulties might arise with respect to leases having been entered into by local CYSS committees and, there being no coincidence in time between the end of the lease and the wi.nding up of the Scheme, certain problems might anse.
Let me say two things about that' matter. The first is that, of course, the Government always maintained that the running of the Scheme was a matter for local committees, and a number of them, of course, have done a very good job. One of the points about the CYSS Scheme is that it has been patchy in the sense that some projects have been good and others perhaps have not been as good. The second point to be made is that I certainly will investigate the point that has been raised by the honourable member for Hughes and will advise him in due course after my investigation of that problem, bearing in mind, as I have said all the time, that it has been a matter for local comittees to arrange accommodation and generally attend to the running of their local projects.
The honourable member also said in the course of his remarks something with which I agree. I think it is appropriate that I should say that I agree with his remark, that is, that a number of CYSS projects gave a good account of themselves. I think that was the substance of what he said. It is very appropriate, I think, that I take this opportunity of saying that I agree with what the honourable member said. A number of CYSS projects gave a good account of themselves. It should be understood, because I do not think this is as widely understood as it should be, that th\it has been the Government's position. Some CYSS projects gave a good account of themselves; some of them were good schemes. Indeed, if honourable members look at the Office of Youth Affairs Youth Affairs Newsletter, which probably in the normal course of events would be distributed tomorrow, they will find details of three of those schemes conducted at Echuca, Corio and Sherbrooke. Honourable members will find the statement there, for example, that the schemes in Echuca, Corio and Sherbrooke are giving young people valuable experience in a wide range of activities.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Minister is ranging very freely, The extension of the debate was to provide an opportunity for the Minister to respond to matters

raised in the adjournment deb\ite. I think the Minister may be extending that licence.
Mr N. A. BROWN-In view of that, Mr Deputy Speaker, could I perhaps bring the matter to an end simply by saying that I agree with that part of the speech in which the honourable member said that some CYSS projects had given a good account of themsevles. We believe. that, across the board, we can do better for yOl.\ng people in general than the CYSS scheme did. We believe that we can do much better in particular for those participants in CYSS schemes. We believe that they will be better served in their search for employment if they take part in our skills, training, work experience and other programs. The sort of material set out in the Youth Affairs Newsletter is .correct. We always have maintained that there were some good schemes. We believe that when we look at the situation acrosss the board and at the objective of prOVIding service, help, advice, work experience and training for young people, we can do as we are doing, and as we will continue to do, much better for them through the range of programs which were announced and outlined in the Budget, the range of programs for which there was a greatly increased appropriation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Qrder! The debate having concluded, the House stands adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 10.35 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Howard to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Mr Killen to present a Bill for an Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect of members of the Defenct! Force.
Mr McVeigh to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: upgrading of airport facilities for the introduction of domestic wide-body aircraft:-
Mr McVeigh to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of. the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: construction of new air traffic services centre and control tower at Perth airport, Western Australia.
Mr McVeigh to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public

842 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1981
Works for consideration and report: construction of working, living and area facilities at Watsonia, Victoria.
PAPER The following paper was deemed to have been presented on 26 August 1981, pursuant to statute:
Lands Acquisition Act-Land acquired for defence purposes, St Kilda, S.A.

Notices


