House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 121, 1981 Wednesday, 25 March 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 875

Wednesday, 25 March 1981

Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2. 1 5 p.m., and read prayers.

PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:

Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And further, that annual Budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child, Mr Free and Mr Mountford. Petitions received.

National Health Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulin dependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the NHS and that insulin prescriptions re vert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.

Air Fares to Tasmania

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:

The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

I . That air fares to Tasmania should not be increased.

2. That air fares to Tasmania are vital to the growing Tourist

3.

Industry. That air travel

is'the

only

way,

apart

from

one

ANL

ship,

that commuting is possible between the mainland of

Australia and the island of Tasmania.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that air fares to Tas mania should not be increased.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Good luck.

Petition received.

Metric System
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respect fullyshoweth-
That the plan to obliterate the traditional weights and measures of this country is causing and will cause wide spread inconvenience, confusion, expense and distress.
That there is no certainty that any significant benefits or indeed any benefits at all will follow the use of the new weights and measures.
That the traditional weights and measures are eminently satisfactory.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Metric Conversion Act be repealed, and that the Government take urgent steps to cause the traditional and familiar units to be restored to those areas where the great est inconvenience and distress are occurring, that is to say, in meteorology, in road distances, in sport, in the building and allied trades, in the printing trade, and in retail trade.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will every pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.

Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
( I ) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pensioner rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans re ceive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 1 00 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by mer chant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys. Petition received.

Labelling of Cosmetics

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic prod ucts, and the inhumane use ofanimals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.

That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the

rCeogmulmatiI.sOsnioonr'srteecrommsmoefnredfearneynrceeg, uselaetmiosnuwnahbicleh

to impose any might restrict

the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cos

metics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for

which animals were subjected to research.

your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:

Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cos metics and toilet preparations to indicate:

876 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 198 1

Petitions

( 1 ) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys. Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
'2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Norwood North Post Office
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The Humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
That hardship and inconvenience would be caused to the community by the proposed closure on 31st March 1981 of the Norwood North Post Office (non-official) 142 Magill Road, Norwood, SA.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Minister of Communications will intercede on behalf of Norwood and Stepney residents and have abandoned the proposal to close the Norwood North Post Office.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hurford. Petition received.
Exports of Live Animals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Australian Government promotes carcass trade and that all future shipments oflive animals overseas for slaughter be banned, and thereby stop a repetition of the shocking loss of life through burns or drowning as occurred with the inciner ation or drowning of 40,000 sheep on a ship to abattoirs in the Middle East, or the more recent cruelty to horses being exportedforslaughter in Japan.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Barry Jones.

Petition received.
Proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans Australia Airlines within 5 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned at the prospect of any legislation regarding Plant Variety Rights.
The reasons are as follows:
1 . We believe it would transfer control, the key aspect of agriculture in this country, to overseas interests not re sponsible to the Australian Government.
2. We believe it would restrict the growing and trading of many seeds.
3. We believe it would cause a decline in the genetic diver sity of crops making them more subject to destruction by pests and diseases.
4. We believe thorough investigation of the effect of simi lar legislation overseas and a full public debate is required before any decision is made.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament re frains fromenacting any legislation on Plant Variety Rights.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Porter. Petition received.
Debendox
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(a) that the Minister for Health should remove the morning sickness drug Debendox from sale immediately and,
(b) Commonwealth laboratories should be set up to test and evaluate those drugs imported into Australia and that theselaboratories be financed by the drug companies.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the morning sickness drug Debendox be immediately removed from sale and Commonwealth laboratories be set up to test and evalu ate drugs imported into Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Petitions

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 877

by Mr West.
Petition received.
Family Law Act
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Isaacs respectfully showeth:
That the Family Law Act should be amended to limit child support orders to a set scale, to provide custody of children to the parent not primarily responsible for the breakdown of the marriage and establish a set schedule for division of matri monial property that cannot be varied at the discretion of any judge.
These measures would reduce the divorce rate and re establish stability and security in family life.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Family Law Act be amended to abolish the maintenance and alimony system.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles. Petition received.
Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representa tives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respect fully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone zone is not only inconvenient but is affecting families, business concerns and employment in the area.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free.
Petition received.
Pharmaceutical Benefit Prescl'iptions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned Pharmaceutical Chemists of South Australia sheweth:
That the Professional Fee paid by the Commonwealth of Australia for the dispensing of Pharmaceutical Benefit Pre scriptions has not been increased since the 1st July, 1977.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
In respect to the provision of Pharmaceutical Benefits by approved chemists throughout Australia, take such action as will ensure that the Government will immediately act to:
( I ) increase the remuneration paid to pharmacists for dispensing Pharmaceutical Benefit Prescriptions.
(2) restore the level of pharmacists' Professional Fees to at least the equivalent of that applicable in 1977-78, adjusted by the previously agreed formula for up dating pharmacists' remuneration.
(3) acknowledge all other increases in costs which are not reflected in the up-dating formula but which have severely disadvantaged pharmacists financially to the extent that the majority of pharmacists are not recovering the costs incurred in dispensing Phar maceutical Benefits.

(4) insist that the valuable contribution made to the community by pharmacists in health care delivery outside of the immediate Pharmaceutical Benefit supply func tion be recognised when the levels of remuneration are determined.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Steele Hall. Petition received.
Airline Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting WA and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean. Petition received.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
JAMISON REPORT: GOVERNMENT RESPONSE
Dr BLEWETT-I preface my question to the Minister for Health by noting that the excuse for the Government's near total inactivity in the health field during 1 980 was that it was waiting on the Jamison report. As the Government has now had the Jamison report for three months, is it possible yet for the Minister to tell the House when the Government will make any specific re sponse to any of the major recommendations of that report?
Mr MacKELLAR-No, it is not.
MEDICAL FILES Mr GROOM-I ask the Minister for Administrative Services: Is it a fact that over recent months officers of the Australian Federal Police Force have entered the surgeries of a number of medical practitioners and have taken possession of patients' files? If so, can the Minister say how many times this has occurred in the past 1 2 months? I s it correct that in some instances original patients' files have been retained by the Fed eral Police for many months without any charges being laid? What official procedure has been adopted by the Federal Police Force to protect the private and confidential nature of patients' files? Finally, is the Minister satisfied that that

878 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

procedure gives proper protection to the tra ditional relationship between patient and doctor?
Mr NEWMAN-The honourable member asked a very important question. It relates to a matter which I know has concerned many honourable members. Perhaps I should respond to the last part of the question first; that is, that part relating to the relationship between the doc tor and the patient. I think that really should be answered by my colleague, the Minister for Health. In cases which involve possible fraud, et cetera, against the National Health Act the pro cedure is this: Usually, the Department of Health conducts an investigation and at a certain stage in the investigation it calls in the police. The role of the police thereafter is to investigate any possible breach of the law.
It is true that under the law the police in their investigation have the power to seize documents. They can do that when a search warrant has been issued under the Commonwealth Crimes Act. Once the documents have been seized the police are very conscious of the need to maintain the confidentiality and security of those documents. I am advised that to that end last year the Commissioner of Police issued guidelines which set down the way in which those documents are to be kept confidential. I add that I am advised that the Australian Medical Association has sighted those guidelines and has expressed satisfaction with them.
I think the honourable member would be interested to know also that the Attorney-General has made a reference to the Australian Law Re form Commission on the matter of privacy. It is expected that the Law Reform Commission in that context will look at the whole matter of the seizure of medical documents. It is also interesting to note some comments made by Mr Justice Kirby when he was addressing members of the General Practitioners Society in Australia, which he is reported to have done on 23 March. In that speech he said that the Law Reform Commission was considering a uniform regime which would normally require judicial authorisation before powers of entry, search and seizure could be exer cised by Federal officials. Mr Justice Kirby is reported to have said this also, which is very perti nent to the whole problem:
It would appear to me to be too facile to say that a doctor's records should not be examined without his consent, or even his patient's consent, when investigating an offence alleged against the doctor or patient himself . . . Otherwise we could be committing investigations and enforcement of the criminal law and breaches ofstatute to the consent of the very person under suspicion or other persons upon whom he may sometimes exercise influence.

J think another example of the enormity of the problem is a case reported on 24 March which relates to a doctor who has been charged and in which it has been alleged to the court that $200,000 may be involved in possible crimes against Medibank. All I would add is that I re mind honourable members that, if there are problems with, and complaints against, the police, under the Commonwealth Ombudsman Act 1 976 people may refer those complaints to the Commonwealth Ombudsman. That ability is enhanced by the powers which will be conferred under the Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Bill which has just been before this Parliament.
NATIONAL HEALTH SCHEME Mrs CHILD-Has the attention of the Minister for Health been drawn to the main front page story in the Melbourne Herald of 23 March? Is it a fact that the fifth Fraser health scheme will provide identity cards for the poor, regressive in surance for the rich and Hobson's choice for the remainder? Mr MacKELLAR-In fact I did read the Melbourne Herald of that date. I am not going to add to any speculation as to what may be the Government's response to matters contained in the report of the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals. Suffice it to say that the report is a most important one. It covers a tremendous range of subjects of enormous significance to all Australians. The Commonwealth Government is giving it the proper consideration it should.
HOSPITAL FUNDING IN TASMANIA Mr GOODLUCK-Is the Minister for Health aware of recent Press reports concerning the plight of hospitals in Tasmania in relation to cost cutting measures imposed by the Tasmanian Government? Is it correct that these measures have been forced on the Tasmanian Government because of the Federal Government's failure to honour the fifty-fifty cost sharing arrangements? Will the Minister please advise this House of the true situation in relation to the funding of hospi tals in Tasmania and once and for all stop the Tas manian Government battering this Federal Government over the head? Mr MacKELLAR - r am aware that some State governments, particularly those of the Labor States-New South Wales and Tasmania -seem to be endeavouring to whip up a climate of hysteria in relation to the funding of hospitals. It is not true in any way, shape, sense or fOfm that the Commonwealth has at any time failed to live

Questions Without Notice

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 879

up to its promises in relation to the fifty-fifty cost sharing of the net operating costs of each State's public hospitals. In fact this year there is an increase in the total amount made available of about $ 1 44m, or overall about 1 2.3 per cent. It was made perfectly clear to the States that the Commonwealth would maintain the amount of money available at the 1 979 levels. Any increases in services above those operating in 1979 would have to be offset by reductions in other parts of the agreed cost sharing formula.
So the States have the opportunity to organise their hospital systems as they wish. Of course there is the capacity to escalate some of the factors. I gave an undertaking to all the Ministers for Health at the recent Health Ministers conference in Western Australia that if they had particular matters they wished to bring before the Commonwealth we would be prepared to look at them. But the fact of the matter is that the funding for hospi tals has not been reduced. In fact it has been main tained at the real levels operating in 1 979. I repeat that overall there has been a 1 2.3 per cent increase this year, or about $ 1 44m. That increase applies throughout Australia, including Tasmania. Some of the instances of the administration of the hospi tals in Tasmania that the Tasmanian Minister for Health brought before the Ministers conference in Western Australia would make me, if I were that State Minister, look very closely at the administration of that State's hospitals. It is up to the States to administer the hospitals, not to bleat to the Commonwealth.
METAL INDUSTRY WORKING HOURS Mr YOUNG-Is the Prime Minister aware of requests made by the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission that there be set up working parties representing metal trades employer organisations and metal union organisations to look at the introduction of shorter work ing hours in the metal industries? Has he directly used his office to persuade metal employers not to co-operate with the working parties, in defiance of the Arbitration Commission's requests? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-As I understand this proposal, it was basically a union proposal. The metal trades employers, initially indicated that they would examine it but they said that they wanted to assess the views of their membership around Australia. As I am advised, the view of the membership was that they should not participate in an arrangement which was designed to achieve a reduction in working hours and which was plainly seen to be designed to achieve a reduction in working hours. I find it very difficult to under stand how leaders in the union movement and

also in the Australian Labor Party so avidly support a 35-hour, working week and arrangements in relation to a 35-hour working week when they know quite well that will increase costs of manufacturing in Australia by 14 per cent to 20 per cent or more and when they know quite well that that will lead to the sale of less Australian made goods and therefore to the employment of fewer Australians. I would have thought that at the moment we would have wanted a circumstance where as many Australians as possible could be employed. To achieve that we need to sell as many Australian goods as possible. Why leaders of the union movement should show such a blatant and callous disregard for the employment of people who do not have jobs I fail utterly to understand.
We have only to look at the tactics in which certain trade unions indulged in relation to the Altona case. There were circumstances there of industrial blackmail and guerrilla tactics which would have been designed to put companies out of business totally. As a result of that kind of press ure and industrial force, some kind of agreement was put to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and the Commission was asked to endorse it. The whole process is a shabby one indeed. The whole process is one that can result only in higher unemployment than would otherwise be the case. The architect of higher unemployment in this Parliament, the honourable member for Wills and former President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, needs to be branded as the archi tect of wage policies and industrial policies which have done a great deal of damage to the Australian community. One of the odd thi ngs about it is that he has the intelligence to understand it and to know it very plainly.
RIVER MURRAY Mr STEELE HALL-Is the Prime Minister aware of the urgency of establishing an overall management system for the long term control of salinity in the River Murray and all its tributaries as well as the regulation of the quantity of water available for domestic, industrial and irrigation usage? Will he consider formulating a specific national policy in this regard to guide the various authorities involved? Will he give thought to establishing an investigating body to determine exactly the technical matters which must govern the development of the Murray and its tributaries in the future? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The importance of the River Murray and its tributaries to three States is enormous. In more recent times we have heard, and we hear now, many people refer to

880 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

Australia's great natural resources. B y that they generally mean minerals or reserves of coal. The River Murray and its tributaries may well be Australia's greatest continuing natural resource. I use the word 'continuing' advisedly because it will be a continuing natural resource only if the three State governments concerned and the Commonwealth jointly undertake the appropriate manage ment arrangements and pursue the appropriate policies which will protect the Murray for all the purposes and activities that are associated with it.
Over a long period the Commonwealth has provided substantial funds to help the States combat salinity, and that process continues. At the moment Senator Carrick is negotiating with the States to achieve a new agreement, and as I under stand it there is good progress in that direction. It is our hope that that agreement will be finalised quite shortly. The urgency is, of course, under stood. This is not something that can be put off for five years or 1 0 years. With continuing dry times in New South Wales and in the south-eastern part of Australia it can become a very urgent problem very quickly. I believe the first step is to get that agreement with all the States. I think then we need to assess the priorities of the Commonwealth and the States in respect of the River Murray Agreement. I believe there would be complete agreement with the objectives that the honour able member would have in mind.
I know that the question was not asked purely from a South Australian point ofview. Obviously, because South Australia ;0 at the end of the River Murray, what happens in New South Wales and in Victoria is of vast importance to South Australia, so much of whose development de pends on good quality water getting down the Murray. I know that the honourable gentleman's question was couched in terms of the River Mur ray as a whole. The concern that is presently felt in South Australia is something of which I and the Government are very conscious.

of the tragic inefficacy of his Government's economic policies in general and final proof of his fail ure to fulfil the promise made more than five years ago to establish full employment in this country?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The figures produced by the Australian Bureau of Statistics are generally regarded as being of greater validity. The honourable gentleman may not want to accept that, but that happens to be the case. Over the last 1 2 months, indeed over the last two years, employment in Australia has been growing very strongly. Total employment has grown in this country much more strongly than in nearly any other Western country. The Australian performance is all the more remarkable because in earlier times the Australian economy would grow if world trade was growing, if there was a buoyant situation overseas. But if there were difficulty and recession in Britain, the United States or the major countries of Europe, very severe recession would be felt in Australia. As a result of our policies over the last five years, this country has gone against the world trend. While the economies of other countries have been shrinking the Australian economy has been expanding, and Australian employment has been expanding. It will continue to expand and to grow under the policies of this Government.
The honourable gentleman knows quite well that the policies that he devised when he was President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, that led to wage increases of nearly 40 per cent in one year, in 1 975, were directly responsible for the massive growth of unemployment in this country. He will know also that as President of the ACTU, when he was very much concerned in devising and forming the 35-hour working week campaign, to gain support from certain areas--
Mr Hawke-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I claim to have been misrepresented.

UNEMPLOYMENT FIGURES Mr HAWKE-I preface my question to the Prime Minister by reminding him that this day, for the first time since August of last year, national figures on registered unemployed have been issued. They total just under half a million, at 482,366. That is an increase of just under 20,000 on the figures for February of last year, or an increase of 4.2 per cent over the last year. They are the highest February figures since the war. Does the Prime Minister seriously suggest that the member for Wills is the architect of these figures, or does he regard these figures as further evidence

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. I must inform the honourable gentleman that I will call him for the making of a personal explanation at the appropriate time.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, if the honourable gentleman wishes to claim that he was not responsible in 1 974 and 1975 for the wages policies that the union movement was then pursuing, with the active connivance and support of the government of the day, he will only be pleading his own impotence. If that is the way he wants to do it, he will bejudged accordingly.

Questions Without Notice

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 8 8 1

NORTH SYDNEY POST OFFICE Mr SPENDER-Is the Minister for Communi cations aware that since Monday 1 6 March the North Sydney Post Office has been the subject of persistent industrial disruption, causing great hardship and inconvenience to those who live and work in the North Sydney area? Is he also aware that the North Sydney Post Office has a deplor able record for industrial disruption and that it services, when it is operating, the fifth largest commercial centre in Australia? Can the Minister tell this House what steps are being taken for the urgent settlement of the present industrial disruption to North Sydney's postal services?
Mr SINCLAIR-There has been some difficulty in respect of mail sorting and delivery staff at North Sydney Post Office. As I understand the position there have been some accommo dation difficulties which are now under review by Australia Post. The difficulties have arisen in particular because of the presence of several agi tators, all of whom have held or hold office as union delegates. One of those union delegates has been dismissed and the other one has been trans ferred to another office. I understand that the period within which appeals may be lodged against this disciplinary action expires at the end of this week. In the meantime there has been a series of rolling strikes which have seriously disrupted mail supplies in North Sydney. I am advised that successively different sectors of the staff have either failed to turn up for work or have failed to perform work when they have arrived. As a result, there have been very significant dis ruptions to mail deliveries in the electorate of the honourable gentleman. I am told that there is a large private box installation at North Sydney Post Office. Except for 80 bags, mail for box addresses that has come to the office has been sorted into the boxes. I am told that pension cheques have been delivered and a deal of other mail addressed to street addresses has also been delivered. However, there is two days mail in the office awaiting street delivery and about 900 bags for North Sydney are being held in other Sydney sorting offices because there is no space currently available at North Sydney. Existing staff would take about 10 days to clear all of the arrears. However, mail posted at North Sydney is being cleared. The present circumstances are of con siderable concern to Australia Post. I am told that the disciplinary action currently being taken is expected to resolve the dispute, and I hope, very shortly.

SHARE TRADING PROFITS Mr ARMITAGE-My question, which is directed to the Treasurer, relates to the sale by thc Bell group of companies yesterday of $53m worth of shares in Elder Smith Goldsborough Mort Ltd, the shares having been acquired mostly in the previous few days. Is the Treasurer aware that the shares were sold for a profit of $ 1 6.5m but that section 26AAA tax on such share trading profit is unlikely to apply as the Bell group acquired its shares through an interposed subsidiary company and sold the shares by selling that subsidiary company rather than directly selling the shares as such? Is the Treasurer concerned that by this de vice tax revenue of some $7.5m will be avoided? If that is so, what, if anything, does he intend to do about it? Mr HOWARD-[ am aware of newspaper re ports to the effect that the Bell group of companies has earned a very large profit on the sale of shares in Elder Smith Goldsborough Mort Ltd. I welcome very much, in the context of a de gree of national economic rationality, the decision of the South Australian Government not to inter vene in the marketplace decision. That stands in contrast with the activities of some other governments in a similar context. In direct response to the question of the honourable member for Chifley I say that, notwithstanding the newspaper reports, J am not at present in full posession of the facts surrounding the matter. The honourable gentleman is as aware as I am of certain provisions of the income tax legislation that prevent any Minister, including the Treasurer, from obtaining details that would not otherwise be publicly available about the affairs of a taxpayer, and that extends to this taxpayer and this group of companies. Mr Armitage-What about this particular device? Mr HOWARD-The honourable gentleman should not get excited. It applies also to any other taxpayer in the Australian community. The honourable member for Chifley knows very well that I would be concerned if this transaction revealed any undue or improper weakness in the taxation law. To the extent that it is possible for me, consistent with the secrecy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act, to gather further in formation about it I will do so. If there is any need-l stress 'if-for a change to be made. I will certainly consider it and make a recommendation to the Government. I say that against the back ground of the fact that this group of companies and other people are engaged in market trans actions. People invested money in purchasing

882 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

shares. It is no part of the philosophy of this Government to get in the way of people trading freely and, if necessary, vigorously on stock exchanges throughout this country.
EXOTIC ANIMAL DISEASES Mr LLOYD-My question is directed to the Minister for Health. In view of the increased danger to Australia of diseases such as foot and mouth disease and the speed with which these ani mal diseases can be transmitted because of air travel, I ask: What was the time lag between the realisation by the New Zealand authorities that the recent animal disease outbreak near Timaru could be foot and mouth disease and their notification of this to the Department of Health? Did the Minister's Department first receive notice from the New Zealand officials, the world reference centre or the media? What was the time lag between his Department receiving this advice and contacting officials at Australian airports? Did a plane from Christchurch land at an Australian airport and did its passengers proceed through Customs during that period? Finally, can these time lags be reduced? Mr MacKELLAR-The honourable gentle man has raised a most important matter. Obviously the question of quarantine is of the utmost significance to a country such as Australia. When this incident occurred, anticipating that I might be asked a question of this nature, I took the trouble to find out in detail what the situation was. The outbreak was diagnosed on a property near Timaru on 1 1 February. The property was declared an infected place at about 4.30 New Zealand time on that day. The New Zealand Min ister for Agriculture and Fisheries issued the first Press release of a suspected outbreak at 9.30 a.m. New Zealand time. Unofficial reports in Australia of this suspected outbreak were confirmed with New Zealand authorities by officers of my De partment in a telephone discussion which took place at approximately 1 1 . 1 5 a.m. on the 1 2th. This further confirmatory advice on the suspected outbreak was contained in a cable recived by my Department from New Zealand authorities at 1 .43 p.m. Australian time. The first reports that we did get about the suspected outbreak were from the media. They were received at 1 0.30 in the morning. Immedi ately we took action to confirm with the New Zealand .authorities whether those reports were correct. I am advised that by 1 2.30 p.m. on the 1 2th all necessary precautionary measures were in operation in all Australian States. It must be emphasised to the House that it is not uncommon for simulated exotic disease exercises conducted

by veterinary authorities in various countries of the world to be incorrectly reported.
Mr Holding-I raise a point of order. Mr Speaker, as the practice regarding questions with out notice requires members not to ask detailed questions which can be put on the Notice Paper, surely it is proper practice under the Standing Orders that instead of a Minister reading his answer he should either seek leave to have it incorporated in Hansard or alternatively have the question put on the Notice Paper so that it can be answered in the proper way. Reading prepared answers is a constant abuse of Question Time. I suggest that now is the appropriate time for you to allow Question Time to be used for the purpose of asking questions without notice.
Mr SPEAKER-I believe this matter is non political in any party sense but is very important in the national sense. Because the Minister antici pated a question on the matter, I do not think it should be assumed that the question was not asked without notice. The Minister came into the chamber prepared for a question on the matter. I do not think that he has transgressed against the House with the length of the reply so far.
Mr MacKELLAR-Exercises are carried out from time to time in various countries. Of course, sometimes there are media reports about these ex ercises which give rise to speculation that in fact there is a genuine outbreak. We have to check very carefully to make sure that the outbreak is serious. Action taken across Australia in advance of any such confirmation would be very irresponsible.
Finally, in relation to the last part of the question, my advice is that the first flight from New Zealand on 1 2 February this year arrived at Mas cot from Auckland at 1 1 .8 a.m. Australian time. The first flight from Christchurch on that day arrived at Mascot at 3. 1 1 p.m. when, of course, those procedures were in place.
COAL EXPORTS: RAILWAY PROJECTS Mr CUNNINGHAM-The Minister for
Transport will be aware of the possibility of a sub stantial export trade in brown coal derivative products from the Latrobe Valley resulting from some of a number of projects currently under in vestigation by the Victorian Government and private developers. In view of the likely need for upgraded rail infrastructure to haul coal products in large volume to port facilities at Westernport Bay, I ask the Minister whether this Government would be prepared to fund the provision of this in frastructure either by declaring a rail route between the Latrobe Valley and Westernport Bay as

Questions Without Notice

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 883

a line of national significance within the terms of the National Railway Network (Financial Assist ance) Act 1979 or by initiating legislation which would enable Commonwealth funding of major railway infrastructure projects with a specific export significance. If such assistance is envisaged, would the Minister inform the House as to the likely form and timing of an offer to the Victorian Government?

under the National Health Scheme. The House will remember, of course, that on about 4 April last year, I think it was, there was a determination that the remuneration should be reduced by 4c as a result of an inquiry which was carried out and certain events which took place in relation to the programming of a computer. The Commonwealth at that stage undertook to have a review completed by 1 July this year.

Mr HUNT-The Government, of course, has a main line upgrading program under which it makes loan funds available to the States to assist them with the upgrading of certain main lines within their States. There is also, of course, opportunity for the State governments to submit to the Premiers Conference and to the Loan Council proposals for infrastructure borrowing to assist with railway development, railway electrification and other proposals which have a priority within those State governments. To my knowledge I have not had an official approach from the Victorian Government on this issue. However, I have had discussions of a general nature with the Victorian Minister of Transport about a number of rail proposals that the Victorian Government has in mind, particularly in respect of the completion of the standardisation of the main line to Webb Dock.
The Victorian Government is currently under taking a survey, as I understand it, of rail needs to try to assist in the development of the Latrobe Valley resources. There are available to the States programs which the Commonwealth has had in place for some time to assist those States with projects that are of particular priority to the States. If an approach comes to the Commonwealth Government, it will be considered no doubt at the Premiers Conference or at the de partmental level in accordance with the program that we have been administering for some time.
CHEMISTS: PRESCRIPTION FEES Mr DRUMMOND-My question is directed to the Minister for Health. Understanding that a tribunal will be set up to determine prescription fees to be paid to chemists, I ask: Will the Minister advise the House whether an interim deter mination will be made by the present pricing com mittee presided over by Mr Justice Ludeke? Mr MacKELLAR-There has been, of course, considerable controversy surrounding the prices which chemists receive following the activities of various remuneration tribunals, joint committees, et cetera, over a very long period. In fact, it has been a most unhappy series of events since the early 1 9608 in relation to the amount of remuner ation that chemists receive for dispensing items

There was an investigation by the Joint Committee of Public Accounts of the events surround ing that so-called overpayment. The Committee looked at this matter in great detail and made sev eral recommendations which are at present under consideration by the Government. One of the recommendations related to the establishment of a tribunal. The Government has taken up that rec ommendation partly and has decided to establish a tribunal which will be binding on both the chem ists and the Government in relation to the re muneration to be paid to chemists. As the honour able member has suggested, that tribunal will report by 1 July this year. The application by the Pharmacy Guild of Australia for an interim re sponse is presently being assessed. Mr Justice Ludeke, the chairman of that joint committee, has asked for a Commonwealth response within the next two weeks. At this stage I am not in a position to say what that response will be, but I em phasise that the tribunal to be set up by legislation will report its determination by 1 July this year.
GOVERNMENT INFORMATION UNIT AND STATE CO-ORDINATION OFFICERS
Mr HAYDEN-My question, which is directed to the Prime Minister, refers to the recent escala tion of the Government's efforts to manipulate the media by strengthening the Government In formation Unit and State co-ordination officer units. I ask: Does his politicisation of those Public Service offices to the point where they now amount to operative arms of the Liberal Party reflect no more than his well-known hostility to proper scrutiny by journalists, or is it directed towards the much more worrying aim of moulding and controlling news so that it will reflect a clear political bias towards his party? How does he justify this misuse of taxpayers' funds and of supposedly non-partisan public servants such as Mr Vincent Matthews?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The previous Labor Administration had a Press secretary, or more, for every Minister. Only a very few Minis ters of this Government have Press secretaries. The co-ordination officers, the liaison officers with the States, and the Government Information U nit

884 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

stand in very large measure in place o fa Press sec retary being attached to each Minister. If the honourable gentleman finds one approach offen sive and the other acceptable, I find that just as strange as his other antics in running round joint Australian-American bases.

Mr SINCLAIR-He can count, too; he is quite a gentleman. I ask that both pages be incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted. The documents read as follows-

TELEPHONE SERVICES Mr O'KEEFE-Is the Minister for Communi cations aware that subscriber trunk dialling services from Canberra to Sydney and the northern part of New South Wales have been severely disrupted for the last 24 hours? Mr Young-Didn't you get your Elders shares? Mr O'KEEFE-Can the Minister inform the House what caused this inconvenience and what steps have been taken to restore these services? Mr SINCLAIR-Apparently there has been within Telecom a proposal to change the staffing arrangements in two ARM trunk exchanges and a long line terminal which presently constitute its Haymarket complex. I am told that the re arrangement involved the introduction of an all night shift at one of the ARM exchanges. Some negotiations were entered into with the Australian Telecommunications Employees Association sub-branch. However, there was a break down in the negotiations and work bans were imposed. The ATEA sub-branch and representa tives of Telecom Australia are due to meet at this moment and I understand that proposals have been made for the settlement of the dispute. In the circumstances, I do not believe that I can take my answer further. I am told that there has been considerable dis ruption to telephone calls northbound; Only about 60 per cent of STD calls from Canberra have been going through. The resulting congestion in the manually connected services has meant that delays of up to 40 minutes have been suffered by many parliamentarians using them in the per formance of their duties and, I guess, even by par liamentarians such as the honourable member for Port Adelaide-if he wanted to sell his Elders shares. In addition, general exchange traffic capacity has been reduced by about 70 per cent. Thus, there has been a significant disruption and Telecom is most concerned to ensure that normal services are resumed as soon as possible. I am told that, as soon as the ATEA men return to work, this should occur in a relatively short time. Mr Morris-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. Under Standing Order 321 I require the Minister to table the documents and notes from which he has been quoting-both pages.

Telecom Australia Headquarters
199 William Street Melbourne, Victoria 3000 Minister Bans at Haymarket Trunk Exchange Purpose To advise you of the current position concerning the above mentioned bans.
Background The Haymarket complex consists of two ARM Trunk
Exchanges and a Long Line terminal under the control of one officer-in-charge. Telecom proposes to re-organise the Exchange and to provide two OICs, one in charge of the Long Line terminal and one in charge of the ARM Exchange.
Discussions were held with the ATEA at a local level on the proposal but agreementcould not be reached on the provision of an all-night shift at the ARM. Without pursuing negotiations any further, the ATEA Sub-Branch imposed bans on certain work at the Exchange which resulted this morning in the failure of a call analyser which has disrupted certain traffic through the Exchange.
Comment At a meeting held t04ay between NSW Telecom manage
ment and the ATEA NSW Branch agreement was reached that supject to the lifting of all bans and work limitations Telecom, in conjunction with representatives of the Haymarket Sub-Branch of ATEA, would further examine the workload at night taking into account comments made by the ATEA.
A recommendation to lift the bans will be put to a meeting of Haymarket Exchange staff at 3 p.m. this afternoon. In the event the bans are lifted service through Haymarket Exchange will be restored as soon as possible after staff are returned to work.
Conclusion I will keep you informed of developments.
B. O'Sullivan' for Managing Director 25 March 1981
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE: HAYMARKET TRUNK EXCHANGE, SYDNEY
Background It has been proposed that the operations of the ARM -A'
Exchange at Haymarket be changed for technical and management reasons. These changed functions would mean for some employees a shift roster re-arrangement.
Telecom management has been discussing the proposals with ATEA. The discussions broke down recently and the ATEA imposed bans on maintenance of equipment in the exchange.
A piece of equipment failed last night and, because of the bans, is not being repaired.
Effect on service The exchange capaCity has been reduced to about 70 per
cent of STD traffic. Direct dialling ISD calls are only mar ginally affected. However, operator connected international calls are down to approximately 60 per cent of capacity.

Questions Without Notice

25 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 885

In Canberra capacity of STD is down to about 60 per cent.
This has caused congestion to the manually connected services
and there is approximately 40 minutes delay in making
connections.
Present position Telecom management called an urgent meeting with

country groups of individuals are very anxious to pick up the excellent material that is available on that channel. At the same time, the cost ofprovid ing those services varies from one area to the other and, whilst I understand and sympathise with the

ATEA officials (including Mr Col Cooper) at 10.00 a.m. this honourable member's concern for Canberra, it

morning to try and resolve the issue.

must take its place with each of the other centres

We will keep you informed of the progress in the around the continent. The management of Chan

negotiations.

nel 0-28 is hoping that in due course it will be

Policy Division
25 March 1981

possible to extend its services as the honourable member requests. In the meantime, I hope that

TERTIARY EDUCATION FEES

the picket line is withdrawn from the Black

Mr DAWKINS-I remind the Minister for Education of the assurance he gave just prior to the last election that the Government did not in

Mountain tower so that it is possible for honour able members to have some idea of the programs presently available.

tend to reintroduce tertiary education fees. Does

that assurance still stand? If it does not, can the

MEAT INSPECTION

Minister say what effect the reintroduction of fees would have on the access to tertiary education of people from ordinary families in Australia?

Mr TUCKEY-My question is addressed to the Minister for Primary Industry. Whilst ac knowledging the Federal role in supervising meat

Mr FIFE-Matters of funding for education inspection in export abattoirs, I ask: Is there any

are reviewed annually. They have been reviewed evidence that the countries importing meat from

in every year that this Government has been in Australia demand that the Federal Government

office, and they were reviewed in every year that must pay the wages of meat inspectors? Is it a fact

the previous Government was in office. There has that the shire of Northam in Western Australia

been no change in the arrangements.

has offered to continue to supply competent and

MULTICULTURAL TELEVISION

established meat inspectors under Commonwealth supervision at the Tip Top abattoirs in

Mrs KELLY-My question is addressed to the that shire? Has the DPI-honourable members

Minister for Communications. I note that he has will note that today I have used the letters for the

made special arrangements for senators and Department of Primary Industry-accepted that

members to view within Parliament House Chan offer? If not, what cost has been added to the Aus

nel 0-28, the multicultural television station, for tralian taxpayer by the DPI assuming those meat

the period 23 March to 27 March. Will the Minis inspection services?

ter consider bringing the same service to the

people of the Australian Capital Territory? Can the Minister advise the House of the costs involved in providing multicultural telecasts to the Australian Capital Territory? Is the Minister of the view that the people of the Australian Capital Territory have the same right of access to mul ticultural television as residents of Sydney and Melbourne?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Minister for Primary Industry is attending a funeral today but I will refer the honourable member's question to the Minister so that he can get a precise and detailed answer. My colleague has been having discussions with his counterparts in the States designed to achieve rationalisation of meat inspec tion services. The Commonwealth has certain

Mr SINCLAIR-I have considerable sym responsibilities for export services of a very

pathy for the view expressed in the honourable serious kind and these have to be maintained at

member's question. However, yet another indus the highest possible level to make sure that

trial dispute, involving the Black Mountain tower, Australia's access to markets overseas is unim

has resulted in an interruption to the proposed paired. On top of that, various States have their

telecast of Channel 0-28, which was intended for own requirements. The attitudes of the States to

viewing by senators and members during this the maintenance of the separate Commonwealth

week. Channel 0-28 programs can be transmitted and State services differ quite markedly. My col

through Canberra fairly simply as the landline league has been having detailed discussions and

connecting Sydney and Melbourne passes through negotiations with the States in an effort to achieve

the national capital. However, the extension of greater rationalisation and greater economies

Channel 0-28 services beyond Sydney and Mel than exist in the present system. However, I will

bourne has not yet been determined. Obviously in refer the question to my colleague who will give a

a number of major popUlation centres around the more precise answer to the honourable member.

886 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Review of Australian Demographic Trends

PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS Mr HAWKE (Wills)-Mr Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented. Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentle man wish to make a personal explanation? Mr HAWKE-I do. Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed. Mr HAWKEThe Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), in his non-answer to my question, was pleased to make the allegation that I was the architect of unemployment. Obviously, like the Prime Minister, I do not intend to insult the intelligence of the House by claiming that is a misrepresentation. It is so absurd as not to war nint wasting the time of the House. But I am concerned that the Prime Minister has made a blatant and, I suggest; deliberate misrepresentation of facts as distinct from personal opinion. In the ab surdity which he launched upon the House he said that in 1 974 the increase in wages was 40 per cent. Mr Malcolm Fraser-I said 1 975. Mr HAWKE-That is better still. I thank the Prime Minister for making the change. In 1 974 the increase in wages was not 40 per cent, it was 28 per cent. But in 1 975, which the Prime Minister was talking about, the December to December increase was 1 3 per cent. Why is it that the Prime Minister, like his other Ministers, has to misrep resent the facts to this House.? There has been no year in' which wages have increased by 40 per cent. Mr SPEAKER- -The honourable gentleman is now arguing the point. Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister) -Mr S peaker , for the sake of accuracy-Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentle man wish,to make a personal explanation? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-- Yes. Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed. Mr MALCOLM FRASER-For the sake of accuracy I should have said that the honourable gentleman waS he architect of policies that would obviously lead ,to massive unemployment. If the honourable gentleman examines the figures over tbe 1 2-month period to March 1 975, he will find " that wa,ges increased by 38 per cent. T will check
, ' that figure and report to the House.

REVIEW OF AUSTRALIAN DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS
Ministerial Statement Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava--Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs) -by leave Since the time when the important work of the national popUlation inquiry reached some unex pected conclusions about our population prospects, there has been a greater awareness of the need for continuing monitoring of the under lying trends. Accordingly, the Government has decided to present periodic reports to the Parliament and to the community in general on current and prospective demographic trends and on some of their implications for the Australian community. I have pleasure in tabling now the first such report entitled 'Review of Australia's Demo graphic Trends'.
I draw the attention of honourable members to some of the main points in the report. Australia's population growth rate fell during the 1 970s from around 2 per cent to a little above one per cent in 1975-76 before increasing to 1 .3 5 per cent in 1 979-80. About two-thirds of the growth in recent years was due to natural increase with the balance being the net effect of overseas migration. Births declined from 272,000 in 1 97 1 -72 to 227,000 in 1 976-77 and have levelled out at around 223,000 in the past two years. Throughout the 1 970s, the net reproduction rate, the most common sum mary measure of population replacement, taking into account both fertility and mortality trends, has continued to fall from 1 .39 per cent to 0.92 per cent by 1 979. This is 8 per cent below the long term replacement level. The most likely future is that Australia's net reproduction rate will continue to decline at least until later in the decade. However, even if fertility rates were to recover to around replacement level, it would be well below levels Australia has generally had in the past.
During the early 1970s the net population gain through migration generally declined. This trend has now been reversed with the net gain in 1 979-80 being 82,000. Whilst there may be vari ations in future levels of net gain, the broad trends in the characteristics of Australia's population can be illustrated by population projections using a long term average annual gain through mi gration of 0.5 per cent to 0.6 per cent of the population. On the basis of the present population, this would be equivalent to a net migration gain of 73,000 to 88,000 annually. On these assumptions, it is likely that Australia's population growth rate will increase from about 1 .4 per cent per annum over the next few years to about 1 .5 per cent per

<- . -

Review of Australian Demographic Trends

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 887

annum in the second half of the 1 980s, before de the century. The absolute size of these groups

clining to about 1 .2 per cent by the end of the cen affects social welfare planning, including the pro

tury. The population at the end of the century vision of pensions and special medical care and

would be about 19,500,000, some two million accommodation.

more than it would be without a contribution through migration.

These are some of the major population trends and implications. Whilst they may not appear to

Significant changes in the age structure are an raise immediate issues, we must remember that

ticipated between 1 980 and 200 1 . Whilst the total demographic trends take generations to work

population is expected to increase by a little over their way through a population. We should not be

30 per cent, the number 'of people aged 65 and misled into believing that issues arising from

over is expected to increase by about 70 per cent future population developments can be left to the

by 2001 , whilst the number aged nought to 1 4 future. We need to remain aware of these devel

years is expected to increase by only 2 0 per cent. opments so that they can be taken into account in

Following the variations in the annual numbers of planning for the future. The matters covered in

births during the late 1 960s and 1 970s, there will the 'Review of Australia's Demographic Trends'

be substantial fluctuations in the numbers reach are very important long term issues. 1 commend

ing primary, secondary and tertiary education the review to the House. 1 present the following

ages, calling for flexibility in manpower and infra papers:

structure arrangements in education. There will

Australia's Demographic Trends Review-Ministerial

also be significant fluctuations in the numbers of Statement, 25 March 198 1 .

young people entering the labour force. For example, the number of 1 8-year-olds is expected to increase from a trough of about 250,000 in 1 984

Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.

to a peak of around 290,000 in 1 989 before declin Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (3. 1 4) -1 wish

ing to around 250,000 again in 1 995.

to say a few words on the matter instantly,

The declining birth rates mean that there will be a general ageing of the population with the me dian age being likely to rise from 29.5 years in 1 980 to about 3 3 years at the end of the century. This may result in the labour force becoming more experienced but less mobile. Lower occu pational and geographic mobility makes it harder for the economy to adjust to structural changes and the introduction of new technology and increases the social and economic costs of moving people to new development projects, particularly in remote areas. Whilst migration will not halt the overall ageing of the population, it can change the dependency ratios by bringing in younger people. For example, on current assumptions, the pro portion of the popUlation in the 65 and over age

although I understand that the Government in tends that it be discussed later in the session. Further discussion of it is certainly warranted. I believe the make-up of Australia's population, together with the decisions which have to be made in regard to immigration to Australia, are of enormous importance because there is not one facet of Australia's planning that is not affected by the de cisions which we make in relation to the future population of this country. It does not matter what area people are involved in-whether it be social security, health, local government, education and so on-we should be looking ahead as to how the lifestyle and the l ives of Australians are going to be affected by decisions which are made now.

group is expected to be about 1 2 per cent by 200 1 . I would go one step further and say that I be

With n o net gains from migration, a figure of lieve the House of Representatives should have a

about 1 3 per cent would be expected.

committee which constantly monitors the move

The changing age distribution of the population also has implications for industry. The general trends in market growth will be away from prod ucts for teenagers to products for the over 30s. Growth in demand for products for the older age groups is expected to be particularly rapid.

ments of population in this country. We did have a minor discussion in the House some time ago on the question of immigration and the future population of this country. 1 said that it seemed to me to be an enormously important aspect of discussion in this House that the two major parties which can govern this country should come as

Persons in the older agegroups are of particular near as possible to the same point of view. I have

interest to policy makers. Whilst the number of no reason to change that statement, because if we

people 65 and over is expected to increase rapidly, are talking about the future education standards

this growth is even more pronounced at older of our people, about meeting the great challenges

ages. For example, the number of persons 75 and that might lie ahead over the next 20 years or 30

over is expected virtually to double by the end of years, which is not very long in the life of a

888 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 198 1

Review of Australian Demographic Trends

country, or about any other matter people need to know now what they are to be catering for. I believe this statement, following on the shock which I think many Australians got with the publication of the Borrie report, is further material which can be discussed. It is something on which perhaps some decisions can be made.
As the report points out, under certain circumstances, using certain criteria, much of which could be altered in the next to or 1 5 years, Australia at the turn of the century could have a population of 1 9 -!- million people. Of course, there are many variables which the Government must ackrlOwledge and which we on this side of the House acknowledge. We are not sure, for in stance, what will happen as a result of the move ments to and fro of New Zealanders. We are not sure of the demands which will be made upon Australia in terms of taking our share of refugees from whatever countries they may come from. We are not sure what the fertility rate may be at any time in Australia, although it would appear we are able to predict fairly accurately what that may be. I think the economy being what it is and the economic demands being what they are in the home now which have brought about a resurgence of married women going to work it is unlikely that we will see an uptake in the fertility rate in Australia which will markedly alter the figures given to us in the statement made today by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) . Therefore these considerations are of importance.
We should look at some of the conclusions which have been reached in the report, assuming that the criteria prove to be accurate. We should look not only at the migration of people to this country and the numbers of people we may have but also at the internal migration machinations of people from one State to another. There would be some very grave long term consequences in South Australia, the State which I represent, about what the report has to say in terms of the aging population, the less demand for housing, the less de mand for white goods, the less demand for per haps motor cars and so on. South Australia, with a very narrow economic base, could. be affected in 1 5 years time to a greater extent than it has over the last 1 0 years. We have to look at where the placement of population is going to be. I believe it is of great significance, when we are looking at the welfare area, to recognise the great increase that there will be in the number of people who will be retired and the burden that will be placed on tax payers in looking after those people. We have an acknowledged but not a universal retiring age of

65 years. I do not believe 65 years will be the retir ing age in this country for much longer. I believe the retiring age for working people will be lowered and I think this will come upon us very rapidly just as I believe the shorter working weekI do not want to get into the arguments about thatwill be a reality for all people in the not too distant future. Those sorts of develop ments and changes will mean that planners will need advanced advice about what they should be doing.
We can see that there will be a transfer of people who have reached retiring age. They will want to head into areas in which they will have a more comfortable lifestyle. Perhaps they will want to live in places which have warmer weather. However, the demands upon the services in such places will really be enormous. The report deals with migration from the States of Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania to Western Australia and Queensland. Some of that mi gration is traditional in the case of retired people, who like to go to where the weather is warmer. Some of that migration is contemporary in terms of the jobs which may be available. The report deals also with the fact that as the Australian average age rises over the next 20 years, the majority of people will be aged between 29 and 33, and they will become less mobile. The Australian work force is already described as being immobile. If we become any more immobile, there may be greater demands on migration in order to fill the jobs wherever they may be, sometimes in remote areas. This raises extremely important questions about what will occur in this COL' .ltry. As I have said, there is no doubt that people in the welfare area will have to plan ahead for what will need to be done for the greater percentage of people who will have no earning capacity and who will have to be kept by the people who are still working, and what that means in terms of the taxation burden which will be placed upon those working.
Other important areas are covered in this report. As I said at the outset, it seems to be of enormous importance that a report of this nature should come back for proper discussion before the House. It seems important also that this House ought to give consideration to having a standing committee on the subject matter contained in this report so that we can be kept up to date on the de mands which will be made on structures within Australia. It may be that the report has reached conclusions with which the majority of the people in this House do not agree. It may be that the ma jority of people in Australia want to see migration lowered. It may be that there are people who

Review of Australian Demographic Trends

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 889

would rather see Australia, through its government agencies, encourage a rise in the fertility rate. Some countries are concerned about the number of people in their work forces. Countries in Eastern Europe have moved to try to encour age larger families, but this has not worked. I do not believe that it will work in Australia because of the demands made on the home economy. Women not only find it comfortable to go to work but also in the majority oJ instances they have to go to work to maintain the home or to maintain the standard of living which they expect to be able to provide for their families. I think that the report raises a number of very important questions which ought to be discussed in this House. I sin cerely hope that the Government brings it back quickly for discussion.
Mr UREN (Reid) ( 3.23)-1 am pleased that the Government has given me the opportunity to say a few words about this report on Australia's demographic trends. I commend the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) for bringing it forward. I believe that this report will be important. It is the first substantial report that we have had on population or demographic trends in this country since the Borrie report in themid 70s.
When the then Prime Minister, the right honourable member for Lowe (Sir William McMahon) , introduced the National Urban and Regional Development Authority legislation in this House in October 1 972, he brought out the fact that during the years 1 950 to 1 970 the population of this country grew, on an average, of 1 . 9 per cent per year. A t that time we had a population of 1 3 million. It was the guesstimate of his advisers at that time that our population would increase by another 10 million by the turn of the century, which meant that we would have a population of 23 million by then. The Borrie report de stroyed that assessment. In fact, Borrie said that both natural population increase and immigration would have brought about a population of some thing like 1 7t million by the turn of the century. If any honourable member refers to my speech of October 1 972, when I put forward the Australian Labor Party's policy at that time, he will see that I said that we wanted to work towards a population from both natural increase and migration of somewhere around 17+ million by the turn of the century. I argued that if the population trend continued and we had been able to slow the growth rate in our cities by at least one million people, as has been dOue by the Commission for the New Towns in Britain, we would have had to absorb the other nine million people in our capital cities. The subsequent chaos, particularly in the cities of

Sydney and Melbourne, could not have been coped with.
Therefore, the Labor Government supported the trend towards more rational growth which enabled us to create growth centres such as Albury-Wodonga, Bathurst-Orange and Macarthur. I f the Victorian and Queensland governments had supported our proposals we could have created growth centres also in Geelong and Townsville. We did not have the co-operation of all State governments, but at least we had the co-operation of the State of New South Wales, which at that stage had a conservative government, and the Victorian Hamer Government, which also had a conservative government. That was the plan that we had and were developing between 1 972 and 1 975. We see now that again the trend has changed. The Minister has pointed out that on average there will be a net migration in take annually of between 73,000 and 88,000 resulting in a total population of about 1 9 . 5 million by the turn of the century. That has to be examined in the context of people living in cities particularly in urban and regional areas.
Regrettably, the Minister mentioned only two sectors of the community. I know that this is not his responsibility as he does not have the planning controls within his Department. He mentioned the education sector, which is an important aspect of our future population, and the industrial sec tor. It seems to me that planning has been lacking under this Government. Because it is a market forces government it does not really plan. It allows market forces to develop which results in incorrect growth of our cities.
The Treasurer (Mr Howard) , who is seated at the table, knows that the new growth centres are receiving inadequate social infrastructure development. He knows that centres such as Gladstone, the Hunter Valley, Lithgow, Latrobe Valley and Portland will grow fast and that the social conditions in those areas will create great difficulties for most people. People in those areas will suffer because of the housing situation. This is the responsibility of the Government under the Commonwealth-State housing agreement.
What really has occurred in the housing area? This Government has cut Federal expenditure on housing from 3.9 per cent in 1 974-75 to less than one per cent this year. It has made available to the States a total of $285m this year but has offered them only $ 1 ,000 over the next five years. So that represents a further cut in government spending. Inflation will make further cuts into the real money being spent on housing. How will we house the people of our country with this increasing

890 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 198 1

Review of Australian Demographic Trends

growth in population? The Treasurer knows that Mr SPEAKER-I have ruled.

the situatiqn with regard to housing people, even by the private sector, has worsened because of this Government's resource development policy. This Government is allowing foreign companies in Australia to draw one-third of their finance for re source development from the local market. If there is further development of this Government's resource policy, semi-government auth ority loans of something--

Mr UREN-I do not want to dissent from your ruling. I am trying to put forward a case relevant to the whole question of future population. I was given 1 5 minutes in which to speak. During that time. I wish to explain how the population will grow to 1 9.5 million by the turn of the century. Until now, the latest projections-those in the Borrie report-were for a population of 1 7. 5 million. Now w e will have to find some form of

MI' SPEAKER-Order! I must interrupt the housing for an extra 2 million people.

honourable member for Reid and ask him to make his remarksrelevant to the paper.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will be in order if he predicates his remarks on

Mr UREN-Mr Speaker, they are directly rel that basis but not if he refers to the provision of

evant to the paper. We on this side, unlike the finance for housing today.

Government, believe that everything is connected with everything ,else. There is an interrelationship with urban affairs.

Mr UREN-There are two ways in which we can house those people. They can be housed by the public sector, an area in which, as I have said,

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman the Government has failed, or we have to find will make anything relevant. I indicate to him that money through the private sector. This Govern

this paper relates to population ,trends of the ment's policy is eroding the money available to

future. It does not relate to the provision of hous the housing sector due to its policies of resource

ing funds in the present.

development. I have given figures which indicate

Mr UREN-With due respect to you, Mr Speaker, I believe it does. The paper states that there will be a population of 1 9.5 million by the turn of the century. There are 1 4.6 million people now living in this country. There will be 1 6.8 million in--
Mr SPEAKERThe honourable gentleman is not dealing with the paper. I will have to ask him to cease his remarks unless he makes them relevant to the statement.
Mr UREN-Mr Speaker, if you read the paper you will see--
Mr SPEAKER-I have read the paper.

that semi-government authority loans are drain ing the money away by offering interest rates of between 1 3.4 per cent and 1 3.9 per cent. How can lending institutions make available funds for private housing if they are offering an interest rate of only 1 1 t per cent to depositors? Even the interest rate on Australian savings bonds was increased to 1 2t per cent the day before yesterday.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is now dealing exclusively with contemporary matters. He is out of order.
Mr UREN-Mr Speaker, with due respect to you-you know that I have been a member of parliament for a long time and that I do not hold

Mr UREN-Again I refer to population any contempt for the role of Speaker because this

growth. At present 1 4.6 million people live in this chamber has to operate in accordance with the

country. By the end of this decade that figure will rules-the facts are that because of the policies of

be 1 6.8 million. By the turn of the century it will this Government we will not be able to house

be 1 9 .5 million. It seems to me that in his paper those people. I am trying to show the chaos that

the Minister deals with the education of that could be created between now and the turn of the

population. He deals also with the effect on indus century if the policies are not changed. I believe

try. When one deals with the Australian popu we have to plan--

lation one has to take into account the inter related matters concerning the condition of people living in cities and regional areas also.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman mentioned that and it was in order but then he went on to deal with the provision of finance for housing in the contemporary sense. That is not relevant.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is in order to speak in those terms.
Mr UREN-I see chaos being created in our urban community. I believe that without some planning by the Government of this country the people who live in urban and regional areas, who constitute over 95 per cent of our popUlation, will experience a lower standard of living. It seems to

M r U R E N - W it h d u e r e s p e c t , M r me that that is the reason why this report is im

Speaker--

portant. I believe it should be studied in depth. It

Foreign Investment: Mineral Projects

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 8 9 1

is on the basis of the population of our country that we must plan economic and social reforms so that the people living in urban and regional com munities can have a decent standard of living. Be cause of a trend towards the development of unplanned centres, J can only see chaos occurring between now and the turn of the century.
Debate (on motion by Mr Howard) adjourned.

AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS STATISTICS
Mr HAWKE (Wills)I crave the indulgence of the House to have included in the record two statistics which are relevant to matters that arose earlier.
Mr SPEAKERDoes the honourable gentle man wish to incorporate some material in Hansard?
Mr HAWKE-Yes. Mr SPEAKER-He may do by leave of the House. Is leave granted? Mr Howard-May I look at the document? Mr HAWKE-The Treasurer knows that it is reliable. It comes from the Australian Bureau of Statistics, which he is in charge of. The Bureau would not produce anything unreliable, would it? Mr SPEAKER-Will the honourable gentle man identify to me the part of the document which he seeks to incorporate? Mr HAWKEYes. The document is a report prepared by the Australian Bureau of Statistics in November 1 978 and is entitled 'Average weekly earnings, September quarter of 1 978'. I wish to refer to two figures which are relevant. One is the annual change in average weekly earnings as at December 1 974. That figure is 28.2 per cent. As the figure for 1 975 was raised by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) , I also refer to the figure of 1 3 per cent for December 1975. Leave granted.
The document read as follows
AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS PER EMPLOYED MALE UNIT

Quarter

Annual
change (d)

1 974December
1975December

% + 28.2 + 13.0

(d) Percentage change over same quarter of previous year in the seasonally adjusted series.

FOREIGN INVESTMENT: MINERAL PROJECTS
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKERI have received a letter from the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The failure of the Fraser Government and the Foreign In vestment Review Board to protect the nationalinterest by not involving itself in the initial equity arrangements for mineral projects at the authority to prospect stage as evidenced by the present controversial decision by the Queensland Government when awarding the Winchester South coal lease to a consortium headed by British Petroleum Ltd.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places
Mr SPEAKERBefore I call the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) I indicate this is not said in any sense as a rebuke, because the matter as raised is in order-it would be of convenience to the House if proposals for the discussion of matters of public importance could be put in shorter terms. I make that statement to all members of the House who may be raising matters of public importance in the future.
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (3.38)-The Opposition has proposed this matter of public import ance because of the continuing alienation of national resources to foreign companies and to governments which own those companies, par ticularly in the climate of questionable mineral tendering processes such as we have witnessed in some States and, more recently, in the State of Queensland. Last week we saw the Bjelke Petersen Government award an important coal area in that State, which is worth about $2,OOOm in current prices, to a consortium headed by a foreign oil company which is 46 per cent owned by the British Government, without the Queensland Cabinet examining the other 32 tender proposals which had been placed before it, without the Queensland Cabinet knowing the de tail of the successful tender proposal and without the Queensland Cabinet making the details of the successful tender proposal public. If the tender was so good for Queensland and the National Party in Queensland believed that the State was being advantaged by the acceptance of the tender, why was the tender not published so that the people of Australia could see just how good it was? Of course, we have seen no publication of the tender. In fact, we have seen reported on the front pages of the Queensland newspapers very

892 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Foreign Investment: Mineral Projects

terse comments by the Queensland Premier at tacking that person in the Cabinet or within the Government who dared to leak the puny Cabinet submission which dealt only with the one tender document.
What we have witnessed is yet another corrupt mineral lease arrangement in Queensland, de cided not by the Queensland Cabinet but by the National Party organisation without resort to fair and open practice, fair and open tendering processes. As we indicated in our outline of the matter of public importance, the problem is that the Commonwealth is left right out of this pro cedure. Because the States have had the constitutional prerogative to issue mineral licences where they have seen fit, when we want to pursue a national policy of maximising Australian ownership-we have an interventionist foreign investment policy as a result of that-we find our selves in the position of the Federal Government and the Foreign Investment Review Board being left to ponder the arrangements after they have been decided by the States, in this case by the Queensland Government.
Whilst the BP consortium has 51 per cent Australian equity-that is well within the present guidelines-we have reached this very sorry state in the administration of our affairs that nobody cares about 1 00 per cent Australian equity, or any level of Australian equity in excess of 5 1 per cent. Whilst the Government has been dragged scream ing to the 5 1 per cent barrier and whilst it now on occasions, particularly in mineral leases, is trying to abide by the 5 1 per cent policy, the situation is virtually this: If a company comes along with a 1 00 per cent Australian equity proposal it is vir tually obliged to let the Government know who its foreign partner is. So instead of having a mini mum 5 1 per cent policy we have a 5 1 per cent pol icy per se. In the case of Queensland not so long ago we had the Queensland Premier bleating about takeovers of Queensland companies by companies from the south, yet apparently the Queensland Government does not mind surren dering large tracts of coal in Queensland to foreign companies. One wonders what the motiv ation is.
However, the most important factor in the awarding of this Winchester South lease area to this consortium headed by BP is that, from the knowledge we have, no up-front money was offered by the BP company or the other companies involved; and that includes Thiess and the Westfield company, which are part of the suc cessful consortium. Some 32 consortiums applied for this lease area, many of which were exclus ively Australian. Yet the offer by the successful

consortium does not have any up-front money; it has only a royalty off the top after production starts. Any Australian company could have offered a royalty after production starts. One would have thought a rich international company or a consortium of rich companies would have been able to offer an up-front amount of money, as is the case with competitive mineral tenders in Canada and other parts of Australia. But that is not the case in this situation. What we see in this is a normal State royalty and then what is called a super royalty which operates after start-up. When we looked at what the super royalty was we found that it was $ 1 a tonne, escalating to $4 a tonne by the year 2005. Taking into account just the inflationary portents in that period, a quick calcu lation reveals that the $4 a tonne will be worth SOc.
What was special about the BP tender? The former Minister for Mines and Energy in Queensland, Mr Camm, was escorted or hosted on a trip overseas by the BP corporation after he retired as Minister. The dogs were barking the fact that the BP, Thiess or Drayton and Westfield offer would be accepted despite the fact that other tenderers had spent up to half a million dol lars competing. In one celebrated case we saw a number of young men in Queensland resign from international companies to get an Australian con sortium together. They have been rejected and no one knows why. Yet we find that Mr Sullivan, the Minister who replaced Mr Camm, was not in the job for long enough. When the Queensland election came along he was replaced as Minister for Mines, Energy and Police. He held the post for five months. Quite obviously, one has to ask the question: Was it because he dug his toes in and indicated to the Premier that he would not go along with that shonky process of awarding the BP consortium rights over Winchester South before the formal tendering processes had been before the Cabinet? Mr Gibbs was then appointed Minister for Mines, Energy and Police.
It is alleged that the successful consortium has been invited to donate to the Bjelke-Petersen fund; that is, a fund which sets up investments in Queensland, the earnings of which maintain the party machinery of the National Party. If that is the case it is corrupt. If it is not the case the company involved in the consortium should say so. I invite BP, Thiess and Westfield-God knows how Westfield, a property developer, got involved in this-to indicate whether that money in fact was sent on to the Bjelke-Petersen fund. The other 99 companies and 32 consortia have been knocked back. Apparently some companies have offered to the South East Queensland Electricity

Foreign Investment: Mineral Projects

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 893

Board coal at cost in the future as part of their proposals. Apparently another tender proposal offered to build a power station without any charge to the public. We have had no explanation of why those proposals have been rejected. We have heard Sir Robert Sparkes, the President of the National Party in Queensland, saying that because someone dared to leak the scandal which is behind the issue a royal commission ought to be conducted into the leak. .
We find that the Queensland Treasury was not even involved in the process. It was only when it got an inkling of the fact that the matter was going to Cabinet that it muscled its way in. We are told in the media and elsewhere that no economic benefits of any kind over and above the normal royalties and taxes would have flowed to Queensland from the BP-Thiess-Westfield tender had the Treasury not tried to improve the tender. After that we saw a report in the Australian Financial Review of 24 March, a copy of which I have here, headed: 'Queensland Government backs down on leaks between royalties, cpr. The article states:
Despite the efforts of its Treasury, the Queensland Government yesterday abandoned its attempt to inflation-proof the super-royalties which will be paid by the BP Australia-led consortium which will mine the big Winchester South steam ing coal prospect.
Instead, State Cabinet has agreed to accept BP's original offer of a royalty rising in set steps or a charge related to the selling price of the Winchester coal on world markets.

be after the consortium has done some explo ration drilling and quantifies the reserve. That is when those companies will offer the mugs, if you like, of the Australian investing public-the companies regard them as mugs-shares at a huge premium. Instead of the Australian public getting in on the ground floor at the exploration or auth ority to prospect stage they will be given a chance to invest after BP, Thiess and Westfield have had a chance to quantify an area which they already know is coal bearing. Then and only then will Australians other than the Australian share holders involved in the consortium have a right to a shareholding. Even then it will be at a premium which suits the companies which are selling. What the consortium will end up with will be a carried interest in the project for next to nothing while the Australians pay the premium. Do honourable members think it is reasonable that BP or even Thiess or Westfield should reap those kinds of benefits? I do not believe it is reasonable.
Something else Mr Gibbs did was virtually to threaten unsuccessful applicants not to release the details of their tenders lest they be treated harshly in the future when next they submit a tender for consideration by the Queensland Government. Sir Robert Sparkes, the Tammany Hall crook who runs the National Party, came out and said that there ought to be a royal commission into the leak. How dare the public find out about this corrupt practice!

If the tender was complete, what was the point of the Queensland Cabinet or its Government or the Treasury as its agent trying to do a deal after the tender had closed? The whole purpose of the competitive tender is to determine, on the basis of the offers, which is the competitive tender and to make a choice, not to go back to try to sew up a deal to inflation-proof the miserable royalty which will end up being worth 50c a tonne in 20 years. This is a scandalous situation which the Federal Government should deplore. I expect that when the Treasurer (Mr Howard) responds to this matter he will deplore the situation and will do the decent thing.
Some wonder why Australians feel there is a need for a Federal resource rent tax. Of course there is a need for it. How could anyone hope to marshal the wealth of this nation for Australians while those brigands in Queensland who run the Queensland Government give away the nation's resources in a scandalous and squandering way? Mr Sullivan, the Minister, had the hide to say in Cabinet that the consortium would offer the Australian public an opportunity to take up shareholdings at the appropriate time. Everyone knows when the appropriate time will be; it will

Mr Howard-I raise a point of order. It is both unparliamentary and verging on being cowardly for the honourable member--
Mr KEATING-I withdraw the imputation. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) There is no point of order. Mr KEATING-I withdraw the imputation. I am interested to see the Treasurer defending Sir Robert Sparkes's activity here. Sir Robert Sparkes is saying that there should be a royal commission to determine who leaked the document. The document was leaked in the interest of truth and to expose the corrupt practices within the Queensland Government. We want to know what is happening and why. I think these questions should be answered. I think BP, as one of the suc cessful tenderers, should make public its arrange ments with the former Minister, Mr Camm. I think the company should reveal its tender documents and so should the consortium in general. It should tell us how and why it came to make ar rangements with Thiess in the first place. It should tell us particularly how it made arrangements with Westfield. It should tell us why a company which is half owned by the British Government

894 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Foreign Investment: Mineral Projects

should be subverting-if it is-the legal tendering processes of a government in Australia to secure a rich resource over which it would otherwise have had no prior claim.
In all this the Fraser Government fails to act; it is powerless. The foreign investment rules as they are administered do not get down to the matterof authority to prospect. What happens is that the Fraser Government faces under its foreign investment regulations a fait accompli situation when these consortia have made their equity arrange ments and have proven reserves beyond the auth ority to prospect stage. Then and only then does the Commonwealth involve itself. If the Commonwealth is interested in decent practices in terms of the awarding of rich coal bearing areas or mineral areas in the country which belong to the people of Australia it should be involved particularly in relation to investments at the authority to prospect stage and not wait until these resources have been hacked about, traded at all sorts of pre miums. Just before the companies start to mine they trundle up to the Foreign Investment Review Board and the Treasurer is then in the position of trying to make some kind of sense, to make a silk purse out of a sow's ear, after the thing has been ripped and raped by all the speculators who are caught up in it or who happen to know the people who run the Queensland Government. It is a scan dalous state of affairs. We have not seen anything as rough as this in a long time.
To think that the Queensland Government was deluged, as few governments are, with all these commercial offers for a very large lease of steam coal. Steam coal is one of the most sought after products in the world. It should not just be handed away. It is a public resource which should not be handed away to companies which happen to know the Queensland Premier, which kick into a National Party fund or which are mates with Sir Robert Sparkes. That is what is happening in this country. We want to know what the Fraser Government will do about it. I will be interested to hear the Treasurer condemn the awarding of this tender and let us know what he intends to do about the fact that 1 00 per cent Australian-owned consortia have been rejected in this auction in Queensland. Australians are disadvantaged to the advantage of foreigners--not just foreigners but companies which are substantially owned by a foreign government.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-- Treasurer) (3.53)-1 think the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) did himself less than jus tice today. I have heard a lot better from him on the subject of foreign investment in the past than we heard from him today. Predictably he spent

most of his speech making wild, unsubstantiated allegations against the Queensland Government. If the honourable member for Blaxland has any facts to support the allegations that he made- [ remind the House that he used works like 'corrup tion', 'brigands' and other words that are a very severe criticism of the Queensland Government let the House hear them. Let him substantiate the claims that he has made against the Queensland Government. Let him support the accusations of bad faith, the accusations of favouritism and the accusations of corruption that he has made. It was only the great tolerance of the House and you, Mr Deputy Speaker, that allowed him to spend most of his time talking about decisions that are essen tially quite outside the province of the Commonwealth Parliament.
The decision to award the authority to prospect to the BP-Westfield-Drayton consortium was a decision taken by the Queensland Government and one completely within the legal province of the Queensland Government. The honourable member for Blaxland and every other honourable member opposite knows as well as we on this side of the House know that the Commonwealth Government has no power whatever to stop any State government, be it the Queensland Government, the Wran Labor Government in New South Wales or indeed any other State government around Australia, from making a decision as to who is awarded an authority to prospect. r do not know the facts. I make it quite plain to the House that I am not in full possession of the facts. I do not know all the circumstances surrounding the awarding of the Winchester South authority to prospect by the Queensland Government. Therefore, I will not indulge in the sort of speculative rhetoric in which the honourable member for Blaxland allowed himself to indulge in trying to work out the motives of people in the decisions that were made.
I listened for quite a while to see whether there was any connection at all between the foreign investment responsibilities of the Federal Government and what has happened in respect of this coal project. It was only at the end of his speech that the honourable member for Blaxland finally said that what the Federal Government should really do is to apply its foreign equity guidelines at the authority to prospect stage and not at the ex ploration stage.
Mr Keating-Sure. Mr HOWARD-I am glad that the honourable member for Blaxland acknowledges that because it would appear on the surface-without in any way pre-empting the consideration that the

Foreign Investment: Mineral Projects

25 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 895

Foreign Investment Review Board has to give to around Australia of State governments having

this project-and on the published information granted authority to prospect in the teeth of fierce

that the BP consortium meets the foreign equity competition from a significant number of ten

guidelines because it is at least 50 per cent Aus derers. The honourable member for Blaxland, as I

tralian owned. On the logic of the honourable understand his motion, would invite us to change

member for Blaxland, if we applied foreign equity the foreign investment policy so that questions as

rules further down the line, back to the authority to whether the equity rules are met are asked at

to prospect stage, this project, on the evidence so the time an authority to prospect is granted. I f

far available as far as foreign equity is concerned, that is the policy of the honourable member, and

would meet that guideline. I hasten, of course, to he nods assent, he has forgotten what happened a

point out that thqt in no way, of course, pre-empts few years ago when a Labor government was in

consideration on other grounds which must prop office. He has forgotten the effect of that kind of

erly be given by the Foreign Investment Review approach upon exploration in Australia.

Board. On the score of equity levels this consor tium has at least 50 per cent Australian equity.

That policy might work-although I regard it as being undesirable on general foreign invest

Ml' DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) ment grounds and make that plain on behalf of

Order! The honourable member for Blaxland had the Government-with less difficulty in certain

the opportunity to address the House. He ad areas, but he knows very well that in regard to oil

dressed the House and was heard in silence. It is exploration it would cause considerable difficulty,

now his turn to remain silent.

as it did between 1 972 and 1 975. One runs the risk

Mr HOWARD-The honourable member for that such a policy, if applied, would create those

Blaxland does not like being reminded of the prin kinds of difficulties again. Of course, there can be

ciples of a foreigninvestment policy which he on a legitimate debate about the type of foreign invest

number of occasions in the past has said enjoys a ment that a country can have. This Government

certain degree of bipartisan support in this House. is not totally, blind to legitimate proposals in re

That has certainly been the position not only of gard to its foreign investment policy. It does not

himself but also of the Leader of the Opposition claim that in every respect that policy is perfect

(Mr Hayden) who, when addressing a seminar in but, by and large, over the last five years it has

Western Australia about 18 months ago on brought a degree of consistency, predictability

foreign investment, said that there was a great and fairness to the development of this country's

deal of bipartisan support. Let us have a bit of resources. We have been able to achieve that

consistency on this issue. Let us remember that not only does this consortium have 50 per cent

often difficult balance between the need to attract large amounts of foreign investment for the

Australian equity but so also indeed did the development of our resources and the need to

consortium that was granted the authority to ensure that Australians will receive a fair share of

prospect for the Curragh deposit in Queensland the action.

some months ago which also was the subject of criticism from the Opposition. That consortium also had 50 per cent Australian equity.

It is a strange irony that we should be debating the merits of a coal project in Queensland when, in respect of coal projects in Queensland, this

As I said earlier, it is not my intention in this de Government has demonstrated more firmly then

bate, nor is it my responsibility, to pass a judgment it has on any other issue its absolute determi

on the decision of the Queensland Government to nation to keep to the foreign equity guidelines and

grant this authority to the BP-Drayton-Westfield to ensure that Australians can participate fully in

consortium. I do not know all the circumstances our resource development. I remind honourable

of that matter. I expressly make it plain that I am members of the Government's insistence in re

not competent to pass a judgement on that de spect of both the Blair Athol and Oaky Creek coal

cision. I am competent to make it very clear to the projects, two of the largest that this country has

House that that was a decision made by the seen, against the criticism, I acknowledge, of the

Queensland Government in full exercise of its Queensland Government-criticism that the

authority in those matters. The Queensland Government will continue to reject as not soundly

Government had whatever decision

a 1 00 could

bpeertakceenntinri'gthhet

to take circum

,

based-that Australians will get a fair share of the action. But let us not lose our sense of perspective.

stances so far as the granting of an authority to Because we have now created an environment

prospect was concerned. In that way its powers which is more conducive to domestic and overseas

and the exercise of its powers were no different investment, because we have created a climate in

from the exercise of powers of any other State which there is a good balance between the two

government. Indeed, numerous examples exist objectives that I have mentioned there is no

896 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Foreign Investment: Mineral Projects

occasion to begin altering, willy-nilly, our foreign investment policy and to strive towards the attain ment of objectives which might meet some theor etical goal but which, in reality, would produce a great deal of consternation and disturbance about our foreign investment policy. The existing approach, which holds that the equity guidelines must be met at the production stage rather than at the exploration stage, represent an appropriate balance. It represents, if I may put it, a trade-off between Australian participants paying a higher premium for later entry and our taking adv<,.ntage of the greater willIngness at the exploration stage of overseas companies to invest. All these issues involve matters of judgment and balance. In respect of our foreign i nvestment policy, the goal of achieving the overall balance of which I have spoken is best attained by requiring that the 50 per cent guideline be met not at the exploration stage but rather when production begins.
We are referring here, ofcourse, to the develop ment of Australia's coal reserves, one of our most valuable resources. I remind the House that since 1 976, under the foreign investment policy of this Government, 1 6 new coal development projects have been examined. Of these, 1 2 have met the 50 per cent equity guideline. Two are required to meet the guideline when production commences. Two have not been approved but are likely to be resubmitted with due regard to the 50 per cent rule. I ask honourable members: Does that rep resent a selling-out of this country's resources, an abnegation of the Government's responsibility in regard to foreign investment? Does it represent anything other than an entirely sensible and con sistent approach to resource development, recog nising that we must attract overseas capital to help develop Australia's resources?
The Government will yield to nobody in ensur ing that Australians get a fair opportunity to par ticipate in the development of Australia's natural resources. That is written into our foreign investment policy and will be applied without excep tion. But in defending that approach we will not blind ourselves to what foreign investment has done for this country. Unlike the Labor Party, we do not shrink from acknowledging the contribution of foreigners to Australia's development. In the same way as they helped to build a local car manufacturing industry when no one else was interested in doing so, they have participated, and will be allowed to participate, in our resource development. It is the height of absurdity and unrealism to ignore the contribution that overseas companies have made to the development of this country and of its resources. One must have a mature, sensible and practical approach to the

subject, a mixture which both takes account of the benefits of foreign investment and ensures that Australians have an opportunity to participate on fair terms. That has been the thrust of this Government's policy over the last four years and will be its thrust in the future. On those grounds, I believe that the production stage is the appropri ate stage at which the guidelines should operate. That maximises in the most practical and efficient way the benefits of foreign investment, while leav ing it open for Australians to participate.
Therefore, the Government rejects the notion that the guidelines ought to be altered in the manner argued for by the honourable member for Blaxland, who spent most of his time not really talking about our foreign investment policy but about a decision that is not within the province of this Government-or a Labor government if it were in office-to make. The decision was made by the Queensland government. I do not know all of the circumstances and the honourable member for Blaxland has failed completely to substantiate any case for an alteration in the foreign investment policy of the Government, which has worked to such great benefit for the Australian nation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiJlar) Order! The Minister's time has expired.
Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith) (4.8)-Once again, the Government has sent in its poor little Treasurer to defend the National Party in Queensland. John Howard, the honourable Treasurer, has fought more battles in this Parliament defending the National Party than have the members of that party themselves. I invite honourable members to look around the chamber. The National Party of Queensland is under attack, yet we have only two members of the National Country Party present today. I must congratulate the Treasurer upon being able to waffle on for 1 5 minutes about nothing. He is a very capable person but I must say that although I have always held him in very high esteem, after today I will not be able to do so. How he could ever defend the Liberal-National Party Government ofQueensland in this House I do not know.
The Treasurer said that we must have these foreign companies in Australia. I agree, but what about the 1 00 per cent Australian-owned companies that were knocked back in Queensland? The Treasurer did not defend them. He did not defend his old Aussie mates. After all, the Foreign Investment Review Board stipulates only 51 per cent Australian participation as a guideline. Those foreign companies could have

Foreign Investment: Mineral Projects

25 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 897

been knocked back, and should have been. I in tend to prove conclusively that if the Government wanted the razor gang to save a little more money it should have sent it to Queensland to investigate what was going on in that State. Let us really look at the situation. There was a $ 1 ,600m coal con tract let in Queensland, one of the most important contracts ever undertaken in Australia. Yet, is it not gross incompetence on the part of the TQrueeaesnusrlyanudndGerotavkerenamneencto.nnoomt iecveevnalutoathioanv?e the
Mr Howard-You mean the State Treasury. Mr HUMPHREYS-I am sorry, the Queens land Government. Why does not. the Treasurer also insist on an economic evaluation being under taken so that we can look after the taxpayers of Australia rather than the wealthy people of Queensland and the National Party? The Treasurer knows very well that they pay plenty of money into the coffers of the National Party and the Bjelke-Petersen Foundation, but this Government cannot get its hands on a cent of it. It would like to; it has been trying for ages but it cannot. How did the headlines in the newspapers begin? Mr Ian Cameron-You don't believe the newspapers? Mr HUMPHREYS-The honourable member has been here only for a while; perhaps he will learn a Uttle about the Parliament. Mr John Brown-If he listened, he might learn something. Mr HUMPHREYS-It does not matter; he does not want to learn. He is out in the country all the time. They have their heads in the emu holes. I point out to the Treasurer that it must have been a Liberal Minister in Queensland who started the headlines in the Queensland newspapers. Surely it would not have been a National Party Minister. Who is the Minister hiding? Who has the intesti nal fortitude to tell the Queensland Opposition what is going on? I am glad to see that at least we have some honest Liberals in the Queensland Parliament. They know, and Joh knows, what the situation is. We see the headline 'Joh angry on coal . . . '. Why is he angry if it is such a great deal? The article states:
The Premier, Mr Bjelke-Petersen, yesterday vowed that any Minister found to have leaked the controversial Winchester South coal tender would have no future in the Cabinet.
He is threatening his Ministers once again. Sir Robert Sparkes and Mr D'Arcy are making different claims, but we all know what is going on in Queensland. The manner in which the
Queensland Government is manipulating mining
resources and development in Queensland should

be of grave concern to Australians, especially members of this House. The matters to which I refer are of such urgency and national importance that they demand that the Federal Government takes steps to ensure the national iilterests are protected. I appeal in particular to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and to the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick) -since the Treasurer is in the chamber I will appeal to him also-to instigate an investigation into all decisions taken by the Queensland Government with respect to resource and mining development in Queensland over the past five years. That is very necessary. If this Government wants to put its razor gang to work to get some more money for the Treasury it should undertake such an investigation because Joh is getting away with murder. The Government knows it, and all Australians know it. The Australian Government and the Australian people are entitled to a better deal and to more money. The money should not go overseas or into the pockets of the wealthy people of Queensland.
The five decisions the Government should in vestigate are: The siting of the Tarong power sta tion, the granting of authorities to prospect to former Ministers of the Crown, the Queensland Government's refusal to release details of the Winchester South tenders, thereby concealing the fact that tenders other than the successful tender offered better deals for Queensland, and the Queensland Government's failure to reveal the full facts relating to the expenses of the former Minister for Mines and Energy, Mr Ron Camm, on his overseas tour organised by the British Pet roleum company. It is an alarmingsituation about which we all should be concerned. It is nothing other than a national scandal and a cover-up. I in tend to prove that, and I intend to prove to the Treasurer that we can get more money if we take a little notice and interest. I know the Treasurer has explained that it is very hard to handle Joh, and he must be very worried now that he has one of Joh's closest relatives as a member of his Government. She will tell all the secrets. He is finished now, and I know that all Government members are running scared.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar) Order! I draw the honourable member's attention to the fact that he is not free to reflect on any member of the Parliament. He may proceed, bear ing that in mind.
Mr HUMPHREYS-I did not think I reflected on anyone.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair sees it as a reflection.

898 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Foreign Investment: Mineral Projects

M r HUMPHREYS-I a m saying how the Treasurer is running scared. I think the Prime Minister is, too. I refer to the granting of the lease to the British Petrokum-Theiss-Westfield group. I believe I speak on behalf of all Australians when I say that Australians have a priority interest in knowing how the Queensland Cabinet arrived at the decision to allocate a prospecting authority over a $ 1 ,600m coal field. The lack of answers to a number of questions strikes at the very heart of the concept of honesty in government. For in stance, why should British Petroleum have thought it necessary to host the former Minister for Mines, Mr Ron Camm, on a trip overseas before he retired last year? British Petroleum domi nates the successful Winchester South consor tium. The Australian public should be told if that company knew at the time it organised Mr Camm's trip that tenders were being invited for the right to prospect and mine coal reserves worth $ I,600m. We might all like to know why Mr Camm and Sir Leslie Thiess, while in London, met with British Petroleum officials. That is another interesting question. I wonder what happened at that meeting. I wonder why the British Petroleum company and Thiess were told that if they included Westfield in the deal, they would be sure of the contract.
There are other inferences to be drawn from the fact that a man known to many people, and known well to the National Party, was at the head of this deal. I do not like naming people in the Parliament, but the matter has been reported and I think it is necessary that it all be cleared up in this House. The man is known to be Sir Edward Lyons. Sir Edward Lyons knows very well that he is being accused of these things. If the truth has to be known and the deals have to be put on the table then Sir Robert Sparkes, who wants every one's name cleared, should clear the name of Sir Edward Lyons, too. His name is mentioned in dispatches, along with all these other accusations. They cannot all be wrong; they are not all made up by the Labor Party. They are made up by the Liberal Party, and honourable members opposite well know that.
The coalition Government in Queensland is very shaky at the moment, and it will be shakier from here on in because of the leaks. If honour able members opposite condone these actions, I can only feel sorry for them. They can only be condemned for doing so. As the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) has said, Mr Camm's successor, Mr Sullivan, did not last long in the job. Why was his tenure cut short? Was it because he declined to use the rubber stamp again? He knew all about the rubber stamp

Government of Queensland. A report in the Bris bane Courier-Mail of Wednesday, 1 1 March states:
Mr Bjelke-Petersen said he reviewed the tenders last week, and the winning tender was 'so far ahead of the others there can be no argument about it.'
What a lot of nonsense that is. There can be no doubt about it because he had rubber-stamped it. He had gone to Mr Gibbs, and said that he would give him the job if he would rubber-stamp the issue. Everyone knows that that is what happened, and that is why Mr Sullivan, another honest Minister, got the chopper. Plenty of honest people get the chopper in the Queensland Parliament. Why was the consortium's bid pushed so hastily and with such great secrecy before a Cabinet which had no prior knowledge of the merits of this or other tenders? My time has run out. However, many more accusations have been made. Unfortunately I will not have time to put them before this Parliament. I hope that the Treasurer will take some action in regard to this matter and that he puts the razor gang to work in Queensland very quickly, especially so far as Bjelke-Petersen is concerned.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (4. 1 9)-It must be a grave disappointment to this House to have before it a subject which is so lengthy in its presentation but which is spoken to so little from the floor of the House. One wonders why the Labor Opposition has raised the matter. I can give only one reason-that the Labor Opposition in Queensland is so lacking-it is non-existent-that it has to forward the charge to Canberra for the cream puffs of this Opposition to take it up. I have no hesitation in defending the National Party of Queensland for its role in the coalition Government. It must be remembered that that coalition, of which the Liberal Party is the other partner, has developed the State of Queensland. It is doing that partly on foreign capital and under the guidelines of the Federal Parliament. I ask the h o n o u r a b l e m e m be r f o r G r i ffi t h ( M r Humphreys) whom he supports-the old guard at Breakfast Creek, the new guard at Charlotte Street or just the rearguard of the Opposition in Queensland?
Mr Jull-It is probably the mudguard. Mr BRAITHWAITE-As the honourable member for Bowman said, it is probably the mud guard, and that is fairly rusty too. Let me deal with some of the unsubstantiated charges that are being made in connection with the Bjelke Petersen Foundation. I imagine that exactly the same criteria apply to that as applied to the John Curtin House when it was established a decade or so ago. I deny that there has been any corruption.

Foreign Investment: Mineral Projects

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 899

The Foundation is sponsored not by the It is interesting that the last report of the FIRB

Queensland Parliament but by a political party. indicates that between 1 974 and 1975 the degree

Accusations of corruption are beyond credibility. of foreign ownership of the coal resources or

J am also appalled that the opportunity has been taken to try to use parliamentary privilege in this place to cast a slur on the character of some very fine Queenslanders. Sir Edward Lyons, who was mentioned by the honourable member for Griffith, is a fine man and I believe that he had no part in the assessment of tenders or the letting of the contract for the Winchester South coal de

Australia was 62. 1 per cent and foreign control was 64. 1 per cent. In 1979 the figures had-dropped to 40. 3 per cent for Australian ownership and 43. 5 per cent for foreign control. The report also indi cates that for new black coal projects the pro jected production is 1 27.7 million tonnes per annum. It is contemplated that 35.1 per cent will be foreign owned. So the percentage is decreasing.

posits; nor did Mr Camm. Mr Camm was a A rather spurious argument was advanced by

Queensland public servant at the time. ] under the member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) when he

stand that he had no part in it whatsoever. The said that resources owned at the moment by

claims that he had anything to do with the accept foreign interests could be sold at a substantial pre

ance of this tender are unsubstantiated. I hope mium later. This Government would not want to

that the public of Australia sees this as a very control the transfer of shares to the extent that

weak and futile attempt by the Federal Oppo was contemplated by the honourable member for

sition in Canberra to take up the cudgels for a Blaxland. One company floated in Australia, the

very weak Opposition in Queensland. r think that Southern Pacific and Central Pacific Mincrals

had to be said.

Co., was 1 00 per cent Australian owned. I would

As I said, the argument has been narrated as a long one, but the question must be: So what? This is a constitutional matter. Queensland has certain constitutional rights. We know that the Australian Labor Party, as a Federal party, would

like to know what degree of Australian ownersh ip there would now be and how loyal the original Australian shareholders have been when the price has fluctuated overseas. How can we control such things?

want to deny resources to the States and take The Winchester South field, which is in the

them for itself. As far as I can see, this matter of Dawson electorate, is one of a number of steam

public importance is not being raised so we can ing coal developments. On the admission of the

debate the subject in question but it is being used Labor Party, I understand that the project must

as a diversionary tactic to knock the multina be about 75 per cent Australian owned, particu

tionals or the transnationals and to promote the larly as BP Australia is in Australian hands. There

Opposition's argument in favour of some form of were 32 applicants for the Winchester South

resource tax. We know that the Opposition wants lease. I understand that the matter was taken to

to expand the coal levies it implemented between Queensland Cabinet without details being given

1 972 and 1 975. It wants to impose a resource rent to the Ministers beforehand, as is normal over a -

tax. It wants to put further controls on industry weekend because of security. I understand also

from Canberra, whether it be through the Foreign that Cabinet appraised the matter and mad its

Investment Review Board or not. It wants to di decision in the normal way. A fat lot oE good that

rect and not guide the policies of resource devel security precaution was. The Deputy Leader of

opment in Australia. I think we. have to be aware the Opposition in Queensland was able to bring

of the actual intention of the Opposition in bring leaked documents into the Parliament. But what a

ing this matter up.

leak it was. It was just a dap squib. . The - ..

In bringing this matter forward the Opposition has shown very little enthusiasm and has provided little information to back its claims. For instance, has the Opposition talked about applying Aus

,

Queensland Opposition was so unsuccessful that.

the Opposition's mouthpieces heie;' tite powder-

puffs of cudgels.

the

Parliament,

have

had

to.

take

up;the,

tralian ownership guidelines to prospecting? I do It is .important to recognise thafcqa:l resOUrces .

not think that it has been mentioned in more than are State-owned assets. The controI the Commoll- .

two or three words. Certainly the honourable wealth has over them through exportJicences and .

member for Griffith said nothing about it at alL . the Foreign Investment Review Board is

But it favours such guidelines at the developmen sufficient. The Winchester South project is likely

tal stage. Why do we not let the foreign capital be to return to Queensland more than the other proj

used in prospecting provided-this is still the pro ects have in the past. I think that is only to be

viso with the Winchester South field-that at the expected when the history of coal mining develop

time when the developmental lease is negotiated ment in Queensland is traced. In the . past there

we do have Australian capital?

has been a high degree of foreign ownership when

900 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

developments have commenced, but foreign own working week is inevitable, despite the sabre rat

ership is decreasing tremendously. On the face of tling against it by the Prime Minister (Mr Mal

it, why can we not let the multinationals under colm Fraser) . As Voltaire said-I am sure a man

take development in a very high risk area, which is of your erudition, Mr Deputy Speaker, would

what resource development has been in the past? know this quote-'no army can withstand an idea

Now the Government of Queensland has proved, whose time has come. ' The time has come for this

as it did under the direction of the former Minister Government to be much more aggressive in its

for Mines, Mr Camm, that it can progressively promotion of tourism. Were the Government

pick up more in royalties and State taxes as devel more prescient than stubborn, it would concede

opment goes along. It can benefit not only the merits and the inevitability of the 35-hour

through government revenue but also through week and swing into a progressive strategy to

Australian participation. Our guidelines are to the maximise the resultant leisure boom that will

effect that wherever possible Australian develop come out of shorter working hours. This is just not

ment should be in the hands of Astralians if they happening.

can afford to put up the money. But if a develop ment is to lapse for want of Australian funds, it is then that we should seek foreign ownership. We are talking in terms of only 25 per cent Australian ownership in this case. I believe there is nothing ir regular. I believe there was tremendous lobbying and tremendous pressure from the 32 other appli cants before the decision was made. I agree with the security arrangements that were implemented, but which were not successful in view of the leak. This Parliament-the Opposition and the Government-would seek maxi mum Australian participation, as it has, and that it would want to get maximum Australian revenue, as it has in this <:ase. I agree wholeheartedly with the Treasurer in this regard.

The tourist industry needs a great deal of Fed eral Government assistance. Many competing interests have facets of the tourist industry within their ambit; for instance, caravan manufacturers vying with motel proprietors, airlines in competition with coach companies right up to States versing States, all in competition for the leisure dollar. So a scheme to promote tourism generally would be difficult for private industry to under take. The only real alternative, once we have de cided just how important the tourit industry would be, is government funding. This is a prime example of public sector spending directly stimulating demand in the private sector. I would like to make this reservation in proposing a fed eral department to oversee tourism and leisure. I

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) would not like to be seen to be ignoring the exist

Order! The honourable member's time has ing Australian Tourist Commission or the fine

expired. The discussion is concluded.

work it does. I am merely stating that the fine

AUSTRALIAN TOURIST COMMISSION AMENDMENT BILL 1981

work that it does merits its being upgraded to de partmental status.

Second Reading Debate resumed from 24 March, on motion by Mr Hodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

I mentioned in my earlier remarks that the Government's net contribution to tourism in the last Budget was $ 1 0m. This parsimony on the part of the Federal Government belies its much heralded support for the tourist industry. I would

M r J O H N B R O W N ( P a r r a m a t t a ) like to quote the Chairman of the Australian

(4.29)-Last night, the effiuxion of time cut me Tourist Commission on the problems that he is

off in my prime. I was proposing a case for the having with staff ceilings which have been drasti

Australian Tourist Commission to be upgraded to cally reduced in the last few years. He said that

the status of a full department. I mentioned some staff ceilings 'caused extreme difficulty in ad

of the reasons why that should happen and I equately servicing the industry overseas'. The

spoke briefly about the financial significance of Chairman went on that this was in spite of the

the tourism industry, its labour intensive nature dedication of the staff who were 'very keen and

and my view of the Government's lack of a real highly enthusiastic' and worked long hours, defer

understanding of the importance of tourism to ring leave and other private commitments in

Australia. I would go further and suggest that the order to achieve the goals they had been set.

chance to create jobs in the leisure industry by There is no need for slave labour to capitalise on

sensible forward planning by government would the tourist boom. A separate department is the

be a prime justification for bringing back the De logical answer. The Commission, I might say, is partment of Tourism and Recreation. Tourism very optimistic about the future growth prospects

will grow in response to increased leisure time, for inbound tourism. Although it does not expect

annual leave and rising real incomes. The 35-hour the high growth of 1 978-79 to continue into the

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 901

1 980s it does predict a rate of about 1 3 per cent per annum-a very considerable figure.
r would suggest that under the auspices of a ministry we could get down to the very serious business of government involvement in the tourist industry. Of course, whenever the term 'government involvement' crops up we hear shrieks of 'socialism' from some quarters. Yet, as r argued previously, through government involvement the industry can function to its maximum capacity and efficiency being, as it is, fragmented and yet, so economically significant. J do not know why we fear this proven strategy. It has been proved over seas that if governments become involved in the tourist industry that involvement usually leads to prosperity. In the last 1 2 months I was a member of a government delegation to Mexico. The Mexican Government could not, by any stretch of the.imagination, be described as socialist. I can tell you, Mr Deputy Speaker, of the beautiful hotel at which we stayed in Mexico Citythe best hotel in a city of 1 4 million people. That hotel-the Chapapultic Hotel-is owned and serviced by the Mexican Government. The New South Wales Government is presently involved in the building of the Sydney Regent in the Rocks area of Sydney. It will be the finest tourist hotel in Sydney and will provide immediately 300 full time jobs. 1 think that is fairly representative of what can happen if the Government is speculative, entrepreneurial or dynamic in promoting a tourist industry in Australia.
It is ironic that the great northern crusader against the dreaded socialists, the husband of Senator Flo Bjelke-Petersen, saw fit to hand over part of Queensland freehold to Japanese interests, namely, Iwasaki, but steadfastly refuses the same privilege to Australian Aborigines. They have to be content with a lease. Mr Deputy Speaker, whilst you might consider that what I am saying is fairly tenuously involved in this tourist argument, allow me to say this to you: 'I think the Iwasaki project could have gone along with a 50 per cent government involvement, with the Australian people still holding the freehold'. I think that is exactly the way in which the Government should be operating. Of course, the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) spoke a while ago about this Government's allowing BP to have the Winchester lease in Queensland although this or ganisation is 46 per cent owned by the British Government. Yet, the Government refuses to involve itself in any sort of promotion of that type for fear of being branded socialist. I find that situation to be rather invidious.
I would like to explain further how I think the Government should have involved itself in the

financial sense. I was recently on the Gold Coast. I note that the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) at the table is from Queensland. ] was toJd by the Gold Coast City Council about the dreadful trouble it is havirig in providing proper facilities in that." area. It is very short of money which is needed to keep up proper water and sewerage services. It appears that each luxury unit in all the complexes which are presently being built right along the coast, particularly at Surfers Paradise, provides only $ 140 a year in local rates. That seems to me to be a very poor state of affairs. The people who own and live in these units have access to the beautiful beaches on the Gold Coast for only $ 1 40 a year. I think there would be a very good case for this Government to slap a luxury tax on those sorts of developments to ensure that money is provided so that local government can properly service those areas. After all, they are our future.
The only industry in Australia which appears to have some prospects in the labour intensive areas is the tourist industry. Unless governments of all sorts have the money to invest in the industry our hopes for the tourist industry will not be realised. The same thing that is happening on the Gold Coast is happening in Sydney. Areas such as Bondi and Coogee are known world wide as the great attractions in Sydney. The only money that local governments get to keep those beaches looking reasonably decent is from the local residents. It seems to me that governments should make subsidies available so that these facilities can be made the sorts of attractions they should be. Bondi is pretty chatty by anybody's estimation. I see the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) is shaking his head, but it is true. If the Federal Government were prepared to subsidise those beachside areas with some funds perhaps they could be made the Acapulco of Australia and perhaps attract more tourists than they do.
We have golden opportunities to make and take from the exciting leisure industry. The Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Hodgman) said that we can expect a record one million tourists to Australia this year providing a $ l ,OOOm boost to the economy. We cannot talk up a boom. It we did it might be dangerous to the economy. We must underpin the tourist industry with sound and sensible infrastructures. We on this side of the House urge the Government to stop pussy-footing around and to come to grips with the true situation. We have great potential as a nation which is attractive to its own citizens to explore and equally attractive and interesting to foreign visitors. We must do all in our power as a

902 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

government to foster the industry to the advantage of the Australian population, not forgetting

which, frankly, he did not have the facts. and figures. Perhaps I should spend the first part of my

the sensitive nature of our environment. The two contribution to this debate today in stating exactly

are capable of existing harmoniously with for what the situation is.

ward planning of the right kind.

More has happened in tourism in this country

I will leave it to later speakers in the debate to in the last five years than happened in the pre

refer to the great attractions of Australia. I know vious 25 years. Australia has increased its share of

that the honourable member for Robertson (Mr international visitors. I believe that last night the

Cohen) is anxious to tell us of the glories of the honourable member quoted the figure of 0.03 per

cosmopolitan city of Sydney. He will want to say cent. That figure has risen to 0.07 per cent, which

something about its beautiful harbour and its represents not an insignificant number. He did

magnificent Opera House which is attracting admit this afternoon, however, that this year for

something like 90 per cent of all international visi the first time we are looking at the prospect of

tors. We will be told about the Great Barrier Reef having one million international visitors to this

in Queensland, the uniquely Australian town of country. That is indeed significant. We are fast

Alice Springs, the Red Centre, the Alps and the heading to the time when Australian tourist

whole range of beautiful natural attractios accounts will be in the black. Previously we have

which we have in Australia that are not properly had an outflow of dollars. Australians going over

exploited.

seas spent more than tourists coming in. It is sig

In urging the Government to take up our suggestions I leave honourable members with this thought in mind. I refer to a quotation from The Complete Life by John Erskine-a book which was written a long time ago. It states:
The body travels more easily than the mind, and until we have limbered up our imagination, we continue to think as

nificant that tourism receipt figures are rising. On present estimates, this year we can look forward to receiving $900m from international tourists. That is incredible. The latest figures which have come to hand would indicate that the average overseas visitor last year spent something in the vicinity of $ 1 ,0 1 3. That is a significant figure.

though we had stayed at home. We have not really budged a

This year tourism will be worth in excess of

step until we have taken up residence in someone else's point of view.

$386 billion world wide. It is the second biggest industry after the oil industry, and by the middle of

I put it to the House that our view is worthy of the this decade the tourist industry will be as big as

Government's mental residence. I hope that it the oil industry. Thank goodness that Australia is

takes up our suggestion that by being more ag now starting to take its share of that international

gressive, more entrepreneurial and more dynamic tourist market. We have been able to do this for a

in the promotion of the tourist industry, by means number of reasons. It is true that the amount of

of some government involvement in terms of rev money spent overseas by the Australian Tourist

enue, this industry which has enormous potential Commission has increased substantially. That has

could prosper in Australia so that the resources certainly helped. The lowering or partial lowering

boom, which inevitably we are going to have, will of international air fares has also helped in

lead to shorter working hours and a greater possi increasing the number of visitors coming here. But

bility that the Australian population will enjoy all the real fact of the matter is that Australia now

the wonders of Australia. In doing so we would has become more competitive in international

provide employment for other people because this tourist terms. The fact that we have been able to

is the one industry in Australia which is capable of keep our inflation rate lower than that of most of

promotion and which is entirely capable of pro our competing countries has been significant. For

viding employment.

example, the walk in off the street price at an

I Mr JULL (Bowman) (4.40)-1 think one of the features of the great debate on tourism in the last Parliament was the fact that both sides of the House took a bipartisan approach to the subject. The honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) played a very real part in helping in the development of tourism for Australia. I was a little disappointed in some of the speeches,

Australian hotel is now appreciably lower than the prices which are chargedin places such as Sin gapore or Bangkok. It is infinitely cheaper than the United Kingdom price and infinitely cheaper than prices in most of the countries of Europe and it is on a par with prices being charged in the United States. We can compete. Australia is a very desirable destination.

especially in the speech of the honourable Certainly the Australian Tourist Commission

member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) last has a huge job to undertake. I think it does that

night. He seemed to forget that bipartisan ap job manfully and well with the resources that it

proach and was terribly critical of some areas on has. I would not disagree that there is room to

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 903

move in expanding the budget of the Australian Tourist Commission to help it in its promotion. At the moment it is limited by the number of over seas officers and the number of staff that it has. Those things being taken into account, the Commission is doing a magnificent job. As the honour able member for Parramatta pointed out, we must continue to support and develop this industry because it is this industry more than any other which provides job opportunities, especially for semi skilled and unskilled labour. As I have said in this House, and I think it is worth repeating, the Bureau of Industry Economics has proved that for every extra 25,000 international visitors coming to this country another 1 ,400 jobs are created. That is a most significant figure. The evidence is already there; it is already working.
A very interesting study is being undertaken in Queensland at the moment. Last year, in terms of job growth, Queensland outpaced all other States. In" 'ecess of 30,000 new jobs were created. It would appear that the tremendous boom in Queensland tourism has brought about an absorp tion of so many of those unemployed about whom we are all concerned. This can be directly attributed to the tourist and other allied industries and 1 think we must continue to promote such development. Another interesting thing is that domestic tourism has become more competitive in recent years. Having taken their first trip overseas, Australians find on their return that it is now cheaper to holiday at home than it is to take an overseas trip. We are certainly competitive in that regard. It is cheaper now to take a holiday on a Great Barrier Reef island than it is to go to, say, Fiji. It is certainly much cheaper to do an Australian tour than it is to go to some of the Asian destinations. When we consider that last year we experienced occupancy rates in some of our hotels along the Queensland coast as high as 9 1 per cent, that speaks for itself. The boom is on at the Gold Coast. It is certainly on at the Sunshine Coast around Noosa and at Cairns. Frankly, it is mag nificent. However, there are things that need to be done, and there are things which we must move on very quickly if we are to take full advantage of that international tourism boom.
I think one of the most significant things that the Government has introduced is the de preciation allowance for new hotel construction. Right now around Australia no fewer than 27 new hotels are under construction. It is estimated that this year in Queensland alone $600 billion will be invested in the tourist industry. That is a significant figure. A few years ago the industry was in a state of depression and tourist operators were going broke. It is almost unimaginable to think

that with just that little bit of Government help we have now reached the stage at which $600m is about to be invested in Queensland.
I should like to turn to a couple of the aspects of the amendments to the Australian Tourist Commission Act which we are debating today. These amendments give the Australian Capital Terri tory the opportunity to have a full voice in terms of the decisions of the Australian Tourist Commission. That is important. [ am certainly not a Canberra-basher. Canberra is a very significant tourist destination. It has tremendous growth potential, especially for international tourists. The figures which were released in recent days are interesting. They show that the second biggest tourist attraction in Australia after the Sydney Opera House is the Australian War Memorial. Tourist operators in Canberra can give us significant figures as to the increase in the number of international tourists going through Canberra, especially in the inclusive tour charter coach market. These tourists are staying in Canberra in excess of one day and the amount of money that they are spending in this city is significant. It would be very interesting indeed to do an analysis of just which is Canberra's biggest industry after the Public Service. From my knowledge, and from speaking with the tourist operators, it would seem that tourism is Canberra's second biggest industry. For that reason, the Australian Tourist Commission should have representation from the Australian Capital Territory. It should also have full representation from the Northern Territory.
Mr John Brown-A new airport wouldn't do any harm.
Mr JULL-J could not agree more. Airports are very much a key to the success of the industry. I should like to get on to the aviation side in just a moment. In terms of the Northern Territory, it was interesting to learn from the studies under taken by the ATC, that the two most desirable destinations that people want to visit in Australia are the Great Barrier Reef and Ayers Rock in the Northern Territory. We must make every effort to make sure that we meet the requirements of our international visitors. T am sure, with the amount of money that is being spent by the Northern Territory tourist promotion people at the moment, and with their input into the Australian Tourist Commission, that that can be brought about and that there will be a promotion of the unique facilities that are being offered in the Northern Territory.
It would seem to me that there is only one thing that is holding Australian tourism back at this time. That is certainly our international air policy

904 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 198 1

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

which is married, of course, to our domestic air policy. I mentioned a moment ago that the institution of the advance purchase excursion fares system has helped significantly in generating people coming to Australia. The figures that were released following the survey of international visi tors indicate just that. I pay full tribute to the Government for bringing in that measure. That experiment has not worked, fully. International air fares are becoming detrimental to the inflow of tourists to this country. Our biggest single problem at present is probably not our physical position in the world. As someone once said, no longer is Australia's problem the tyranny of dis tance; it is the tyranny of the high air fare.
I think we should go back over the last three years to see exactly what has happened. The new air fare regime was heralded in many places as being the great salvation for Australian tourism. I admit that we have seen dramatic increases in the number of people coming to Australia to visit friends and relatives. We have seen quite good increases in the number of pure tourists coming to this country. If we look at where those pure tour ists are coming from on their package holidays we will see that our biggest single international market is New Zealand. Because of our old links and old ties we should be looking more towards Great Britain and Europe providing us with international visitors.
I accept that there has been a dramatic increase in the number of people visiting friends and rela tives. Frankly, I was quite shocked and horrified to find at recent public hearings on applications for air routes into Australia that the total number of package holidays sold to Australia from Great Britain last year was 2,000. Britons are the largest purchasers of package holidays in the world. In fact, last year five million Britons went overseas on package holidays, and Australia got 2,000 of them. What is even more horrifying is that British Airways, which has a monopoly situation with Qantas Airways Ltd on the Australian run, actu ally allocated a grand total of 20 seats a week to travel operators in Britain to sell package holidays to Australia. If that was not enough, with just a little over 1 00 people coming here on British Air ways, it was later learned that Qantas contributed the princely sum of 700 seats during the year to travel operators to package Australian holidays. The rest of the package holidays were sold, probably on bodgey fares, by the Malaysian Airline System. MAS contributed more to the package holiday market in Australia last year than either of the national carriers operating on those two routes. We were told by Qantas and especially the

Department of Transport that when the new international air fare regime came into operation it would be the greatest thing to promote tourism.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. The Chair is reluctant to interrupt the honourable member but I point out that it would be helpful if he made more frequent references to the Bill before the House.
Mr JULL-One of the things with which the Australian Tourism Commission is charged is looking after the promotion of Australian tourism and operating in conjunction with the airlines and the Department of Transport to encourage international visitors come to the country and to travel around the country. The point I wish to make is that there must be a closer relationship between the Australian Tourist Commission and the avi ation authorities in Australia.
When the new air fare regime was introduced three years ago we thought there would be more flights, cheaper seats and cheaper fares. Let us look at the history of the route. I have spoken to Australian Tourist Commission officials in Lon don who have given to me much of the information and have detailed many of the problems with which they are faced. They have produced some facts that really are quite startling. Although promises were made not one new flight has been introduced. Apart from the ten flights that were operating in 1 978 not one new flight has been introduced by Qantas or British Airways on that route. International passenger survey figures indicate that 40 per cent of the traffic on the United Kingdom-Australia run is taken up by in termediate point traffic-the high yield traffic. Only one new Australian city, Darwin, is being serviced under this new air fare regime. That ser vice was introduced only after a speech was made in this House in which Qantas was severely cri ticised for failing to serve Darwin. Services to Sydney and Melbourne have remained unchanged. Services to Brisbane operated by the two national carriers have been depleted. The service to Perth has deteriorated from 12 to 1 0 services a week and, at the moment, the super-Apex fare is not particularly low.
In terms of the tourist related fares being operated on world routes the cheapest air fares to Australia at the moment are exactly twice those being charged on the major routes. The advance purchase air fares are subjected to those con ditions to such an extent that Qantas actually advertises in the United Kingdom trade Press that seats are not available. We are told that that is a matter of commercial judgment for Qantas. If we

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 905

ask the Department of Transport how many Apex seats are allocated they say that that is a commercial secret, that we are not allowed to know. I doubt whether the Australian Tourist Commission would know the number of seats allocated. Quite frankly, some of the figures I obtained in Britain were really staggering. Those figures show that as few as 1 5 seats to Australia were allocated on the cheaper fare.
Neither of our national carriers has really done
much to promote true tourism traffic to Australia from Great Britain. The Australian Tourist Commission should have a much greater input in determining aviation policy. I spoke to people in the Australian Tourist Commission in London who said that their greatest frustration was in get ting seats to make available to travel agents in Bri tain to provide package tours to sell to Australia. Frankly, that is just not good enough. It is fair to say that we cannot expect the Australian Tourist Commission to provide miraculous figures unless all the conditions are right. To my mind that would be the one point that needs to be rectified as soon as possible. We have to get that air fare component right in an international sense. I find it amazing that we were told three years ago that negotiations were under way to establish a tour basing fare between Britain, Europe and Australia. That tour basing fare has not yet come about. The negotiations have not been successful.
We have reached a situation in which officials of the Department of Transport are sneaking around the place, checking out passengers' tickets to see what is happening in the cut price air fare war. All that Australians are doing is reacting to the free market forces. I cannot see why an Australian traveller should have to pay twice as much as air fares should be. It is a lucrative market. I can blame no one but our own officials and perhaps this Government for setting up a protec tionist area that has failed. We can only expect the free market forces to work. They will continue to work until such time as we take Qantas out of its quandary and let it compete in the market place. Once we do that Qantas will absolutely kill the market. The Chairman of Qantas has already indicated that he is prepared to compete in the market-place. It is important that we get that ab solutely right.
At the moment the domestic aviation situation also is in a state of flux and some very hard but very real decisions have to be made by the Government in the next few weeks. We have a new airline agreement. That agreement has been negotiated by the Department of Transport, the Government and the airlines but there has been no input regarding the terms of that agreement by

the Australian Tourist Commission or the tourism section of the Department of Industry and Com merce. One wonders when one approaches the Department of Transport or the ATC just how much notice is taken by those bodies anyway. The problem with which we are faced is that we now have in Australia a cozy club in which Ansett Air lines of Australia, Trans-Australia Airlines, Qan tas and the Department of Transport go behind closed doors in a secretive manner and negotiate air services. It is about time that those negotiations were brought out into the open. 1 suggest that this could be done by establishing in Australia some sort of authority which issued air licences and adjusted fares. If we could do that we could get the very real input of the ATC and the tourist industry into the whole decision-making process.
One of the questions that has to be asked by this Government in the near future is: 'How far can we go? ' The fact that a tour basing fare is not available for Australian based travel agents from domestic airlines certainly is causing problems within the domestic industry. Travel agents in Australia receive only 5 per cent commission and we are reaching a stage where it is not in their best interests to try to promote Australian travel or Australian domestic fares. It is not in their interests to get good packages together so that they can be sold overseas. This is the sole preroga tive of the domestic airlines. Unless the Australian Tourist Commission has the facility to package Australia in the best possible way we will never realise our true potential. We must realise our true potential if for no other reason than the tremendous employment prospects offered by international tourism. I support the amendments contained in this Bill. The Bill will be a tremendous help in promoting the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory as true parts of the total Australian holiday package experience.
Mr COHEN (Robertson) (5.0)-As has been stated, the Opposition supports the Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Bill. Mr Deputy Speaker, I noticed that you pulled up the previous speaker, the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) , for not making comments relevant to this Bill. It is difficult, as you would appreciate, Mr Deputy Speaker, to talk for a long time about the actual increase of one in the number of commissioners. I think most of us would like to speak broadly about the question of tourism. I hope you will extend to me the same tolerance as you extended to the previous speaker. It is an exciting time for those of us who have been interested, involved and excited about tourism for

906 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

many years-in my case since J first became a member of this House-finally to see this Government, this nation, recognising the value of tour ism. I believe that our predictions of years ago will become increasingly more accurate as the years pass by.

on all new income producing hotel accommo dation. Clearly that has had a significant effect on the increase in the number of hotels that are being built. Overseas promotion has increased substantially. Of course we now have international air ports at Hobart and Townsville.

Figures were given a few moments ago by the honourable member for Bowman indicating the expansion of the hotel industry. I read in today's Daily Mirror that in the electorate of the Opposition shadow Minister for tourism, the honour able member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) , a $25m hotel is to be built. Interestingly enough it will overlook Parramatta Park, a place with which I am vaguely familiar.
My interest in this matter goes back 1 2 years. I was instrumental in writing the policy for the Australian Labor Party prior to the 1 972 Federal election and the policy which was implemented by the late Frank Stewart. It was a good policy. It was the first time, I think, that most people ack nowledged that tourism was being taken seriously by a Federal government. I believe that we on this side have a very proud record with regard to the development of tourism by the national Parliament. When we went out of office J was determined that tourism would never again be rel egated to the cinderella industry it once was. I asked the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) whether he would introduce a select committee on tourism. To our great pleasure and delight he did so. I served on it, as did the honourable member for Bowman.
I believe that the House of Representatives Sel ect Committee on Tourism had one of the most profound effects upon industry of any select com mittee in this Parliament's history. Many of its recommendations were implemented. First and foremost, of course, the Committee placed the spotlight on the tourist industry. It received enormous publicity through the media. People started to discuss tourism and as a result the Government responded to the recommendations. The great majority of those recommendations, which were bipartisan, have been implemented. I have complimented the Government on the things it has done.
I always thought that the report of the Bureau of Industry Economics was most significant because it pointed out what we had known for years but could not prove, that the industry made a major contribution to employment and -gross domestic product in this country. However, the recommendation that delighted this side of the House when it was implemented by the Government was the 2t per cent depreciation allowance

Today [ wish to talk about what this Bill does not do. [ wish the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) were present in the chamber because I believe we do have problems in the industry.
Mr John Brown-The Assistant Minister is here.
Mr COHENThe Minister Assisting the Min ister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Hodgman) is here. It is like having the twelfth man. There are serious problems. I ask this House to listen to what I am about to say because I believe we have to overcome these problems. If we take the right action there will be even more exciting times ahead of us. In Australia vast numbers of tourist towns see themselves as the tourist mecca. That will not occur. We cannot develop hundreds of tourist villages in Australia. We have to be relatively selective in promoting and planning specific areas for tourist development.
There is also a growth in the number of aged people moving to the same tourist areas to retire. This has meant that there are hundreds of thousands of aged people moving into some towns, creating a conflict of interest between the retired and the business community which is seeking to increase the tourist traffic. The benefits of tourism-increased shopping and recreational facilities-often are not perceived as benefits by the retired, who resent the intrusion of the tourist, whom they regard as an intruder. Increased rates enable local government to provide infrastructure-water, sewerage, paved roads and cultural and social amenities. As the retired are, in the main, no longer seeking employment, the most obvious benefit of tourism is of little interest to them. The less obvious indirect benefits often are not related by them to tourism. Each new attempt to increase tourist attractions and accommo dation is resisted. It is also true that in many cases the two lifestyles come into direct conflict. A very large number of tourists look for excitement on their annual vacation. Hotels, restaurants, bars, sporting events and facilities may well delight the tourist but in the numbers required for a success ful tourist resort they may be anathema to the permanent resident, particularly the retired. Quite a number of tourist villages and towns are now resisting or at least questioning the large scale tourist development that is being planned in

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 907

their regions. Yeppoon, Noosa and Cairns are a few examples. We ignore this problem at our peril.
A feature of Australian tourist development is that in earlier times the rush to encourage development led local councils to accept virtually any application providing they increased rate revenue. Approved by councils were subdivisions which did not have water, sewerage, drainage and paved roads; facilities alongside poorly built shopping centres, and which lacked adequate community cultural and recreational centres. Although coun cils are now lifting their standards, in some areas the damage has already been done. Many seaside tourist and retirement areas are blighted by the past lack of planning and aesthetic standards and are too costly and fraught with administration difficulty to redevelop. Cheap, shoddy fibro and weatherboard holiday cottages alongside fading prefabricated jerry-built shopping centres have given many areas reputations that they are finding it difficult to recover from.
There are some notable exceptions such as Surfers Paradise, Port Macquarie, Coffs Harbour and Cairns which have attracted quality devel opers who are investing in international standard accommodation and tourist attractions. However, even these areas suffer from the mistakes of the past when earlier administrations lacked a vision of the future. I often give my own area, the central coast of New South Wales, as an example of that. There is also a marked reluctance by major hotel groups to become involved in tourist development outside the major capital cities. They prefer to concentrate on the business traffic in the cities. Earlier I mentioned the development at Par ramatta by the South Pacific group. I have a great admiration for the South Pacific group but it has not been prepared to develop in the wilderness areas. Earlier I mentioned the hotel which is to be built at Parramatta. I appreciate that it is a business decision, but it is a shame the South Pacific group has not done so.
Developers are now seeking unspoiled areas to develop quality tourist resorts demanded by international visitors. Once again a clash occurs as Australian residents resent their intrusion. Noosa appears to be a particularly good example of this sort of clash of interests. Conservation groups are alert to any further alienation of the coastline, having seen so much degradation in the past. Tourist development is equated with the worst sort of coastal mismanagement. If Australia is to compete with the resort development that is oc curring in other parts of the world where whole towns are being built for tourism where pre viously nothing existed then it is essential that

total tourist complexes are developed along with existing centres and in tune with the environment. I think that can be done but we have to recognise this problem and separate, in some instances, the retired and local population from the tourist com plex itself.
Opposition to total tourist development is often misdirected. Alienation of the coastal environ ment is occurring, whether we like it or not, by a number of kilometres each year. It attracts little attention because it is so gradual and occurs in so many small projects. I could never understand the opposition to the Yeppoon development. We have had problemsI will not go into them nowbut I thought it was an excellent concept. Australians who have sought peace and tranquility for vacations o r retirement are entitled to have that uninterrupted. However, if Australia is to attract international visitors and encourage Australians to spend more time holidaying in Australia, we must develop international quality tourist resorts for those who want a more active holiday, including sporting facilities, nightlife, res taurants and man-made attractions. Different people seek different things in holidays and I would be the last person to say: This is the sort of holiday you should have'. If people want nightlife and restaurants, let them have it. If they want to camp in the bush, that is fine. We should not im pose one standard on everybody.
At the moment Australia has only one town totally planned for tourism Thredbo. Another project of a similar nature being planned is the Yulara Village at Ayers Rock, and I compliment the Government on that project. The Iwasaki development at Yeppoon is, of course, in the same category. How do we resolve the problem caused by the lack of tourist facilities? In my view, Australia must build planned tourist develop ments to match what is happening in other parts of the world. Bali, Fiji, the Philippines and Mexico are just a few examples of countries which have set out after the tourist dollar and are going about it in a thoroughly planned and pro fessional manner.
I want to talk about M exico which was mentioned in this debate by the shadow Minister. The best example of a properly planned tourist development that I have seen is in Mexico. The Mexican Government has created a body, the National Trust for Tourist Development, which is known as FONATUR. It was established in 1 974. It plans and builds, in co-operation with private enterprise, international standard resorts. Last year 1 visited two projects, as a guest of FONA TUR, at Can-Cun and Ixtapa-Zihuatanejo. Can Cun is located on the Yucatan Peninsula in the

908 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

Caribbean near the ancient Mayan cities of were foreign visitors. Of the 50 per cent foreign

Tulum and Chichen-Itza. It was selected after a visitors 82 per cent were from the United States

search of 10,000 kilometres of coastline to find a and most of the remainder were from Canada.

remote area suitable for tourist development that The city of Can-Cun, which has no employment

offered all the essential requirements for discern other than tourism, has created employment for

ing tourists-climate, scenery, beaches and prox 9,000 people. If we include the families of those

imity to places of historic and cultural interest.

people, 36,000 people gain a living from tourism

FONATUR operates similarly to our own National Capital Development Commission. It acquired the whole area, 10,000 hectares, for total development and moved in to provide the infra structure required for Can-Cun to attract the pri

there. In 1979 those 9,000 employees earned an average of $US40 a week. That may not seem much but it was about 30 per cent higher than the earnings of the average Mexican. One hotel room in Can-Cun provides food for 10 Mexicans.

vate investment necessary to ensure its success. The resort is on an island about 2 1 kilometres in length and 400 to 500 metres at its widest part which is separated from the mainland by only a few hundred metres or so. The local director of the Can-Cun FONATUR project informed me that about $75m had been invested in the infra structure costs of the township alone. The Trust had already received all that money back from the proceeds of the sale of land to private developers arid hoteliers. I was not able to obtain details of the total cost of the international airport, tele communications or road developments, but this was probably about a further $200m.
The whole area is planned to ensure that there is maximum harmony between the tourists and the local residents. Hotels and condominiums,

Although FONATUR sells land to private de velopers for hotels, motels and so on, it retains tight control on the type of development that occurs. Mexico has some of the finest and most imaginative architects in the world. This is evident in the design of the hotels which clearly bear the mark of the early Mayan architecture. Every private development proposal has to he passed by FONATUR. That does not mean only thc physi cal dimensions. Unless the sketch plans are aes thetically pleasing and fit in with the overall de sign, they are sent back to the developer to be redrawn. No conflict exists between high-rise and low-rise buildings because the two areas are separ ate. Special zones are created for hotels, condo miniums and private residential areas. The main commercial administrative centre is located well

residential areas, shopping centres, the airport, away from the main resort area. Light industry

convention facilities and the commercial centre are all located in properly planned areas to ensure

also has its own region.

ease of movement and aesthetic standards. The I also visited Ixtapa-Zihuatanejo which is on

project has been developed in stages. At the mo the west coast, about 200 kilometres from ment it has reached the 4,000 hotel-room mark Acapulco. This project is a smaller version of and is well on the way to establishing 1 0,000 Can-Cun. It has about 1 ,500 hotel rooms and is

rooms. Virtually all the major international tour aiming for a total of 5,000 rooms. I liked it better

ist hotel chains are represented, including Hilton, because I thought it was more in keeping with the

Sheraton, Club Mediterranee, alongside the sort of thing we could develop in Australia. Can

Government's own chain, El Presidente. Twelve Cun was a bit grand for us. Ixtapa-Zihuatanejo is

months ago private investment was estimated at an area similar to the Cairns area with tropical between $350m and $400m in five or six years. rainforest and mountains in the background. It is

Public and private investment, therefore, is prob absolutely beautiful, beautifully planned and it in

ably between $600m and $700m. It needs to be no way interferes with the local community.

remembered that the Can-Cun development is in a remote part of Mexico well aWay from the de veloped communities. It could be compared with

Mr Barry Jones-It is featured in the film Ten, isn't it?

our building in the Gulf of Carpentaria. I was informed that no existing communities were in the immediate area.

Mr COHEN-I think the honourable member is right. The development is financed by government and initiated by government but in total is a

Figures on the development are very interest private and public enterprise operation. No

ing. In the few years since Can-Cun was estab conflict of interest exists. People in private

lished, its growth has been phenomenal. The enterprise are delighted because the facilities are

4,000 hotel rooms have an occupancy rate of 89 all laid out. They know the project will be a suc

per cent. In 1 979 Can-Cun received 400,000 cess because the Government is behind it and is

visitors-five years after its establishment. Fifty providing the infrastructure. The Government

per cent were domestic visitors and 50 per cent gets its money back by selling the land to private

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 909

enterprise and private enterprise knows the project will be fully promoted because the Government has a large investment in it. It seems to me to be the perfect sort of co-operation and initiative for a government.
If Australia is to become a major tourist desti nation it must upgrade its tourist resorts and de velop total tourist complexes such as I have outlined. Only governments have the constitutional power and the funds to initiate such proj ects. Only when governments indicate that they are prepared to commit their resources wholeheartedly to specific projects will they en courage major international hotel chains to invest in development outside the major capital cities. That is the point I am trying to make. Sure, we will encourage them into the big cities but we will not get great tourist resorts in the areas where we want to encourage tourists unless we do it that way. Last year I put forward a proposition which did not hit the deck but 1 hope that if I keep push ing it, it will. I want to see an Australian government, be it a Labor or Liberal government, set up an Australian tourist development corporation to develop tourist resorts of international standing. That proposal should have been incorporated in this Bill. Such development could occur only if it were invited by a State government and done in co-operation with that government. I think that would be essential. This should all be done in the total context of a national tourist plan.
The next questions would probably be where to build these projects and how many to build. I do not think it is right for me to say where these de velopments should take place, but clearly areas such as north Queensland and Tasmania would be suitable. I have spent a great deal of time talking to Tasmanians about this concept. I would like to spend another hour talking about Tasmania's potential as a tourist area. It needs tourist resorts more than any other State. One could perhaps be developed in the Hobart region, one in the Strahan area and one near Launceston. I do not know specifically where they should be situated. Tasmania needs to generate a little more excite ment about what it has to offer. Without question, it is the most beautiful State in Australia but it lacks--
Mr Barry Jones-It has funny members though.
Mr COHEN-We all have our problems, even Tasmania. We could have another tourist resort in the Canberra region. The Barossa Valley region of South Australia would also be suitable. If Tas mania has a problem about excitement, South Australia--

Mr Hodgman-We haven't. Mr COHEN-The Minister can continue to talk like that but if we want to be honest that is the major problem. Many tourists are being attracted. Another type of tourist will be attracted by the excitement generated in these complexes. South Australia has an even bigger problem. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr GiIes)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Be fore I call the next speaker may I remind the House that we are, I think, meant to be debating a Bill. I appreciate the odd passing references to it. I hope other honourable members will also conform. Mr SHACK (Tangney) (5.21 ) -Thank you very much for your guidance, Mr Deputy Speaker. As has been pointed out by the honour able member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) , the Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Bill introduces three important and welcome but very specific amendments to the structure and the financial operation of the Commission. Being the fourth speaker after the Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Hodgman) in this debate it is very difficult to . wax eloquent and at length on the amendments in the Bill. When, how ever, one realises that the Commision was set up for the purpose of encouraging visits to Australia by people from other countries and of encourag ing travel within Australia, including travel by people who have arrived from overseas, I am sure the House will agree with me that the debate pro vides an opportunity for a freer ranging discussion of matters of importance to tourism. It is in that vein that I would like to contribute to the debate this afternoon. One of the constant complaints heard about travel in Australia, especially air travel, is that it is so expensive compared with international travel to and from Australia. For example, without dwelling on figures too much, it is cheaper to fly from Perth to Bali than it is to fly from Perth to Sydney or, in the other direction, it is cheaper to fly from Sydney to some of the South Pacific re gions than it is to fly from Sydney to Perth. There is no doubt that this fare discrepancy inhibits domestic tourism. When one thinks of overseas visitors arriving in Australia, staying largely at the gateway of arrival and not venturing far afield into our country because of what they consider to be the prohibitive cost of domestic air travel, one realises that this is a problem for Australia's tourism.

9 1 0 REPRESENTATIVES 2 5 March 1981

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

The honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) correctly highlighted the report of the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Dom estic Air Fares and the fact that the Government has before it a report of extreme significance to the Australian tourist industry. The Government has to make some decisions very shortly on that report-decisions which are of vital concern to the tourist industry, to travel agents operating in that industry and to anybody who wants to fly anywhere in Australia, be they a tourist or not. I will spend a couple of minutes, of course referring at all times back to the legislation before us, examining the Holcroft report. I review the position to date. The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) tabled in the House on 25 February the report of the Independent Public Inquiry into Dom estic Air Fares. Associated with that tabling, the Minister issued a Press statement announcing that detailed consideration of the report would be pursued as a matter of urgency and that the Minister hoped to be in a position to make an announce ment as to the Government's decisions on that report when the Government introduced the air lines agreement legislation later this session. The Minister repeated that statement when he delivered a recent speech to the National Country Party Federal Council in Canberra on Saturday, 7 March. The Minister called for constructive de bate in this decision-making period. The Government has before it a report. The Government has rightly welcomed debate on that report, rightly welcomed input into its decision making process. I hope this afternoon in the few minutes that I have I can contribute to that constructive debate.
The Government set up the Holcroft inquiry in May last year. Its terms of reference are well known to honourable members but to facilitate the subsequent reading of what I have to say I seek leave to incorporate the terms ofreference in Hansard.
Leave granted. The document read as follows
TERMS OF REFERENCE The Terms ofReference of the Inquiry are as follows: 1 . The Inquiry is to examine air fares on the trunk routes and regional routes operated by the two major domestic air lines Trans Australia Airlines and Ansett Airlines of
Austalia, with special reference to the way in which fares are
set on individual routes in the national network by use of an air fare formula.
2. In respect of these routes the Inquiry should report, and make recommendations as appropriate, on:
(i) costs, revenues and load factors, (ii) existing and alternative pricing policies including
special discount arrangements, (iii) the degree of cross-subsidisation. 3. The Inquiry shall have regard to:

(i) the public interest, (ii) government domestic aviation policy including the
objective ofincreasing competition, (iii) the effect of competition on fares, (iv) the report of the Domestic Air Transport Policy Re
view Committee, (v) the desirability of a nationally consistent approach to
setting first, economy and standard class fares, (vi) factors which affect operating costs on particular
routes, (vii) the assignment ofcorporate overheads, (viii) operations of other airlines over routes referred to in
(1),
(ix) other relevant factors.
Mr SHACK-J thank the House. It is import ant to note that the Government established that inquiry only one year after the publication of the Department of Transport's Domestic Air Transport Policy Review Committee report. Not withstanding that departmental report and its conclusions there have been, and there were at the time, considerable and long-standing represen tations from all over Australia concerned about the fact that domestic fares were too high gener ally, that long haul routes were subsidising some of the short haul routes and that these two facts were, in fact, products of an inefficient airline system not the best for Australia's domestic air transport needs and not the best for Australian tourism needs. I think the last point is important because those who pressed for the establishment of the inquiry in the first place . the fair internal air fares campaign from Western Australia, the Western Australian Government, participants in the tourism industry and Western Australian members and senators from both sides-were under no doubt that the inquiry's terms of reference brought into focus the two-airline agreement.
Mr Chapman-And the South Australian Government, too.
Mr SHACK-When we look at the terms of reference under 3. (i) concerned with public interest, 3. (ii) the objective of increasing competition, 3 . (iii) the effect of competition on fares and 3 . (viii) operations of other airlines over routes I do not think it can be denied that the two airline system itself is brought into focus. The public believes so because the bulk of submissions made substantial reference to the two-airline system and not just to fares. Submissions were received not only from the State governments of South Australia, Western Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory but also from the tourist industry. The members of the inquiry believed their terms of reference extended that far because they accepted such evidence and they brought down recommendations on the .basis of those findings. I do not believe it is sustainable to

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 9 1 1

argue in isolation that fares are separate from the system because it is the system which provides for the fare setting formula, which provides for the fare setting procedure based on inputs from that system. It is put into context with the system. Fares are but a product of the system. I do not think they can be considered in isolation. I want to turn to the report. It is a bulky three-volume document.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I wonder whether, before the honourable member turns to the report, I might try to help the honourable member with regard to this debate. I do not mind the honourable member using the principles of the Holcroft report as it relates to tourism, but I do not really think a full scale debate on the Holcroft committee report is quite appropriate at this time. r ask the honourable member to try to help the Chair in that regard.

TABLE 1 2 . 1-ESTIMATED CROSS-SUBSIDIES ON SELECTED JET SECTORS, 1979-80

Route

Sector distance

matEedst(ai-)

O&D passengers

Subsidy(b)

Perth-Adelaide Perth-Melbourne Perth-Sydney Adelaide-Melbourne
Darwin-Sydney . Darwin-Melbourne Cairns-Townsville
Cairns-Sydney Rockhampton-Brisbane
Brisbane-Sydney Brisbane-Melbourne Sydney-Canberra Sydney-Melbourne Canberra-Melbourne Melbourne-Hobart Melbourne-Launceston

(km) 2 , 1 20
2,630 3,123
643
3,201 3,201
283 2,175
520 747 1 ,376 237 707 470 618 476

( '000) 115 220 183
522
2S 22
51 52 94
747 268 504 1 ,603 26 1
301 223

$m -2.9 -S. I -8.8
+ 4.3
- 1 .4 -\.I + 0.8 - 1 .4 + 1 .0
+ 4.5 -2.2
+ 8.8 + 1 1.0
+ 3.2 + 2.7 + 2.7

MI' SHACK-I certainly accept that guidance. We heard from the honourable member for Robertson a very important speech about provid ing tourist facilities and about the need for provid ing such resorts and important venues around the country. The point I want to make in connection with our air fare system is that even the provision of those facilities, warranted as they are, is of little benefit to the Australian tourism if people cannot afford to fly there or make the discretionaryjudg ment that it is too expensive for them to fly there. I really believe, in the context of this debate, this report is a: watershed for Australian tourism. It is something that I am certain the Commission is acutely aware of. The decisions the Government makes with respect to that report will have long term consequences with respect to the develop ment of tourism in Australia.
Briefly, the report identifies gross cross subsidisation between routes. The report iden tifies the deficiencies of the present air fare setting formula and procedure. The report points to a lack of desirable accountability necessary in a regulated environment. Let us turn and look at cross-subsidisation for a minute. These findings alone indicate the need for the inquiry in the first place. They certainly vindicate those who called for the inquiry. As I did before in tabling the terms of reference of the inquiry I also seek leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard two tables coming from the report which identify the extent of cross-subsidisation.
Leave granted. The documents read asjollows-

Source: Inquiry Research. (a) 0 & D means origin and destination. (b) Plus sign denotes subsidy received; minus sign denotes subsidy paid.
Appendix II
SECTOR CROSS-SUBSIDIES ON THE NATIONAL JET NETWORK

Sector

PassenCrossDistance gers Subsidy

Perth-Adelaide Perth-Melbourne Perth-Hobart
Perth-Canberra Perth-Sydney Perth-Brisbane
Adelaide-Alice Springs Adelaide-Darwin Adelaide-Sydney
Adelaide-Melbourne Adelaide-Canberra Adelaide-Hobart Adelaide-Launceston Adelaide-Coolangatta Adelaide-Brisbane Adelaide-Cairns Alice Springs-Sydney Alice Springs-Melbourne Darwin-Brisbane Darwin-Sydney Darwin-Melbourne
Mount Isa-Brisbane Cairns-Townsville Cairns-Mackay Cairns-Brisbane Cairns-Sydney Cairns-Melbourne
Townsville-Mackay Townsville-Rockhampton Townsville-Brisbane
Townsville-Sydney Townsville-Melbourne

(km) 2 , 1 20 2,630 3,248
3,099 3,123 3,870
1 ,316 2,558 1 , 1 66
643 1,113 1,261 1 ,056 1 ,845 1,9 1 3
3,305 2,482 1 ,959
2,769 3,201 3,201 1 ,572
283 613
1 ,392 2,175 2,768
330 599 1,114
1 ,861 2,490

('000) . ($m)

1 1 5 -2.89

220 -S.12

10 -.51

20 -.95

1 83 -8.80

29 -1.86

47 -.33

33 -1.16

350 -1.25

522

4.34

45 -. 1 1

22 -.13

21 -.02

16 -.30

43 -.88

2 -. 1 0

1 5 -.50

21 - .45

25 -1.00

28 -1.39

22 -1. 1 1

34 -.43

51

.84

8

.07

102 -.89

52 - 1 . 3 7

20 -.80

14

.22

12

.II

1 28 - -.31

42 -.80

18

- .60

9 1 2 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

Sector

PassenCrossDistance gers Subsidy

Mackay-Rockhampton Mackay-Brisbane Mackay-Sydney Mackay-Melbourne Rockhampton-Brisbane Rockhampton-Sydney Brisbane-Sydney Brisbane-Canberra Brisbane-Melbourne
Brisbane-Launceston Sydney-Coolangatta Sydney-Canberra Sydney-Melbourne Sydney-Hobart Sydney-Launceston Coolangatta-Canberra Coolangatta-Melbourne Coolangatta-Hobart Coolangatta-Launceston Canberra-Melbourne Canberra-Hobart
Canberra-Launceston Melbourne-Hobart Melbourne-Launceston Darwin-Cairns Alice Springs-Cairns

(km) 279 799
1 ,546
2,139 520
1 ,267 747 984
1,376
1,852 679 237
707 1 ,061
915
916 1 ,330 1 ,948 1 , 806
470 1,088
946 618 476 1,737 1 ,457

( '000) 18
76 24
9 94 20 747 54 268
12
258 504 1,603 78 67
11 1 85
11 8
261 16 9
301
223 9 9

($m )
.JO
.36 --.30
-.24 1.04
-.12 4.45 .03
-2.23
-.23 1 .93 8.84
1 1.00 -.09
.14
.02 -1.35
-.23 -. 1 4
3.19 - .03
.01
2.67 2.70 -. 1 5 -.09

Mr SHACK-I thank the House. For example, in the year 1 9 79-80 passengers on the Perth Sydney sector subsidised passengers on other routes to the extent of some $8.8m. If this cross subsidisation is going on it helps to explain why many tourists from overseas, upon landing at the gateway of Sydney, for example, do not venture any further west simply because they make the decision that the fares involved in doing so are simply too expensive.
The second point identified in the report relates to the deficiencies of the fare setting procedure. The committe considered that the very existence of cross-subsidisation was a serious indictment of the existing pricing policy. That policy is based on the technically inefficient operation of the two participants, Ansett and TAA, in a system which in itself enshrines inefficiency. When tourists ar rive in Australia the only way in which they can fly about the country in the major air networks is with these two airlines. One can appreciate that the cost of fares will affect whether those tourists travel further than the gateway of arrival. Throughout the report the committee brings down findings in similar vein. If people have the time, I would refer them especially to chapter 6.
Finally, the third point that the inquiry iden tifies relates to the lack of the accountability and regulatory control needed in such a regulated environment. The committee argues that where the two airlines are operating in an environment

which is devoid of market forces and commercial considerations there is evident a lack of control which should be exercised by the regulatory authority-a control which should be exercised in the public interest, not only in terms of those who need to fly about Australia in the course of ordinary business but also of our tourist trade.
In response to those three major findings, the Holcroft report presents 36 recommendations which, taken as a complete package in the context of the two-airline system, represent an attempt to improve that system and better safeguard the public interest. I see as a first option open to the Government in considering the report the complete implementation of the 36 Holcroft recommendations. I do not think that it would be good enough to adopt only the fare setting recommendations and simply remove the cross subsidisation inequities. It is the monitoring role and the need for public accountability which underpin the fare setting procedure. As 1 said earlier, these provisions are necessary to discipline the airlines in the absence of competitive market forces. Once again it demonstnites the point that fares are but a product of the system and cannot be considered in isolation.
If the Government were to pick up what I have labelled the first option in an effort to improve the situation two difficulties would be presented. Firstly, it cannot be implemented without sub stantial renegotiation of either the present two airline agreement under which the system works or that which the Government hopes to bring in later in the session. For example, the necessary monitoring role of the regulatory authority and the increased public accountability that is called for by the report cannot be put into effect in con junction with either the present or the proposed agreement. The 36 recommendations, taken as a package, represent an attempt to improve the domestic air fares situation to the benefit of reg ular commercial travellers, private travellers and tourists. But even if the Government in an effort to assist tourism were to pick up all 36 recommendations, we would end up with what Holcroft himself describes as a second best option. Holcroft examines the two-airline system, as indeed he must if he is to consider fares. In various parts of the report the conclusion is reached that the two airline system operates as a barrier to competition; it is out-of-date; it is a system which en shrines inefficiency; one which promotes waste and one which provides for fares being higher than they could be if another system were to take its place. In short, in response to these findings, the committee states:

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 9 1 3

The inquiry feels that progressive deregulation of all but safety requirements is the preferred solution.
It is no secret that I support this conclusion. In September 1 979, in this House, I attacked the two-airline policy and called for its scrapping. I have repeated that call on many occasions and will continue to do so, if for no other reason than it has important consequences, as the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) pointed out, for Australia's tourism. That, in turn, has important consequences for employment in that service area.
I am opposed to the two-airline policy because, among other things-if we are talking of tourism this is important-it denies .to entrepreneurs free dom of entry to the market, the ability to be able to present a package-based fare in an endeavour to cater for the tourist market. It denies to the Australian travelling public significant carrier choice and offers little realistic price value choice in terms of fares. I admit that the policy, as it has operated, has some benefits. These relate to flight frequency and an especially high standard of in flight service. But I do not believe that those benefits outweigh the disadvantages, and they are provided to the travelling public at an inflated cost.
Earlier I called the two-airline system a piece of economic madness which is costing Australia dearly. Certainly it is costing Australian tourism dearly. It is one based on inflated costs due to enshrined operational inefficiency caused by an absence of real competition. A deregulated system, one more open to competition and to competitive market forces, would ensure that all fea tures, not just frequency of service but most importantly price, would be based on, and respon sive to, consumer demand.
I propose that the Government adopt the second option related to the Holcroft report. Briefly, I believe that it should pick the recommendations which relate to fare setting and the removal of cross-subsidisation. I believe that to be an absol ute must. It is not an opportunity for the Government to bring in some new initiative, but simply for it to rectify a long-standing injustice and to re move long-standing inequities. Secondly, and fun damentally, I believe that the Government should give five years' notice of termination of the present two-airline agreement, as provided for therein.
When one compares the two agreements, present and proposed, side by side one can see some advantages in that which is proposed for freight, postal services and the like, but one also realises that it would enshrine the present system

for a further 1 0 years and would have drastic effects for regional operators, who could play a large part in servicing the internal tourist market. One also realises that it would have severe disad vantages for Australian travel agents. Therefore, the Government should drop the proposed agreement and give five years' notice of termination of the present agreement.
During the five-year run down period prior to expiration-here I take up a point that the honourable member for Bowman made-the Government should establish a civil aviation type of authority with two specific roles. Within the re strictions of the present agreement the authority should monitor and regulate the airlines system a la Holcroft. A specialist body is needed because, as the Holcroft report correctly points out, lo date the Department of Transport has not been capable of fulfilling that role. Secondly, that civil aviation type ofauthority needs to investigate and prepare for the progressive deregulation of our airline system at the end of the five-year period, with a view to bringing about ultimately . one which will be truly competitive, responsive to consumer demands and needs, and one which will require all operators to be subject to commercial considerations and market forces. Mr Deputy Speaker, time has got away from me. I thank you for your lenience and hope to continue this debate on a subsequent occasion.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) ( 5.40)-The Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Bill proposes amendments to the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1 967. I would like briefly to outline the proposed major amendments and to comment on them. Section 6 of the principal Act is being amended to provide for membership of the Commission to be increased from nine to 1 0 members. The additional member enables the States and Territories to have three members on the Commission on a rotational basis. This is a very desirable amendment, one which the States and Territories have been seeking for some time. If there were to be any criticism of the member ship of the Commission it would be that there should be greater membership representation by the States and Territories.
Present membership of the Commission com prises members drawn from the tourist industry, the Public Service and the States and Territories in the following proportion: Six from the industry, one from the Public Service and two from the States and Territories. Because the tourist industry is such an important part of Australia's economy and because its growth is dependent on the involvement of State and Territory government, I

9 1 4 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

suggest that the Minister for Industry and Com merce (Sir Phillip Lynch) should give consideration at a later date to increasing the number of representatives from the States and Territories so that each is continually represented on the Commission. I believe it is desirable to have closer liaison with the States and Territories for a number of reasons which I will outline later.
The amendments to section 1 2 of the Act con cern the disclosure by members of the Commission of any pecuniary interest that they may have in matters coming before the Commission for consideration. I notice that the proposed amendments, although requiring a disclosure of any pecuniary interest, do not require a member to refrain from voting on a matter in which he or she has an interest. If the Act provides for disclos ure of such an interest it should provide also for a member not to take part in or to vote on the matter under discussion. It appears that there is only a subtle difference between the amendments to Part V of the Act, which deals with finance, and the original sections. Funds appropriated to the Commission by the Parliament will remain with the Treasury and be paid to the Commission when required instead of being paid into the Commission's bank account, as was the case pre viously. In other words, the Treasury will earn interest on unspent funds rather than the Commission. I have no argument with that intention. In summary, the amendments appear to be desir able. Apart from those few matters dealing with representation on the Commission and the pecuniary interests of members, I support the legislation.
I now wish to speak generally on the role of the Australian Tourist Commission and the value of tourism to Australia. The Australian Tourist Commission was established to encourage visits to Australia by people from other countries, as well as travel within Australia. It is therefore a very important organisation which can become the catalyst for much increased visitation to Australia and for increased travel within Australia. I say that it can become the catalyst because I believe in previous years the Commission has had insufficient funds really to get on with the job of promoting Australia overseas and of getting people to travel within their own country. The credit for the significant increase in visitation to Australia in recent years must go not only to the efforts of the Commission but also to the re duction in international air fares and a shift in overseas currencies. As a result Australia has been made more appealing to visit from an economic point of view. The Commission's expenditure budget has grown from $ 1 .520m in the first year

of its operation, in 1 967-68, to $8.9m in the cur rent financial year. I seek leave of the House to in corporate in Hansard a table which shows the yearly expenditure budgets from 1 967-68 to 1 980-8 1 . It also shows the real growth in expenditure.
Leave granted. The table read as follows
AUSTRALIAN TOURIST COMMISSION Table ofExpenditure

Financial year

Expen- *Deflator diture index

tReaI expenditure

1 967-68 1 968-69 1 969-70 1970-71 1 9 7 1 -7 2 1 972-73 1973-74 1 9 74-75 1 975-76 1 9 76-77 1 977-78 1978-79 1 979-80 1 980-8 1 (est.)

($m) 1 .520 1 .750 2 . 1 00 2.350 2.650 3.053 3.014 3.300 3.629 2.900 3. 1 00 4.200 8.200 8.900

($m)

28.27 5.377

29.86

5.861

31.55

6.656

34.86 6.741

39.04

6.788

43.27

7.056

50.57

5.960

62.81

5.254

72.30

5.019

80.28

3.612

86.56

3.581

91.77 " 1 00.00

,

'

-

t?(7
8,200

* Deflator used is the implicit Government Final Consump tion Expenditure deflator.
t Real expenditure isexpressed in terms of 1 979-80 prices. Sources: Appropriation Bill No. 1 ; Australian National Accounts,
Mr MOUNTFORDI thank the House. The table shows that the Commission's expenditure grew steadily from 1 967-68 until 1 972-73 after which, in real terms, it steadily decreased until the 1 979-80 financial year. The table shows that although expenditure has grown almost sixfold since 1 967-68, in real terms it has grown only slightly in excess of 1 t times. If the expenditure budget had kept pace with the deflator index, the expenditure budget for the current financial year would have been in the order of $ 1 6m. Obviously there needs to be further massive increases in funding to the Commission if Australia is to increase its share of the very competitive tourist market. Additional funds could be allocated by di verting from Consolidated Revenue to the Australian Tourist Commission the $ l Om presently received from the gateway exit tax. It is not good enough for the Government to point to the increased growth in tourism to Australia over recent years as an excuse for maintaining funds at a low level because other factors have been the cause of that tourist boom. The enormous drop in international air fares a couple of years ago and changes in overseas currency rates have combined

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 9 1 5

to make Australia a more enticing tourist desti nation for many overseas visitors. That is why during 1 979 a total of 793,000 short term visitors came to Australia, an increase of 25.8 per cent over the previous year. I n 1 980 the number of visi tations continued to increase, and 893,000 people came to Australia on short term visits. The growth rate between 1 979 and 1 980 dropped to approxi mately 1 2 per cent and unless we devote more funds to promoting tourism to Australia the rate obviously will drop further.
Tourism is big business to any country and some smaller countries rely on tourism for their basic wealth. It is estimated that during 1 979 overseas visitors added $650m to the Australian economy. When we take into consideration the tourist and visitation pattern of movement within and between the States and Territories of Australia by our fellow Australians revenue to Australia from tourism is around $ 1 ,OOOm. In my State of New South Wales during 1 979-80, domestic tourism generated 16.3 million trips, 83 per cent of which were within New South Wales. There is great potential for domestic tourism within Australia but the $300,000 set aside in the current Budget for the Australian Tourist Commission to promote such activity is insufficient to get across to Australians the message that they should see their own country first.
Almost half of the Australian people do not take a holiday away from their usual place of resi dence, so there is still a lot of promoting to be done if we are to realise the full tourism potential of our country. Many of these people, particularly low income families, cannot afford to go away on holidays. To help overcome that problem I believe the Australian Government should provide funds to non-profit organisations such as local councils and the Youth Hostels Association of Australia to enable the construction of low cost accommodation facilities for use by low income families and the youth of our community. I con gratulate the New South Wales Minister for Tourism and the New South Wales Department of Tourism for the manner in which they have provided low cost accommodation facilities by funding, mainly on a dollar for dollar basis, organ isations such as those I have mentioned. Over $ l m has been provided in recent years by the New South Wales Government for the construction of such facilities.
The national capital of Australia, Canberra, needs such accommodation facilities so that school children and low income families can come to this great city and enjoy its splendours. As an Australian, I am proud of our national capital and no citizen should be denied the privilege of seeing

our capital and seat of government because he cannot afford to pay for accommodation. It is our duty to ensure that this city and this Parliament are accessible to our fellow Australians. As a pilot project I commend to the Government the pro vision of sufficient funds to the Youth Hostels Association to enable the building of low cost ac commodation facilities in the Australian Capital Territory for use by school children and low income families. Half a million dollars is all that would be required for the project.
Returning to the activities of the Australian Tourist Commission, I would briefly comment on the level of staff ceilings set by the Government. Those countries from which we attract the largest number of visitors -New Zealand, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and Japan-have been the hardest hit by staff cuts. In fact all those countries have had or now have less staff to promote Australia than they had in 1 977. I f we look at the annual report of the Australian Tourist Commission we will see a staff summary on the last page. It shows that in 1 977 in the United States of America there were 1 3 staff members on the Commission but in 1 980 the number had dropped to 1 1 . In the United Kind gom there were five staff members in 1 977 and that number remains the same today. In New Zealand there were five in 1 977 but in 1 980 that number dropped to four. In Japan the number of staff in 1 977 was six and that number dropped to four in 1 980. I think that summary shows that there is a great need in the Australian Tourist Commission for an increase in staff, particularly in those countries from which we have most of our visitors. It is a ludicrous state of affairs if the Government is genuinely expecting the Commission adequately to promote Australia in those countries. It is little wonder that the New South Wales Government has opened its own tourist offices with staff in each of those four countries I have just mentioned. 1 suggest that the Minister look at this as a matter of urgency, because we cannot hope to increase visitation from those countries without adequate staff for promotional and informational purposes. In my opinion it would be far better for the Commission to pro mote Australia overseas as a total country rather than allowing the States to promote their own areas on a purely parochial basis.
However, in recent years we have seen some of the States, including New South Wales and Victoria, promoting themselves overseas because of the inadequate level of promotional activity carried out by the Commission. I do not like this purely parochial promotion by the States, mainly because a lot of the promotional material does not

9 1 6 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Australian Tourist Commission Bill

place Australia a s a whole in proper perspective in comparison to the State being promoted. One would think, by looking at some promotional material, that all the attractions and natural wonders of this nation are the preserve of some States. Some of it reminds me of maps of the world printed in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries by certain oriental countries which showed their own sizes in an inflated manner in an effort to distort their true influence in world affairs.
I consider, therefore, that the Minister should attempt to obtain agreements from the States and Territories that the responsibility for promotion of Australia overseas should rest with the Australian Tourist Commission. The States could then utilise their funds on internal promotional activities and on the improvement of facilities. Sydney, for example, is the gateway to Australia. I n 1 980, 5 7 1 ,000 overseas visitors, or 64 per cent of the total, entered Australia through that city. The reason is, of course, that the nation's birth place has much to offer the tourist with both natu ral and man-made attractions. Careful planning by The Rocks Development Authority has now transformed the Rocks area of Sydney into an his torical delight. The Sydney Opera House is, of course, -the most popular tourist attraction in Australia, and the linking of that attraction with the Rocks area has made the harbourside and Cir cular Quay area of Sydney a marvellous and most self-satisfying tourist visitation area. The New South Wales Department of Tourism is to be congratulated on its many initiatives in promoting and servicing the needs of tourists coming to Sydney. The Department's new tourist bus service, which transports tourists and visitors to the major tourist attractions in Sydney, is proving to be of great success. The New South Wales Government, by the introduction of financial incentives and, I believe, a depreciation incentive which is available from the Federal Government, has been able to attract a number of entrepreneurs and convince them to build international hotels in Sydney, some of which are already under con struction. These international hotels, numbering some eight in total, will provide by the mid-l 980s an additional 2,500 rooms for use by tourists. With the continued increase in tourism they will certainly satisfya need at that time.
Whilst I have been somewhat critical of the Government's lack of adequate funding of the Australian Tourist Commission to enable it prop erly to promote tourism to and within Australia, I do give due recognition to the fact that during the last two financial years expenditure by the Commission has doubled. In conclusion, I request the

Minister to look at the suggestions that I have outlined. I urge the Government to make a greater contribution to the promotion of tourism so that the Australian economy and employment in Australia can be further improved.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time.

WAGES STATISTICS Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs) -I ask for the indulgence of the Chair, on behalf of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) , to provide some information to the House which the Prime Minister said during Question Time today that he would provide. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-The Minister has my indulgence. Mr VINER-This afternoon the Prime Minister referred to the annual increase in wage rates up to March 1 975. The figures quoted by the Prime Minister were challenged by the honour able member for Wills (Mr Hawke) . I produce to the House a table of figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics which I will seek leave to have incorporated in Hansafd. The figures relate to the percentage wage increases in the year to January 1975, the year to February 1 975 and the year to March 1 975. The annual wage increase for the year to January 1 975 was 36.5 per cent. To February 1975 it was 36.7 per cent; and to March 1 975-being the specific month to which the Prime Minister referred-it was 37.6 per cent. That is the weighted average of minimum weekly adult wage rates for male and female, calculated on the basis of civilian employees figures from the Australian Statistician. I ask leave of the House to incorporate the table in Hansard. Leave granted. The table read as follows-
WAGE INCREASES (Per cent) Minimum weekly (adult) wage rate

Year to

Male Female Average(2)

1975January February
March

34.9 40.0

36.5

34.8 40.7

36.7

34.9 43.3

37.6

Wages Statistics

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 9 1 7

Year to

Minimum adult weekly wage rates

Male

Average

weekly

Average

(3)

weekly ordinary

(3) time

Female Average earnings earnings

his deputy misrepresenter who has succeeded ad mirably in continuing the misrepresentation. The facts will show that the Prime Minister--
Mr Viner-You answer the facts. Mr HAWKE -Why does the Minister not wait for them?

1 975-March

' quarter

34.9 41.3 36.9 26.7 32.4

Mr VinerYou answer the facts. Mr HAWKE---The Minister will get them.

( I ) Source ABS Wage rates and earnings.

Mr Viner-Answer them.

(2) Calculated as weighted average, with weights determined by employment from ABS Civilian Employees Australia.
(3) From ABS: Average weekly earnings: December Quarter 1980.
Mr VINER-Of course that table will clearly demonstrate the accuracy of the Prime Minister's statement this afternoon. As he pointed out, that was the period during which the presidency of the Australian Council of Trade Unions was held by the honourable member for Wills. I remind the House, on behalf of the Prime Minister, that the honourable gentleman was President of the Australian Labor Party at the time. Furthermore, the Prime Minister referred to the level of unemployment during 1 974-75, that being a period when the Labor Party had such drastic--
Mr Les Johnson-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. In view of this scurrilous attack and the fact that there will be no chance to reply, 1 draw your attention, Mr Deputy Speaker, to the State of the House.
(Quorum formed) .
Mr VINER-The figure 1 was going to give was that between May 1974 and May 1 975 unemployment-that is, those looking for full time work-grew by 1 38,700. This was the period of presidency of the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the Australian Labor Party of the honourable member for Wills during the discredited Whitlam regime.
Mr HAWKE (Wills)-Mr Deputy Speaker, what we have witnessed--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! Does the honourable member for Wills seek the indulgence of the Chair to make a very short statement in rebuttal of what has been said?
Mr HAWKE-I do, Mr Deputy Speaker. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER- -I ask him to be short. Mr HAWKE-I will be short. The statement which can be immediately made is that the No. 1 misrepresenter from the Government has sent in

Mr HAWKE-Keep going. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will address his remarks through the Chair and try to keep to the point at issue if he can. Mr HAWKE-Why do you not tell them? Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member can protect himself. Mr HAWKE-The facts are very simple they are incontrovertible. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) lied to the House. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member is not entitled to use that language. Mr HAWKE-When the Prime Minister sends into this House a Minister who provides the figures which show that the Prime Minister lied, why am I not entitled to? Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will withdraw that remark. Mr HAWKE-Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-It is unparliamen tary; it must be withdrawn. Mr HAWKE-Mr Deputy Speaker, I will withdraw and say that the statements made by the Prime Minister-Mr Viner-Mr Deputy SpeakerMr HAWKE-I have withdrawn. Mr Viner-l ask that the honourable member withdraw unqualifiedly. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat and honourable members opposite will keep quiet. Does the honourable member withdraw? Mr HAWKE-You have heard me; I have withdrawn. Do 1 have to do it twice? Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-No. Mr HAWKE-I have done it. I withdraw what I have said and substitute this: What the Prime Minister said to this House this afternoon has been shown, out of the mouth of the Minister he sent in on his behalf, to have been statements

9 1 8 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

which are untrue. The Prime Minister said that the wage increase which took place in the period to which he referred was 40 per cent. The figures which have been brought in by his own Minister show that there was no increase of 40 per cent in that period. Either one tells the truth or one does not. One can use whatever words one likes to use, Mr Deputy Speaker, but the Prime Minister said that it increased by 40 per cent and the figures which have been brought in show that the increase was not 40 per cent but was significantly less than 40 per cent. If one does not want to call that an untruth, if one does not want to call the person who issues an untruth a liar, I accept that one is not allowed to use that word.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The parliamen tary term is 'an inaccurate statement', not 'a liar'.
Mr HAWKE-A deliberately inaccurate statemen t .
Sitting suspended from 6.4 to 8 p.m.
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION BILL 1981
Second Reading Debate resumed from 24 March, on motion by Mr Viner:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr PEACOCK ( Kooyong-Minister for In dustrial Relations)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House has a general debate covering this Bill and the Racial Discrimination Amendment Bill 1981 as they are associated measures? Of course, separate questions will be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (8. 1 ) -The Human Rights Commission Bill is a piece of legislation which is not new to this House. Human Rights Commission legislation has been before the House of Representatives on a number of occasions. We are now debating what could be termed a reframed but not altogether new Human Rights Commission Bill. The first Human Rights Commission Bill was introduced into the Parliament by a former Attorney-General, the now Mr Justice Ellicott. That Bill was debated at length in 1 979. Honourable members will recall that in 1 979 the whole Bill was lost over an impasse between the Senate and the House of Representa tives concerning the so-called Simon and Martyr amendments dealing with the abortion issue. The

Bill now before the House is substantially the same Bill as that of 1 979.
Adverting to the debate on the abortion issue, this Bill is different because those amendments which were the subject of so much bitterness were moved by the members concerned as private members; obviously, they had not been accepted by the Government and incorporated in the Bill which at that stage had been passed by the Senate. The validity of the amendments moved then is somewhat doubtful when one takes into account the fact that the amendments moved at that time by the Opposition suggesting that the human rights provision ought to apply to the States and Territories were opposed by the same gentlemen who moved their amendments on the basis of their belief that those amendments would provide a means of protecting the unborn child. Many of us did not accept the validity of their amendments as they had voted against the proposition that the human rights legislation should apply to the States. Without the acceptance of that prop osition, their amendments in fact would have had very little application because the human rights legislation would not have affected State law.
Nevertheless, this Bill also is a weak Bill. The amendment which we will move to the motion that the Bill be read a second time adequately sums up our opposition to this legislation and the constructive proposals with which we would re place it. Firstly, we object to the fact that the Bill has no application to the laws and practices of the States and the Northern Territory. It is perhaps interesting in this context to look at the second reading speech which former Attorney-General, now His Honour Mr Justice Ellicott, made on 1 June 1 977. The then Attorney-General referred to the fact that his initial proposal in late 1 9 76 was for the establishment of a joint Commonwealth State venture. He stated:
Under this proposal the Commission would have had power, amongst other things, to examine and report on Commonwealth and State laws and practices that were inconsist ent with the International Convenant and it was proposed that individuals would be able to bring complaints affecting them to the Commission for investigation. It was proposed that reports of the Commission would be made by the Commission to all governments and it would then have been a matter for the relevant government, State or Commonwealth, to take any legislative or administrative action that might be ap propriate to provide a remedy for any violation of the Covenant.
In other words, the initial proposal was that at least the Commission would have some power to inquire into the laws and practices of the States. Under the 1 979 and 1981 legislation this would not be possible unless we were to have a very acti vist commission which was prepared to take a broad view of its powers. Under clause 9 ( 1 ) (c)

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 9 1 9

the Commission would be able to report to the Minister on Commonwealth law or actions which should be taken by the Commonwealth on matters relating to human rights. It would be possible-I certainly hope it will be the case-for the Commission on its own initiative to suggest overriding Commonwealth laws in a number of areas, particularly in relation to Aboriginal rights.
The second of our major objections to this Bill is that it provides no judicially enforceable rem edies of any kind. We all recall how what is now known as the Murphy Human Rights Bill of 1 973 was vilified in a disgraceful and dishonest cam paign to have it rejected. Now even Government senators agree on the need for judicially enforce able remedies. Senator Missen described our proposed amendment as very attractive. He said that there was very little in the amendment with which he did not agree. Most of the criticisms ad vanced against the Bill were sound, he said. But we note that he voted against the amendment. It is perhaps interesting to note the comments which Mr Justice Ellicott made on the role ofjudges on the introduction of the 1 977 Bill. He stated:
I believe it is fundamental in a democracy that our basic human rights should be defined by Parliament and not by judges.
No one disputes that Australian courts and judges are conservative and reactionary, by and large more concerned with the preservation of the property rights of the wealthy than with the civil and political rights of individuals. However, pass ing a Bill of Rights does not mean that a parlia ment gives up its role in relation to human rights; it means that parliaments are prepared to say that there are some rights which are so basic that not even elected governments may take them away. As Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau put it, those rights depend on the outcome of no elec tions. It is those two matters-the lack of appli cation to the States and the lack of enforceable remedy-which underscore the weakness of the whole Bill.
The Government has a litany of sins of both omission and commission in the human rights area. It is the most illiberal government since the Menzies Government of the 1 950s and the Bruce Page governments 'of the 1 920s. However, no one would dispute that the majority of human rights violations have been and will continue to be per petrated by the States. The Ellicott joint approach has failed and the Durack approach is simply to ignore the States. It is clear that only a Labor government will be prepared to take the step that will give us effective human rights legislation; that is, the enactment of Commonwealth

legislation under the external affairs power, placi tum (xxix) ofsection 5 1 of the Constitution.
Mr Viner-That is a dangerous exercise. Mr LIONEL BOWEN-It is not a dangerous
exercise. Human rights are never dangerous. The
Minister is not frightened of even the voters in his electorate. The present Government, after signing the two important declarations on human rights-that is, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Convenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights-finally got around to ratifying the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on 3 1 August last year. The terms of the ratification are quite extraordinary. There are no fewer than 1 4 objections to the Covenant. Perhaps the most contentious of all of those is the reservation relat ing to Article 50 of the Covenant. Article 50 states:
The provisions of the present Covenant shall extend to all parts of federal States without any limitations or exceptions.
Of course, in 1 979 Article 50 was the subject of considerable debate concerning the non applicability of the Covenant to the States. No other federation, West Germany or Canada for instance, has ever attempted a reservation based on federalism along the lines of the Australian res ervation. It has been suggested that that reser vation may actually be void or, at the very least, there will be problems of reciprocal arrangements between Australia and other nations which have made no such reservations. The point has been made by Mr James Crawford of the University of Adelaide that the Soviet U nion could use Australia's reservation as a ground for arguing that Australia has no standing to challenge the Soviet Union's violation of the Covenant.
Among Australia's other reservations was the refusal to accept the application of the electoral principle of one vote one value. Even the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) would not object to that. That is why we still seek the enactment of a Bill drafted along the lines of the 1 973 Human Rights Bill. Such a Bill would apply not only to the Commonwealth and the State parliaments and governments but also to the courts themselves. Recently the High Court dis missed an application for special leave to appeal from a conviction on a rape charge received from a person named McInnis in Western Australia. In effect, a majority of the High Court said that whilst it was desirable that people be legally represented, the trial was not void if there was not legal representation. Such a decision would have been impossible under the United States Bill of Rights. So it is important that we realise that the

920 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

Bill of Rights is a n instruction to both governments and parliaments, as well as to the courts. It will be noticed that there is an obligation under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that people before the courts be entitled to legal aid and be legally represented before any ju dicial tribunal. But we find a high court saying that it is not necessary.
I turn now to the differences between the 1981 Bill and the 1 979 Bill. One of these matters is par ticularly relevant, that is the removal of the pro vision allowing an applicant's complaint to be dis missed on the grounds that the complainant did not have sufficient interest or concern in the pro d:edings. We are glad that at least on this small issue the Government has now seen the logic which it failed to see two years ago. The other matter concerns the requirement for disclosure of interests by members of the Commission, no doubt brought about in part by the fairly inad equate report of the Bowen Committee of Inquiry concerning Public Duty and Private Interest. We have always found that report to be inadequate, but at least the subject of pecuniary interest is now part of the Australian legislative agenda. The major difference between the 1 979 and 1981 Bills lies in the widening of thejurisdiction of the Commission to possible breaches of rights related to the Declaration of the Rights of the Child, the Declaration on the Rights of the Mentally Re tarded and the Declaration on the Rights of the Disabled. Some people might see this simply as an attempt to diffuse the abortion issue. However, there is nothing in any of these declarations that is anything other than totally worthy. All children, the mentally retarded, and disabled people, should enjoy special protection under the law. J hope that perhaps even in a small way these amendments can do something toward that end.
In view of the fact that the work of the Commission will not be limited now to easily enforce able civil and political rights, but also to rights which may involve government appropriations and community resources in general, it seems strange that the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, signed by Australia in December 1 972, and ratified in December 1 975, is not included. Matters covered by the Covenant or by the Convention are spelt out in the amendment. These include guarantees of the right to form and join trade unions, social security, an adequate standard of living, work, physical and mental health, education, and to take part in cultural life. I refer to some of Clause 2 of Article 1 0 of that Covenant. It provides:
Special protection should be accorded to mothers during a reasonable period before and after childbirth. During such

period working mothers should be accorded paid leave or leave with adequate social security benefits.
The Article then goes on to deal with other matters. I think it is significant that we have failed to embrace that Covenant in this legislation. In the Senate the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) did not reply on this issue. One would hope that the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, who represents the Attorney-General in this place, would at least seek from the Attorney General consideration of that proposal.
The other matter which we seek to have incor porated in the Commission's jurisdiction is the United Nation's International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women. In the Senate on 12 March, Senator Ryan gave notice that she would be moving a private member's Bill after July because of the Government's inaction in this area. Some of the States appear to believe that discrimination against women does not exist. In the Australian Capital Territory the whole subject is a long running saga. At this stage there seems to be no reason, pending comprehensive Federal legislation dealing with discrimination against women, that the rather ineffectual Human Rights Commission should not be given jurisdiction over matters concerning the Copenhagen convention, that is the convention outlawing all forms of discrimi nation against women. I am told that that conven tion has been accepted by 78 countries. It is surprising to think that Australia is not amongst them.
Also, given the lack ofenforcement provisions in the Bill, the Government could have given serious consideration to ratifying the optional pro tocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights so that people could appeal to the Inter national Human Rights Commission. I would suggest that it is precisely for the same reasons that the reservations were made to Article 50 of the Convention. That is because the Government is concerned that the international community should not find out that Australia's human rights record is not as rosy as it would like to portray it to be. I ndeed, this Government speaks with a great deal of duplicity on human rights generally, both by its failure to do anything about human rights at State level in Australia, and because of the view it seems to take that human rights are devisible; something that we should urge for people in the Soviet Union-a view which we share-but that we should do nothing about human rights where our economic or strategic interests may be affected, a view which we reject totally. The uselessness of this Bill and the extra ordinary width of Australia's reservations to the

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 921

Covenant make Australia's position on international human rights much weaker than it should be.
Finally, I wish to refer to paragraph (g) of the Opposition's amendment. We remain concerned at the whittling away of the powers and the status of the Commissioner for Community Relations. The Commissioner will lose his power to report directly to Parliament, and he will lose a great deal of the resources which have made the office under Mr Grassby so successful for the last five years. Whilst the Government's amendment to the Racial Discrimination Act is technical, its de feat would mean that the 1 979 Act would not come into operation, and we will oppose outright the Racial Discrimination Amendment Bill 1981 . Over the years the Opposition has made its position clear. The Government is not concerned about human rights, either in Australia or elsewhere. Posturing at international forums is about as far as it ever gets. Knowing as we do that some Government back benchers would support our amendment if they were free to do so, we can simply urge the acceptance of our amendment, well knowing that it could be defeated and that this tame Commission will come into operation. As Australians, we all regret that this country has not been able to do a great deal better on human rights. Accordingly, I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substi tuting the following words: 'the Bill be withdrawn and re drafted to provide for-
(a) its application to the laws and practices of the States and the Northern Territory;
(b) the full application, without the reservations and dec larations embodied in Australia's ratification, of the rights contained in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
(c) the specific adoption in judicially enforceable form (along the lines of the Human Rights Bill 1 973) of the rights contained in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
(d) the extension of the Commission's jurisdiction to enable it to investigate and report upon possible breaches of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (which includes guarantees of the rights to form and join trade unions, social security, and adequate standards of living, work, physical and mental health, education and to take part in cultural life);
(e) the extension of the Commission's jurisdiction to enable it to enforce the rights contained in the UN. Con vention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimi nation against Women;
(f) the expansion of the powers and functions of the Commission to give it a more effective enforcement role, especially in relation to civil and political rights, and
(g) in relation to racial discrimination matters, the reten tion of the independent status and functions, and especially the power to report directlyto Parliament of the Commissioner for Community Relations.'
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the amendment seconded?

Mrs DARLING (Lilley) ( 8 . 1 9) -1 second the amendment, Mr Deputy Speaker. Principle 1 0 of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child as proclaimed by the United Nations on 20 November 1 959, which document it is proposed be incorporated in Australia's Human Rights Commission Bill, declares:
The child shall be protected from practices which may fos ter racial, religious and any other form of discrimination. He shall be brought up in a spirit of understanding, tolerance, friendship amongst peoples, peace and universal brotherhood, and in full consciousness that his energy and talents should be devoted to the service of his fellow men.
If the sentiments expressed in this passage were achieved, we would hear the sigh of relief rising across the world, because our major problems would be resolved. If they were achieved and applied, firstly, to the deliberations in this chamber and thence to those in every boardroom, union, factory, school, home and institution in Australia, social injustice would be resolved in this country and one would hear a shout of glee from our pensioners. We in this chamber would be voting in unison to lift the burden of the disadvantaged in our nation. Rather than there being opposition to the constructive amendments being put forward by the Opposition I hoped that there would be consideration of the facts put forward by Government members and that we would vote to pass these amendments.
It is a sobering thought that we in this chamber should have the task and responsibility of weigh ing up and choosing those basic rights which we believe every Australian citizen should possess. Having made this choice it is necessary to strengthen it with legislation as strong as that which strengthens the ideological direction 'thou shalt not kHl'. But this is not the case with the legislation under review. That is one of the sound reasons why the Opposition is putting forward amendments to rectify the omission. I repeat that I hope that Government members who really believe in the basic rights of man, woman and child, will support these amendments.
To date this debate on human rights in this country has generated a lot of noise, a lot of hot air. I am concerned that this will be as far as the Government's commitment to ensuring real rights for humans in need of protection will go. The only noise created by the Human Rights Commission will be the gnashing of gums of a toothless paper tiger. Australia must not use this legislation merely to demonstrate its bona fide in the brother hood of nations or its justification in claiming to be a soul brother to the black African nations. The Commission must not become a sop to the international pretensions of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), something for him to tuck

922 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

under one arm as he strides the world stage of international affairs.
I do not necessarily subscribe to the edict that charity begins at home if home means one's own parish only. We are part of a global village arid should accept a broad responsibility for the welfare of our fellow man. Surely the achievement of human rights should begin at home. How can we offer to cure the ills of other societies when we have shown that we cannot cure our own. We appear to have an ingrained parochial notion that human rights are those rights which other nations infringe. Nothing could be further from the truth. Australia, and particularly Queensland, is blazed with a trail of instances where people without status or power in our community are denied their fundamental rights. This legislation, as far as it goes, aims to rectify this undesirahle situation in two ways: Firstly, by widening the terms of reference of the Human Rights Commission as provided in the Human Rights Commission Bi1I 1 979 and, secondly, by extending the so-called jurisdic tion of the Commission to possible infringements of those rights proclaimed through recent United Nations declarations-the declarations on the rights of the child, the rights of the mentally re tarded and the rights of the disabled.
The wider application of the legislation serves to explain and highlight the wider implications of human rights as being more than a report in the overseas news section of the morning newspaper. Let us take as an example the implication regard ing the rights of the unborn child. Recognition of prenatal injuries or accidents gives to the human who has been injured or affected by accident the right to sue. If Labor's amendments are adopted and the Commission is given power, inclusion of the rights of the child wil l enable the Federal Government to investigate through the Commission the operation of State laws relating to children and minors. There are aspects of Queensland's child welfare system which frankly are appalling. The rights of minors is an area of authority in which State governments have been traditionally unchaJlenged to the detriment of minors. In 1 979, 4,000 minors came before the Children's Court in Queensland. Estimates suggest that seven or eight out of every ten were not legally represented.
Some provisions of the Children's Services Act in Queensland are brutal and archaic. I know of young girls aged 1 2, 1 3 or 14 in my electorate of Lilley who have been forced from the family home through brutalisation at home. Such girls are picked up by the police and institutionalised because they are in moral danger. They are housed with convicted felons. That is a shocking

situation. The fact that it should be allowed to exist is an indictment of our society. Juvenile jus tice in Queensland ought to be high on the Commission's agenda for investigation. I place on record my support for the submission made by the Reverend Wally Dethless for the Brisbane Youth Advocacy Centre, the aims of which I would like to have incorporated in Hansard. This ties in with what I am talking about, and the Centre is meet ing an existing need. I seek leave to incorporate the document in Hansard.
Mr VinerMr Deputy Speaker, if I can have a look at the document I may be able to accom modate the honourable member.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) The honourable member for Lilley will now he aware that in similar circumstances she must fi rst ac quaint the Minister at the table with the document to be incorporated.
Leave granted. The document read as follows

YOUTH ADVOCACY CENTRE
I . The aims of the Youth Advocacy Centre are as follows:

(i)

to represent young Children's Courts;

people

unde, r

1

7

years

of age

in

the

(ii) to inform young people and their paren'ts of their legal

rights and the workings of the Children's Courts;

(iii) to research the gaps in thejuvenilejustice system;

(iv) to evaluate the nature, quality and quantity of the ser

vices being offered by thelegaloffice for young people;

(v) to speak out with and on behalf of young people and

their parents with a view to making a juvenile justice system more just;

(vi) to train lawyers and social workers in the workings of the juvenilc justice and welfare systems and to provide

up-to-date and on-going training;

(vii) to stimulate local communities to an awareness of the

problems facing young people at risk and their families

in their own communities and to action.

2. The method ofwork
The Youth Advocacy Centre will-
( 1 ) Provide 24-hour on-call legal assistance for young people apprchended by the police.
(2) Provide lawyers with social-work backup; a young person's legal problems can be less than 50 per cent of his or her problems. The other 50 per cent can be fam ilies, accommodation, employment, education, health, etc.
(3) Be present where the Children's Courts aresitting, e.g. Brisbane, Ipswich, Beenleigh, Inala, etc.
(4) Train other lawyers to do voluntary work in the Chil dren's Courts in countryareas.
(5) Visit schools especially in under-privileged areas and inform young people of their rights with the help of special cards, kitsand pamphlets.
(6) (a) Obtain the services of lawyers in Brisbane who
will take on three cases per year on a voluntary basis; (b) Provide training for these lawyers; and (c) Supervise and evaluate their work.

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 923

(7) Organise consumer groups of young people and parents who can reflect on their experiences with the Department of Children's-Services and the courts and make recommendations to the appropriate authorities.
Mrs DARLING-I thank the House. Unfortu nately, if the Bill in question is left unamended, recording moral support for such a worthy initiative is just about the limit of a Federal member's power in this area. Even with the Human Rights Commission and the extension of its charter to in clude the rights of the child I fear that the Queensland Government's children's services legislation and the implementing authorities will remain untouchable. The United States Federal Government has begun withholding or withdraw ing funds from the States where those funds are used to incarcerate young people. It has some power as the overriding authority which gives the money, and it requires certain standards. At the same time it is making more funds available for re habilitative strategies and programs, which is a much better way of dealing with this situation. If this House passes amendments which give power to the Commission I hope this sort of action will eventuate from the work of the Commission. The Commission is useless without that power. This is the sort of action which I would like to see the Commission recommending to the Federal Government. Why should it not recommend such action? I am afraid that such action would be considered unthinkable by the Federal Government which is bound by the policies of federalism put forward by the Prime Minister and which appears to treat the Queensland Premier as an unehaIIen gable, independent foreign head of state.
I put it to those thinking members on the Government benches-I know that there are some of them-that the Commission can consider but it cannot act. Admittedly, it cannot act and it does not purport to do so. The Commission can consider breaches of rights beyond the traditional civil and political rights but its functions extend very little beyond consideration of human rights violations. In the 1 979 legislation the Commission was conceived to ensure compliance with the In ternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights adopted by the United Nations in 1 966 and signed by Australia on 1 8 December 1 972. The signing of that Covenant was one of the first actions of the then Labor Government.
The establishment of the Commission was one of the obligations Australia accepted as a signa tory. The range of rights encompassed by that Covenant includes the inherent rights to life sadly that has become a slogan rather than a statement of principle-freedom from cruel and de grading treatment, freedom from arbitrary arrest

and detention, freedom of thought, the presump tion of innocence, the right to trial within a reasonable time, the liberty of movement, the freedoms of conscience, religion, expression and peaceful assembly. One additional covenant which should be considered for inclusion within the scope of the Commission is the 1 966 Inter national Covenant on Economic, Social and Cul tural Rights which was signed by Australia at the same time as the Covenant to which I referred previously.
Another obvious extension of the field of human rights would be the inclusion of the 1 979 United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. Who on the Government benches is prepared to deny that women face disadvantages and discrimi nation in gaining access to housing, credit, employment, training, education and legal rep resentation, and in the taxation and social security systems? It seems the height of hypocrisy and in consistency to sign a declaration outlawing all forms of discrimination against women and then do absolutely nothing to enforce or back up that commitment. To call such an exercise window dressing is an understatement. It can be nothing more than base political expediency. I note with pleasure that Senator Susan Ryan will be moving to rectify the situation.
The Opposition has put the view that the legislation, by widening the areas of concern through the inclusion of some United Nations covenants not previously included in the 1 979 legislation, is merely extending the Commission's inadequacy and inefficacy to new areas of human rights. In stead of being useless in two categories of human rights as already tabled, it will now be useless in four categories. That is this Government's version of progress. It is virtually pointless to extend the Commission's scope as this legislation would do, or to call, as the Opposition has done, for even greater extensioc if the Commission does not have the authority, the executive power and the statu tory muscle to support its jurisdiction. This Commission is charged with monitoring, investigation and reporting on some but not all human rights violations.
One does not need glasses to see the holes in this legislation. The Bill's provisions are not judicially enforceable. As the Women's Electoral Lobby has observed, the Bill has so many exclusions to the obtaining of information by subpoena that it is almost impossible to make a case to put before a court. Alternatively, cases which are brought before a court can be dismissed on the basis that they would somehow be against the public interest. Defendants or witnesses in such cases can refuse

924 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

to testify on the grounds of self-incrimination. The greatest inadequacy of the Commission is that its limited powers do not extend to the juris diction of State and Northern Territory governments. I speak as a Queenslander. In my maiden question in this Parliament, which was on human rights in Queensland, specifically the treatment of Aborigines in that State, which is shocking, I sought to draw the Prime Minister's attention to his greatest constitutional weapon in enforcing human rights observance on the States-the external affairs power. The Prime Minister rejected my suggestion. He stated:

In the view of this Government it--

That is, the foreign affairs power 

would be a wrong way to achieve a desirable objective.

Is the elimination of what I referred to in my ques

tion as 'the infringements of human rights and

maltreatment of minorities in Queensland' not a

desirable objective? I say that it is not only a desir

able objective; two imminent events make it an

immediate objective. If it is not achievable by the

foreign affairs power, even greater attention

should be given to the Australian Labor Party's

amendments which are under discussion now.

The events I refer to are the Commonwealth

Games which are to be held in Brisbane and the

Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.

The Prime Minister runs the risk of having the

termites from Queensland undermining his inter

national platforms. With the spotlight on

Australia and on his own back yard, the Prime

Minister may feel a little less self-righteous in

championing the cause of human rights and may

feel a little more disposed to using the only real

and effective means he has at his disposal to

achieve that desirable objective. Implicit in the

Prime Minister's reply was the fact that the

foreign affairs power does exist and could be used.

The only question mark hangs over whether it

should be used. in saying that it

mWuestobnethuissesdi.de. .

have

no

hesitation

As a Queenslander, I would note that the Prem ier of my State has the same attitude to the issue of civil and human rights as he does to income tax. He prefers to flatten it and, if he cannot do that, then avoid it. His Government's suppression of civil and political rights is already well documented. It is a catalogue of incredible politi cal and personal abuse of human rights violations and infringements of civil liberties which has earned for the Queensland Government the odi ous distinction of being included in a list which was compiled by the United States Department of State of governments accused of such violations.

Mr Good luck-It is still being elected.

Mrs DARLING-Australia is not or should not be half a dozen foreign countries. [t should be one cohesive body. The Federal Government, if it is to justify its existence, must accept some responsibility for its people in every State. Regret tably, in answer to the honourable member for Franklin, the Queensland Government is still being elected. Really that is the reason we need to give power to this legislation-to keep that Government under control.
Mr Deputy Speaker, J put it to you that honourable members on the other side of the chamber should demonstrate their concern for the insufficiency in the Human Rights Commission Bill by supporting the amendment moved by the Opposition.
Mr HARRIS (Chisholm) (8.36)-1 would like to address myself to two aspects of the Human Rights Commission Bill. The purpose of this Bill is to establish, as we all know, a Human Rights Commission. This Commission would promote the observance of human rights throughout Australia and immediately within the limits of Commonwealth law. It is contemplated, 1 hope, that in co-operation with the States regarding human rights matters, the Commission will assist the Government in carrying out Australia's international responsibilities in the cause of human rights. This obligation was undertaken by Australia as a party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. I am glad that the Bill seems likely, finally, to pass in to law. [t has had a difficult and much delayed course in this Parliament.
As I have said, there are two matters which I wish to discuss. The first is that the Commission will, at least initially, be limited in its operation to the laws of the Commonwealth and its Terri tories. It is true that clause 1 1 of the Bill provides for arrangements to be made between the Federal Government, and the State governments and the Government of the Northern Territory. Pursuant to that clause the Attorney-General may make ar rangements for the performance on a joint basis of functions relating to the promotion of the observ ance of human rights in a State or a Territory. He may arrange for the performance by a State or a Territory or by an authority of a State or Terri tory on behalf of the Commonwealth of functions relating to the promotion of the observance of human rights. That includes the functions of the Human Rights Commission itself. Further, that clause permits, by agreement, the performance by the Commission of functions on behalf of a State or a Territory relating to the promotion of the ob servance of human rights. There can be no argument that the kind of arrangements proposed in

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 1 981 REPRESENTATIVES 925

clause I I would enable the laws of a State or a Territory to be subject to the provisions of the Bill and the attentions of the Human Rights Commission.
The Attorney-General (Senator Durack) has said that clause 1 1 provides for a range of co operative arrangements to be entered into with the States and that it is his expectation that this mechanism will be fully used. I certainly hope so. On a previous occasion when I spoke in this place I argued, in a different area of law, for a reference of State powers to the Commonwealth. I would not like it to be thought that I am seeking a whole sale takeover of State responsibilities by the Commonwealth. That is simply not so. On the prior occasion I was simply talking about the area of family law, which in my view ought to come under one law covering the whole Commonwealth . Here J concede and readily accept that what we are talking about in regard to State laws is a whole variety of laws which, in my view, quite rightly, are the domain of the States. In many of those areas they affect human rights. Clearly the kinds of things which we are contemplating in this Human Rights Bill ought to apply to State law as they will do to Federal law.
I would greatly prefer that the arrangements proposed in clause 1 1 be used and work success fully. I would much prefer that we work as a fed eral body and not intrude into areas which the States ought to be managing. It must be ack nowledged, as has been mentioned earlier in this debate, that in some areas of State activity the human rights record is scarcely one which is com mendable. The record of the States, put at its gentlest, can be described as an uneven one. I hope the States realise that if they wish federalism to work, as I am sure all of us on our side of the House, and I hope all of us do, they must play their part. Where opportunities are there for cooperation they ought to co-operate.
The provisions in clause I I do not in any way impugn State sovereignty. If the States co-operate pursuant to that provision they will have their own means of ensuring that their laws comply with the Human Rights Commission Bill. The Attorney has said that ministerial meetings on human rights will continue to exercise a role at a top policy level in considering these issues. He be lieves continuing consultation between the various levels of government will promote generally the cause of human rights in Australia. As I have said, I hope that he is right. I urge him to take every opportunity to encourage the use of the pro cedures provided in the Bill. As I have said, I hope that the State governments appreciate that if they do not contribute as they ought one day one

government in the federal sphere may seek to in trude where the States would not wish it to.
The other matter I wish to raise relates to the inclusion in the schedules to the present Bill of three Declarations. Schedules 2, 3 and 4 contain the Declaration of the Rights of the Child, 1 959: the Declaration on the Rights of the Mentally Re tarded, 1 9 7 1 ; and the Declaration on the Rights of the Disabled, 1 975. When a similar Bill was last before the Parliament its passage was stalled because of the differences of view concerning what was described as the Simon amendment. The Bill in its present form has been defused very largely by including the Declaration of the Rights of the Child in Schedule 2. The third paragraph in the preamble to the Declaration recites:
. . . the child, by reason of his physical and mental im maturity, needs special safeguards and care, including appro priate legal protection, before as well as after birth . . .
The Declaration of the Rights of the Child calls for men and women everywhere, in voluntary organisations and in governments, to strive for the observance of the rights of the child which it pro claims. Each of the three declarations does not involve the same kind of commitment in international law as does the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It is intended that the Human Rights Commission will monitor and report on the way in which the Commonwealth departments and agencies conform to them. It can be only for the best that the different views ex pressed in the previous debate have now been able to be resolved with the inclusion of these three declarations. This is not the kind of measure that we would wish to have passed in an atmosphere of bitterness, as I think the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) described the prior debate. To succeed, the Commission needs to have the widest possible support throughout the community.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition has moved an amendment which commences with the request that the Bill be withdrawn and redrafted to provide for various measures. I do not wish to discuss the substance of those proposed matters for redrafting. It seems to me that if we do that we will be back where we started and the Bill may never be successfully passed. To withdraw and redraft now would impose further delay. When e v e r t h e Bill n e x t comes before t h e Parliament-of course, it would have to go back through the two Houses-would be the opportunity to reopen matters which have previously been debated. We cannot be sure what the course of this legislation would then be. The amendment indeed is not an amendment to the Bill itself. It is an amendment to the motion that the Bill be now

926 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

read a second time. A s I understand it, i f the amendment were carried the Bill would certainly not be proceeded with today. In fact, one assumes that it would never proceed. That I think would be the worst possible result. I hope that the Bill can now be passed with the general agreement of all, notwithstanding reservations people may have about various facets of it. I hope that the Commission can be brought into operation as soon as possible. I support the BilL
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (8.46)-In joining in the debate on the Human Rights Commission Bill I take the opportunity of declaring my disap pointment at certain aspects of the Bill which, I believe, indicate considerable deficiencies in the proposed operation of the Human Rights Commission. Australia has been long overdue for a Bill of Rights, but the present Bill is a rather pale imi tation of the kind of safeguards of civil liberties which many Australians have been demanding for years. It is questionable whether the proposed Human Rights Commission is better than nothing at alL One thing is certain, however, and that is that there are serious omissions which I would now like to draw to the attention of honourable members.
In referring to the provisions of the Bill I will not be using the precise language of the Bill. I believe honourable members will not find any difficulty in following the points I wish to make. I turn to sub-clause (4) of clause 1 0 which gives the Commission the power to decide not to hold an in quiry as a result of a complaint if, amongst other things:
(a) the complaint is frivolous or vexatious or is not made in good faith;
(b) the subject-matter of the complaint is trivial;
Note the words 'frivolous', 'vexatious' and 'trivial' and the phrase 'not made in good faith'. These terms are highly subjective. In effect, they mean that the Commission could decide not to hold an inquiry for a variety of political reasons. How many street marchers and demonstrators havc been described by our national newspapers as frivolous and vexatious people?
Mrs Darling-Hundreds in Queensland. Mr MILTONThat is right. Is it likely that the Commission would consider a complaint of a violation of human rights from such a person as worthy of an inquiry? Likewise the word 'frivol ous' can be applied quite differently depending upon the political or philosophical view of a com missioner. At the very least there should be a right of appeal against a decision of the Commission not to hold an inquiry on the grounds contained in paragraphs (a) and (b) of sub-clause (4) ofclause

1 0. Again, in sub-clause (5) of clause 1 0 the Commission has the power not to hold an inquiry if 1 2 months has elapsed since the act complained of occurred. This time limit appears unreasonably restrictive. One could envisage many possible cases of a violation of human rights when it may take a considerable time before sufficient evidence could be accumulated which would convince the commissioners that the complaint was genuine. The time limit should be extended to at least two years. There should also be a right of appeal against the decision of the commissioners.
Another provision of the Bill which contains considerable deficiencies is sub-clause (2) of clause 1 5 by which it is possible to prevent the dis closure of evidence relevant to a human rights vi olation by certification from the Attorney General that this disclosure would be contrary to the public interest. Here we have another of these vague, indeterminate terms-'contrary to the public interest'. What is the public interest? Let us take the example of the Vietnam war. The then Liberal Party-led Federal Government considered that any protest against the war was con trary to the public interest. Had this Bill been in operation at that time, any person whose human rights had been violated because of his protest against such a war would have been unable to obtain evidence to support his complaint. Yet we all know that Australia's participation in the Viet nam war was a crime against the Vietnamese people. What is contrary to the public interest is a subjective judgment which depends upon the political complexion of the government in poWer at the time of the alleged human rights violation. The invoking of sub-clause (2) could mean that a multitude of human rights violations could not be proceeded against because the complainant was unable to obtain essential information.
Mr Cohen-It would be worse than in Russia, wouldn't it?
Mr MILTON-The honourable member is right; it would be worse. I t is true that it is not the Attorney-General but the Chairman of the Commission who is to decide whether the disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public interest, but does anyone believe that the Chair man would oppose the view of the Attorney General? The precedents provided by the actions of the chairmen of other such statutory bodies do not give me any confidence that the Chairman of this Commission would take an independent view on such a matter. I n its practical effect, the pro visions of clause 1 5 (2) would make the gathering of information almost impossible-in circumstances in which human rights violations could be

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 927

legion. Another serious flaw in clause 1 5 is con tained in sub-clause ( 8 ) , which declares:
. . . that it is a reasonable excuse for a person to refuse to furnish information or produce a document . . . or to refuse to answer a' question . . . when giving evidence under this section that the information, the production of the document or the answer to the question might tend to incriminate him.
That is, I might add, a sexist phrase. I would have hoped that our legislators might have come to terms with that matter. Why is a guilty party given such an option? The violation of human rights is a serious matter and no guilty person should be permitted to take this easy way of evad ing his or her responsibility. Surely it would have been possible to include a subclause which would have effectively ensured that the incriminating evidence would not be used against such a person. When the effect of this sub-clause is added to that of sub-clause (2) , and so many potential violators can use those escape clauses to avoid the publi cation of their activities, one wonders whether the Government is really serious in its avowed inten tion of promoting the observance of human rights.
Another grave deficiency is the lack of publicity which will be given by the Commission to human rights violations. Clause 1 6 specifies that where, after inquiry, the Commission finds that an act or practice is inconsistent with 01 contrary to any human rights, it shall report to the appropriate Minister accordingly. Publicity is not required and no sanctions are specified, so non-government offenders could completely ignore the findings. It is true that in due coursej the Minister would table the report in Parliament, but the progress of a report through the parliamentary procedures can be long and tedious. It would not be difficult to con ceive an item's being delayed or even perhaps overlooked. My point is that the Commission should have the power to make public in a far more effective way, perhaps by official Press re lease, any transgression of human rights. These public announcements could be made immedi ately the Commission had concluded its inquiry and need not be subject to the delay and undue formality that are associated with publishing a report.
1 consider that another important deficiency in the Bill is that there is no right of appeal against the findings of the commissioners which arise from their inquiry. I believe that the adoption of a Bill on human rights in Australia has been long overdue, but it gives me cause for great regret that the Government has abdicated its responsibilities by producing such a weak and ineffective body as the proposed Human Rights Commission. Of course, I accept that in practical terms there can

be no such thing as a value-free or neutral interpretation of human rights. Frequently, debates on human rights in Australia ignore the economic, cultural and social processes which result in millions of Australian workers and their families suffering unemployment, poverty and cultural deprivation. Such people suffer the deprivation of their human rights just as surely as if they were physically restrained or maltreated. In particular, the human rights of the Aboriginal people of Australia are being violated every day, in the States of Western Australia and Queensland especially.
Another aspect of human rights which is often neglected is the right of workers in their work place. At present few employers are willing to grant their employees the right to participate in the decision-making processes in relation to their work, yet in many countries this elementary human right is well recognised and is operating as a part of normal industriaI relations.
As I have mentioned these few matters it must be clear to honourable members that 1 am less than enthusiastic about the provisions of the Bill. I realise that they have been before the House on a previous occasion. I can only express my disap pointment that the Government, in reSUbmitting the Bill, has not seen fit to remedy the serious deficiencies that I have outlined. I support the amendment that has been moved by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) .
Mr N. A . BROWN (Diamond Valley) (8.58) -The Human Rights Commission Bill is a very significant piece of legislation. As is well known to honourable members, it has been before the House on a previous occasion. In my submission, it cannot be denied that the present Bill is a far more desirable piece of legislation than that which was previously before us. That is so for a number of reasons, one of which is that it now includes in its schedules a covenant, the full title of which is the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and three very significant declarations. The first, which is contained in Schedule 2, is the Declaration of the Rights of the Child, one of whose preambles includes the statement:
Whereas the child, by reason of his physical and mental im maturity, needs special safeguards and care, including appro priate legal protection, before as well as after birth.
11 is appropriate that the House should have before it a piece of legislation which recognises that fact and recognises it as a proposition which is contained in the Declaration of the Rights of the Child. Too often, I suspect, we overlook in legislation the rights of those who, for whatever reason, cannot speak for themselves. The para graph which I have read refers to one such reason .

928 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

We are concerned with children before as well as after they are born. I support the manner in which the Government has approached this issue -by including in a schedule the Declaration of the Rights of the Child, to which the Human Rights Commision of course wilLha-ye regard in its delib erations. So it is appropriate in every respect that we have on the record now, as one of the matters to which the Human Rights Commission will have regard, recognition of the fact that one important group of people to whom attention should be given when we are considering human rights is unborn children. I compliment the Government upon approaching the issue in this manner.
The Bill establishes a Human Rights Commission. One of its functions, as set out in clause 9 ( 1 ) (f) , is 'to promote an understanding and ac ceptance, and the public discussion, of human rights in Australia and the external Territories'. I presume that means, amongst other things, that the Commission will encourage discussion in Australia of issues of human rights. It is on one of those subjects that I wish to address some remarks to the House tonight.
Debate on the Bill is, in general terms, import ant for a number of reasons. The first is that it provides an opportunity to express our concern for human rights and their preservation; secondly, it enables us to consider the human rights issues involved when we set up machinery to examine breaches of human rights, as we are doing now by means of this Bill; and, thirdly, the legislation re minds us, because of the international treaties that in effect we are implementing by means of this legislation, that human rights is an international issue. I have already drawn the attention of the House to the fact that one of the functions of the Commission is to promote an understanding and acceptance, and the public discussion, of human rights in Australia and the external Territories. It is in that area that I wish to make some remarks. The basis of those remarks is a motion of which notice was given by the honourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton) on 4 December 1 980. That motion relates to the denial ,of human rights of the Baha'i people in Iran. The motion of which the honourable member for Mackellar gave notice reads:
That this House-
( I ) expresses its graveconcern over the persecution of the 200,000 adherents of the Baha'i faith in Iran by the regime of the Ayatollah Khomeini, and notes with alarm the recent execution of a member of the Baha'i faith in Tabriz solely on the grounds ofhis religion;
(2) calls upon the Government of Iran to release from
custody those Baha'is, including 9 members of the National Spiritual Assembly of Baha'is of Iran, who have been unjustly detained, and to restore the holy

places, properties, community centres and companies that have been confiscated; (3) commends the Australian Government fot its assistance to Australian Baha'is in expressing their protest to the Iranian Government, and
(4) requests the Australian Government to lend its support to moves in international forums designed to re store to the Iranian Baha'is their freedom to live their lives in peace and practice their religion in harmony with their fellow citizens ofother faiths.
The honourable member for Mackellar also spoke on that issue in the adjournment debate on an earlier occasion. I give him credit for raising the issue by that means. Part of the motion commends the Australian Government for its assistance to Australian Baha'is in expressing their protest to the Iranian Government against this particular and fundamental denial of human rights. It is therefore appropriate to consider this issue further in the debate on this legislation. It is also appropriate to do so because, as I have already said, one of the functions of the Commission will be to promote an understanding and acceptance, and the public discussion, of human rights in Australia and the external Territories.
The substance of the matter can be compressed into a number of short points. I hope that I can put' them on the record in a few moments. The situation is that, in the first place, the 300,000 to 400,000 members of the Baha'i religion in Iran have been harassed in the exercise of their re ligion; secondly, their centres have been raided and documents, including their membership lists, have been seized; thirdly, their spiritual meetings and religious classes have been broken up and their teachers have been arrested; and, fourthly, their trading company has been confiscated and its employees interrogated. Their buildings and land which have been used solely for religious purposes have been taken over by the Government and their national headquarters, cemeteries and hospital have been confiscated. Fifthly, some of the members have been dismissed from government service in Iran because of religious beliefs and for no other reason whatsoever; and, sixthly, one of the Ayatollahs has said that Baha'is are people whom Moslems may annihilate without fear of punishment. They have been branded as apostates and abused, and their religion has been denied as a legitimate religion. Seventhlythis is far worse than all that they have been per secuted and beaten and their leaders have been ar rested. Indeed, some adherents of this faith have been executed.
These are violations of the most fundamental human rights that we could possibly articulate. They deserve to be condemned in the strongest terms. In particular, they are violations of Article

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 929

1 8 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which was signed by Iran, amongst other countries. These violations are also contrary to Article 27 of the Covenant, which is set out in a schedule to the very Bill that we are debating tonight. Article 27 reads as follows:
In those States in which ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities exist, persons belonging to such minorities shall not be denied the right, in community with the other members of their group, to enjoy their own culture, to profess and practise their own religion, or to use their own language.
The first two paragraphs of Article 1 8 state:
1 . Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, con science and religion. This right shall include freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice, and freedom, either individually or in community with others and in public or private to manifest his religion or belief in worship, observ ance, practice and teaching.
2. No one shall be subject to coercion which would impair his freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice.
It is appropriate that we should have it very firmly in our minds that the Covenant contains those declarations of very basic human rights. I hope that when the Commission is established it has regard to those rights and to breaches which occur, even if they occur outside Australia; so long as that can help to illustrate in accordance with the Commission's functions the fact that basic human rights exist, that on occasions those human rights are broken and that when they are broken those breaches should be condemned. We can conclude from all of this that, first of all, the adherents of the Baha'i faith are being persecuted in breach of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which is annexed to this Bill, and in breach of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We can conclude secondly that their religion and its survival in Iran are at risk.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I thank you for your indulgence in enabling me to make those points which may not, on immediate consideration, be relevant to the precise clauses of the legislation but I know that the views I have expressed are the views also of many, if not all, members of the Op position in this Parliament who would, like honourable members on this side of the Parliament, wish to record their condemnation of the denial of basic human rights. Without taking up more of the time of the House, I wish to incorpor ate in Hansard-I think permission has been given in advance by the Deputy Leader of the Op position (Mr Lionel Bowen)-some declarations which are similar to the views I have expressed. That will avoid the necessity of my speaking longer. Nevertheless it will put on the record the views of both this Parliament and a number of international bodies about these very grievous

breaches of human rights to which I have been referring. The first document is a resolution of the European Parliament passed on 1 9 September 1 980. The second is a written declaration, being No. 88 of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, dated 29 September 1 980. The third is a motion passed by the House of Com mons of Canada on 16 July 1 980. The fourth is a declaration on the state of religious minorities in Iran made by the Federation of Protestant Churches in Switzerland, Human Rights Commission, on 1 2 September 1 979. I ask leave to in corporate those documents in Hansard.
Leave granted. The documents read as follows-
Friday, 19 September 1980 RESOLUTION on the persecution of members of the Bahai community in
Iran The European Parliament,
recalling its unfailing attachment to the international pro tection of human rights,
recognising in particular the need to protect the rights of re ligious minorities in all countries,
concerned at the systematic campaign of persecution directed in Iran against the 300,000 members of the Bahai community (the biggest religious minority in Iran) and the accompanying violations of fundamental human rights, in particular:
(a) the refusal of any legal protection to the Bahai minority,
(b) the summary arrest, detention and execution of leaders of the Bahai community,
(c) the confiscation or destruction of the resources and means ofsubsistence of the Bahai and the arbitrary dis missals or refusals to employ Bahais,
(d) the threats and acts of violence against the Bahais in an attempt to force them to repudiate their faith,
1 . Condemns the violation of the human rights of all re ligious minorities in Iran, more particularly the members of the Bahai faith whose rights as a religious minority are not recognised by the Iranian constitution;
2. Calls upon the Government of Iran to grant the Bahai community the legal recognition and protection to which all minorities are entitled under the provisions of the various UN pacts and convention on human rights;
3. Also condemns the illegal measures taken against Cath olic and Anglican leaders and the execution of leading members of the Jewish community;
4. Calls upon the Foreign Ministers of the European Com munity meeting in political co-operation to make urgent rep resentations to the Iranian authorities to put an end to the per secution of the members of the Bahai community, and to allow them to practise their religion freely and enjoy all civil, political, social, economic and cultural rights;
5. Requests the Commission and Council to impose an em bargo on all sales of surplus agricultural products to Iran where subsidies by European taxpayers are involved until full human rights are restored to Iranian citizens;

930 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

6 . Instructs its President to forward this resolution to the Council, Commission, the Foreign Ministers meeting in politi cal co-operation, to the Government of Iran, to the Governments and Parliaments of the - Member States and to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
COUNCIL OF EUROPE Parliamentary Assembly WRITTEN DECLARAnON NO. 88

At the beginning of July all federal parliamentarian groups appealed to the Iranian authorities to grant freedom of con science (in german it means religious freedom K.S.) to the Baha'is in Iran.
At the same time, the human rights commission of the fed eration of protestant Churches in Switzerland received this documentation on the situation of the Baha'is in Iran, with the request to publish it once notified.

on persecutions in Iran The undersigned, members of the Assembly,

\ . Scandalised at the systematic campaign of persecution directed in Iran against the 300,000 members of the Bahai community, and the accompanying violations of human rights, including:

a. refusal of any legal protection to the Bahai minority; b. summary arrest, detention and execution of leaders of
the Bahai community, and the destruction and confisca tion ofproperty and resources of the Bahai community;

2. Equally concerned at the gross violations of human rights inflicted upon other minorities in Iran, including Jews, Roman Catholics and Anglicans,

3. Call upon the Committee of Ministers to make urgent representations to the Iranian authorities to put an end to these illegal and inacceptable persecutions.

66.276 01.7

Signed: MART KRIEPS KERSHAW TABONE Total: 4

HUMAN RIGHTS

End of August we were notified to proceed. Meanwhile the Iranian government has taken further actions against the Baha'is. Thus, at the registration, children who declare their membership in this religious community are not admitted to school. Further, 37 national Baha'i leaders have been put on the list ofthose who may not leave Iran. At present their sanc tuaries which are of international importance, are profaned and destroyed.
The 300,000 Christians, who mostly belong to ethnical minorities are, it seems, subjected to less important oppres sions. Nevertheless their hospitals have been confiscated, cor respondence courses had to be stopped and libraries were closed. The Iranian members of the episcopal-Church have been affected most.
We are aware that here it is not only a question of the rights of Baha'is or Christians, but of the religious freedom of minorities and the respect of the dignity of all the peoples living in Iran in general. Terrified by the persecution of the Kurds, we are publishing this document today in the hope that those personalities invested with the task of elaboration a new constitution for Iran would pay special attention to the pro tection ofminorities and would grant religious freedom.
For the human rights commission of the Federation of protestant Churches in Switzerland.

Condemnation of Persecution of Religious Minorities in Iran-Motion under S.O. 43
Mr GeoffScott (Hamilton-Wentworth): Madam Speaker, I rise, under the provisions of Standing Order 43, on a grave matter of urgency which I hope will receive a sympathetic support on all sides of this House.
In view of at least 26 more Iranians dying on Monday before a firing squad, including two leaders of the Baha'i re ligious sect, I move, seconded by the honourable member for Eglinton-Lawrence (Mr de Corneille):
That this House of Commons deplores the continued per secution ofreligious minorities in Iran, especially the 200,000 Baha'is, and urges that this total abuse of religious tolerance be brought to the attention of the Human Rights Committee of the United Nations.

Heh. Rusterholz
Mr N. A. BROWN-Finally, may 1 thank the Deputy Leader of the Opposition for his concurrence in the incorporation and express the hope that all members of the House believe, as I do, that breaches of human rights, no matter where they occur, should be roundly condemned; that the particular breaches to which I have referred are very serious and fundamental breaches of very basiC human rights and that they should be con demned by all civilised countries and all civilised peoples.

Madam Speaker: Such a motion requires the unanimous consent of the House. Is there unanimous consent?
Some hon. Members: Agreed. Madam Speaker: Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the motion?
Some hon. Members: Agreed. Motion agreed to.
DECLARATION ON THE STATE OF RELIGIOUS MINORITIES IN IRAN
In agreement with the executive committee of the feder ation of protestant Churches in Switzerland, its human rights commission publishes the enclosed document on the state of the Baha'is in Iran.

Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (9.1 I )-The Human Rights Commission Bill 1981 now before this House contains essentially the same unsatisfac tory elements as the original 1 979 Bill. The major objections now are as they were then and I will just outline them briefly. They are, firstly, the fail ure of the Bill to apply to the States; secondly, the failure to create judicially enforceable rights of any kind; thirdly, the failure to give the proposed Human Rights Commission any effective power; and fourthly, the absorption of the Office of the Commissioner for Community Relations into this Commission, thus downgrading the status and

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 9 3 1

independence of the Office of Community Relations. The Opposition has proposed amendments to rectify these deficiencies in the legislation. I hope that the Government will give these very serious consideration.

A further aspect of the 1 98 I Bill also deserves some attention. In extending the provisions of the Bill in relation to children, the mentally retarded and the disabled, we are moving into an area of social, economic and cultural rights. These are indisputably human rights too, but they require the provision of services and resources to achieve their ends, rather than merely judicial decisions and judgments as in the case of civil and political rights. It would be preferable to include alI the areas under the umbrelIa of social, economic and cultural rights rather than just these three examples and consider giving the Commissionjur isdiction to enable it to investigate and report on possible breaches of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as outlined in the Opposition's amendment.

There are several glaring omissions in this respect are provisions for Aboriginals, migrants and women, as well as many others. In particular the Bill does not extend the jurisdiction of the Human Rights Commission to the United Nations Con vention on the Elimination of All Forms of Dis crimination against Women signed by Australia in July 1 980. There should be no need for me to ex plain the great improvements that are needed for improving the status of women in this country. All we have to do is look around this House to see a glaring example of the inequalities of women in our society. We have only three female members in this House, all from the Opposition, and there have only ever been six women members of the House of Representatives. That is appalling dis crimination. But more importantly, women in Australia continue to be discriminated against in terms of educational and employment opportunities. Eight years after an Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission decision giving equal pay for men and women, there is still an average 48 per cent gap in pay rates. Average weekly earnings for women are $ 142 compared with $227 for men.

Of course it is not only in terms of remuner

ation that women in the work force suffer dis

crimination. Women have traditionalIy been

confined by their training and by their social ex

pectations, to the lower status, lower-paid sales,

clerical, factory and service occupations. An Aus

tralian Council of Trade Union working women's

survey which that even in

was the

rmeocestnttlryaudnitdioenrtaalkfeenmilalluestoractceud

pation, that is housekeeping, women were paid an

average of $ 1 73.80 compared with male house keepers, who received an average of $286.30. As well as menial, low-paid work, sexual harassment and poor conditions further disadvantaged the fe male work force. When we examine the pro fessional, higher-paid, higher status occupations we find them largely monopolised by men. Many studies have shown that it is not enough for a woman to be equal in competence to men, but that the woman has to be markedly superior in competence to do a particular job in order to overcome the negative and entrenched social attitudes which cause so much of the discrimination suffered by women.
These same negative attitudes contribute to enormous discrimination against women in many other areas as well as the work force. In access to housing, credit, financial services and legal services women must battle strongly to be treated as persons and to be treated with dignity and respect. Australia has paid lip service to the concept of human rights for some considerable time and has not sought actively to promote the rights of women. Although some States have recently introduced encouraging anti-discrimination legislation, I note that the Federal Government has still failed to introduce such legislation, its own employees and residents of the Australian Capital Territory have no protection under anti discrimination legislation.
In relation to rights for women and other disadvantaged groups, Australia has committed itself to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Article 2 of this Declaration states:
Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.
We might also look at Article 7, which states:
All are equal before the law and are entitled without any dis crimination to equal protection of the law.
We compare these words with the realities facing women in Australia who need legal assistance or protection. For example, we might consider the plight of those who cannot meet the means test requirement for legal aid, or the plight of women in refuges, or the plight of those affected by inequi table family law property settlements.
Australia has also ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which extends the provisions of the Universal Declar ation, and we have signed the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, although this has not yet been ratified. It is time that this rhetoric was translated into action. The Federal Government should take the lead in this matter and not

932 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

just leave it to the States. W e need a uniform, co The issue of human rights is of great significance

herent policy and commitment to the elimination to us all as members of Australian society and de

of all forms of discrimination against women.

served to be treated seriously and conscientiously,

The Federal Government has constitutional powers on its side as well as a strong moral obli gation to provide effective legislation in these matters. The Commonwealth, as the largest employer in this country, could set a standard for all

instead of in this cavalier fashion. I would urge all honourable members to consider the amendment moved by the Opposition and consult their con science carefully before casting their vote on this BilL

employers in ensuring that equality of oppor Mr CARLTON (Mackellar) (9.22)-May I

tunity exists for women in the Public Service. The first of all thank my colleague the honourable

current situation, as outlined in the 1 980 Statisti member for Diamond Valley (Mr N. A. Brown)

cal Year Book of the Public Service Board, points for his kind support for my efforts to draw the

out some of the discrimination in this area. There attention of the House and the Australian people

are no female First Division officers and only 27 to the plight of the Baha'i community in Iran. I

out of 1 , 3 1 9 Second Division officers are females. draw the attention of honourable members to my

This is totally unacceptable. This inequitable situ notice of motion No. 25 under General Business

ation clearly indicates that the Federal Govern and hope that other honourable members will ap

ment should put its own house in order if it wishes proach the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) to

to claim that it supports the various human rights see whether this matter can be brought before this

conventions outlined earlier.

Parliament.

My colleague, Senator Ryan, in another place

Tonight I would like to address my remarles to

has drawn attention to the powers of the Com the amendment moved by the Deputy Leader of

monwealth Government to outlaw discrimination the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) to the Human

in finance and banking. These are indeed crucial Rights Commission BilL The amendment contains

areas as many women have experienced the hu a number of parts. The main objections put for

miliating and degrading form of discrimination ward by the Opposition, which are reflected in

practised by lending institutions and have had to this amendment, are that the Bill relates only to

give up their attempts to provide a home for the Commonwealthjurisdiction and does not seek

themselves and their families. The Bill before this to override State legislation by using the power of

House does not provide effective legislation for foreign affairs under the Constitution. The Prime

the establishment and promotion of human rights Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has made quite

in Australia. It is poorly conceived and lacks any clear why the Commonwealth does not wish to

real power to achieve reform. The Women's Elec use that power. I regard this power as a somewhat

toral Lobby, a group well known over the past 1 0 artificial device. I believe it leads to a continuing

years for its work in promoting improvements in warfare with the State governments which is very

the status of women, has expressed strong reser unproductive, and we had examples of this under

vations about this Bill and has argued for its rejec the Labor Government. It kids people that the job

tion. I will quote from its recent statements on this of convincing citizens within each of the States to

matter. It states:

change attitudes over a period can somehow be

The Bill as drafted confers no further rights on women, Aborigines, other disadvantaged groups, or anyone at all. A commission set up under the proposed legislation would be

neglected and that certain results can be obtained in a very fast fashion merely by passing legislation in this Federal Parliament.

ineffective, inconsequential and would have no teeth.

The honourable member for Canberra (Mrs

The Bill has so many exclusions that to the obtaining of in formation by subpoena that it is almost impossible to make a case . . .

Kelly) in her speech used the words 'negative and entrenched social attitudes', I would certainly endorse her remarks in relation to a number of situa

There are no real sanctions in the Bill-the commissioner can write a letter to the culprit or take a report in some future parliamentary session. The Bill does not provide the right of appeal to the judiciary.

tions in the Australian community. I would urge all members of the House, particularly members of the Opposition, if they are gravely dissatisfied with the way certain rights are not protected, as

The inescapable conclusion of all this is, as WEL they believe, in certain States, to go about con

says:

vincing the large number of citizens of those

The Bill is window dressing by the Australian Government to fool other nations into believing that Australia is carrying out its obligations under the United Nations Convention on Human Rights.

States that negative and entrenched social attitudes of the kind of which they disapprove, and of which I think we would all disapprove, ought to be dealt with by working to alter the policies of

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 933

the governments which have the constitutional responsibility for those matters within those areas. I would certainl y support that kind of activity and I believe that is the place for it to be done. If there is not any change in the hearts and minds of the people living in various parts of this Commonwealth, we can pass legislation here until we are black in the face; we can cause enormous disruption between federal and State governments as was done under the Whitlam Government. However, this would be totally counterproductive and would lead to a hardening of those attitudes. Therefore I think it is important to give the kind of lead we are giving in this legislation by setting up the Human Rights Commission and to raise these kinds of issues in a way which will lead pro gressively to real reform and real changes in those attitudes. In other words, it will be done by coax ing, by illustration, by example, by probing, by public debate, by gradually changing people's minds and not by entering into some kind of war with the States. Therefore I believe paragraph (a) of the amendment moved by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition regarding the application of these laws to the States and the Northern Terri tory is ill-advised.
The second paragraph of the amendment relates to full application, without the reservations and declarations embodied in Australia's ratifica tion of the rights contained in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. This mainly relates to the same issue in that Australia's ratification of that covenant excluded its appli cation to the States, unless the State governments themselves wished to enact their own legislation. Of course, these matters are taken up in the minis terial committee. So that part of the amendment is really much the same as the first part. Para graph (c) of the amendment relates to the specific adoption in judicially enforceable form, along the lines of the Human Rights Bill 1 973, of the rights contained in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. This relates to judicially en forceable powers given to the Commission . I think the Government's view is a sensible one since we are grafting on to a basically English system of civil rights which we already possess. When one looks at the position around the world one realises that Australia's commitment to the United Nations Convention on Human Rights is much more effective than the commitment in most other countries. We are drafting a new instrument on to a system of human rights which has been de veloped over some hundreds of years and which is generally very effective. Before determining whether any additional judicial enforcement is needed, we would like firstly to see which nooks

and crannies require improvement before we bring in sweeping enforceable legislation across the whole range of issues, most of which are already the subject of laws which are enforceable by the courts in the existing system. So at this stage I think it would be unwise to proceed as far as that.
The fourth paragraph of the amendment relates to the extension of the Commission's juris diction to enable it to investigate and report upon possible brev.ches of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which includes guarantees of the right to form and join trade unions; to enjoy social security, adequate standards of living, work, physical and mental health, and education; and to take part in cultural life. Enormolls groups of laws, federal and State, cover all those things. We have been enacting laws in the Commonwealth Parliament since 1 90 1 to cover all these things. The State parliaments have done so before that. To bring in an overriding set of further legislation in all those areas seems to me to be absolutely superfluous.
Paragraph (e) of the amendment relates to the extension of the Commission's jurisdiction to enable it to enforce the rights contained in the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. Whilst I think one might examine this matter more closely I think the remarks made by the honourable member for Canberra about negative and entrenched attitudes, particularly towards women, have a great deal of validity. I think there is an advance within this Bill because Article 3 of Schedule 1 states:
The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to ensure the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of all civil and political rights set forth in the present Covenant.
Since the Commission as established under this legislation would be required to take that into account with respect to federal legislation it is open to people to ask this Commission to take up those very issues under Commonwealth legislation. For instance, the employment of women by the Commonwealth could be taken up under the Public Service Act. It is up to people to get the Commission to look into those areas and to report to this Parliament on any cases where it believes there should be alterations to the legislation to protect the equal rights of women in the Commonwealth work force. Whilst conceding that in that area a great deal more needs to be done, I believe that contrary to what the honourable member for Canberra has said, there is a specific advance within this legislation enabling women and the Women's Electoral Lobby, in particular, who have drawn objection to it, to be very active

934 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

within this area, T think to the advantage of women.
I have already covered paragraph (f) of the amendment relating to the expansion of the powers and functions of the Commission to give it a more effective enforcement role, especially in relation to civil and political rights. Finally, para" graph (g) of the amendment relates to racial dis crimination matters and the retention of the independent status and functions, especially the power to report directly to Parliament, of the Commissioner for Community Relations. 1 think an historical reason exists as to why Opposition members are sensitive on this matter, their having appointed a former Labor Cabinet Minister to that position. The fact that he is in that position has no interest for me in relation to this legislation. It is perfectly sensible to combine that area ofactivity within the concept of this Bill.
In the few remaining minutes left for me to speak 1 refer to the holier than thou attitude which is adopted by members of the Opposition on legislation of this kind. Anyone would think that Opposition members are paragons of virtue in relation to human rights. Listening to them, one would think that this country is somehow gravely deficient in its responsibilities under the United N ations Convention on Human Rights. That is clearly not so. Australia is one of the outstanding countries in the world, with a developed system of human rights under its legal systems, State and Federal, which provides an extraordinary measure of freedom to the citizen. That does not mean that the system cannot be improved. This relatively modest measure seeks to improve the system in a way which will not damage it but will leave it open for further changes to be made in the future, should they be necessary.
I want to make some remarks about an area of threat to human rights which is totally overlooked by the Opposition. Grave threats to human rights are embodied in the federal platform of the Opposition party. I refer to threats to human rights within the area of industrial relations. No aspect of the life of the Australian community presents a more striking contrast between what the average person regards as fair and reasonable and what ac tually happens in practice than does the field of industrial relations. Denial of fundamental human freedoms such as freedom of association, practices designed to restrict trade thus reducing choice, and i ncreasing costs and coercion of indi viduals without legal redress are all commonplace in the area of industrial relations. The ordinary citizen finds it hard to accept that such unjust practices can apparently be allowed to continue without the intrusion of the law when he himself

is without doubt subject to the law. Equally, he cannot understand why parliaments, particularly the Federal Parliament, cannot pass legislation and enforce it to prevent these injustices, which occur every day and are reported in the media. They are well known--
Mr Holding-That makes it right, does it? That makes it accurate?
Mr CARLTON-The comments from the honourable member for Melbourne Ports attract my attention. I am not suggesting that because in cidents are reported in the media they are right. I am suggesting that they are drawn to the attention of the public by the media and that those practices are clearly wrong. It is not only through the media that they become known. They become known through the common experience of people every day. An essential guarantee of freedom for the individual is that all people should be equal under the law. In successive generations a number of powerful groups seeking to exert unreasonable pressures on individual freedom have been cir cumscribed by legislation passed by parliaments and enforced through the courts. For example, in the course of the twentieth century, the powers of corporations have been subject to a wide range of legislation in such areas as companies and securi ties, trade practices, wages and conditions, industrial safety and environmental protection. All this legislation has been enforceable in the courts. The legislative restrictions on corporations were rein forced by the emergence of the trade union movement and established as a further countervailing force to the power of corporations and individual employers before the turn of the century and sub sequently. It was and still is necessary for workers in some enterprises or industries to come together in trade unions or other forms of association to bargain with employers on an equal basis in order to secure what they regard to be fair returns for their work. Their right to do this is recognised and supported. A complete framework of legislation has been developed in Australia in order to ensure this right.
In recent years trade unions have increased their power relative to other groups in the community. Many trade unions have used this power in ways that individuals and corporations are prevented by law from using. In addition, particularly since 1 969, some of them-only a few, but enough to make it very inconvenient for people have felt free to defy industrial laws under the Federal Conciliation and Arbitration Act and similar State Acts, leading to serious industrial disruption and a serious denial of human rights for workers and consumers. Beyond the use of grow ing bargaining power within the area of industrial

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 935

law, unions have also disputed the applicability of Mr H O L D I N G ( M e l b o u r n e P o r t s )

the general body of law to their actions. They be (9.39)-The arguments advanced by the honour

come virtually exempt from the application of able member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton) illus

civil actions for damages arising out of disputes, trate the fundamental differences between

using the threat of further industrial retaliation to Government and Opposition members in respect

prevent action being taken against them. They of this legislation. One can judge human rights

have also declared that they will resist the appli only by the exercise of legislation relating to

cation of laws designed to prevent restrictive human rights in'Australia. One can determine the

trade practices, although those laws already apply level of racial discrimination and the way in which

to corporations.

it operates in our community only by looking at a

number of situations which have been developed

I merely point out that whilst we are being lec tured by the Opposition, day in and day out, on our alleged lack of concern about human rights, the Opposition, by its very party platform-any honourable member can read it-is suggesting that the legal restraints on the trade union movement in the course of disputes be removed altogether. At the moment the restraints are there. They are almost unenforceable because of the use of power by trade unions. Yet the Opposition is suggesting that they be further weakened or removed. This is an area recognised within Australia as being one of severe denial of individ ual human rights. Certainly we need the freedom to join a trade union but perhaps we also need the

over a period, largely by the Commissioner for Community Relations. For the last five years this Parliament has had annual reports submitted to it by the Commissioner forCommunity Relations in which he has pointed out and highlighted not merely denials of human rights but also conscious acts of racial discrimination as they occur within our community. Although the honourable member for Mackellar may wax large and say that by and large Australia is better than most other countries in regard to human rights, and [ suppose that if we were, to compare Australia with EI Salvador that is probably a valid statement perhaps one should look at the evidence put forward in this House.

freedom not to join a trade union. We need the

freedom to go on strike and, perhaps, the freedom This House has spent hours with Government

to decline to go on strike. We have to look only at members opposite giving notices of motions. We

the pressures being exerted on teachers within my have spent hours debating human rights in the

electorate at this very moment. A majority of Soviet Union. But ] cannot recall a single occasion

teachers do not wish to take industrial action. on which the Government, a Government

Their human rights are being denied in trying to member or a Minister of the Government has ini

force them to go on strike by using all sorts of tiated a debate in the Australian Parliament based

social and other pressures against them. I am not upon the reports of its Commissioner for Com

prepared to be lectured by the Opposition on the munity Relations. These reports are substantive

grave failure of Australia to meet its obligations documents. They run into many pages. The most

under the United Nations Convention on Human alarming aspect of the reports-and their sub

Rights while the Opposition not only condones stance has never been attacked-is that not only is

but also actively defends practices which are oc there racial discrimination in Australia but also

curring within the industrial arena.

one of the vehicles for the continuing perpetration

of the racism is the administration of State

Finally, I believe that this Bill is a cautious but proper advance in the area of human rights in Australia. It builds on a long tradition of human rights guaranteed already under a substantial system of equality under the law. I think it will raise interesting new issues. The appointment of the commissioners will be important. As an example I refer to the Australian Law Reform Commission and the interesting questions raised by His Honour Mr Justice Kirby and his colleagues. We

governments. The Commissioner for Community Relations has, with regret and concern but essen tially in discharge of his obligations, cited example after example where raCial discrimination has not taken place by accident, it has not taken place as a result of a conservative or boorish attitude in some outback community, qut has been the posi tive result of the ongoing administration and the philosophy of the governments of Queensland and Western Australia.

will see similar interesting issues raised by the

Human Rights Commission. If this Parliament is Has that been a matter of concern to this

asked by the Commission to examine areas where Government? No, says the honourable member

further legislation is needed, I am sure it will be for Mackellar. Let me use his own terms. To an

happy to do so.

Aboriginal in Queensland or in Western Australia

936 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 198 1

Human Rights Commission Bill

it does not much matter whether one is on the re ceiving end of Sir Charles Court or Mr Bjelke Petersen. It does not matter much whether one is a member of the Yungngora community or the Aurukun or Mornington Island community. Cases of racial discrimination have been illus trated and documented time after time. They have been brought to the attention of this House. They have been brought to the attention of the honourable member for Mackellar. But what is his advice to the Australian people? He says: 'With someone like Mr Bjelke-Petersen or Sir Charles Court, it is not a question of the Commonwealth's exercising its constitutional rights. It is not a question of our discharging the mandate which was given to us by the people of Australia in a referendum. It is not even a matter of our honouring the obligations which we undertook as part of the international conventions, which we freely signed'. Oh no. When we are dealing with the political backwoodsmen who represent some of the effective money power that keeps the honourable gentleman opposite in office, to use the terms of the honourable member, what we have to do is to 'engage in public discussion and debate'. We have to coalesce the States into agree ing with our propositions. If the honourable member had read the continuing reports of the Commissioner for Community Relations to the Parliament that gave him the obligation to report instances of discrimination, the honourable member would not simply regard himself as being involved in some kind of awfuljest.
Pages 23 to 3 1 of the 1 980 report of the Commissioner for Community Relations deals in detail with racial discrimination in Queensland. It fol lows the 1 979 report in which the Commissioner referred to documents and official policy state ments of the Government of Queensland. The in fringement of human rights and exercises in racial discrimination do not always involve breaches of State law. What they often involve are continuing acts of administration, one heaped upon another, which in terms of the rights of the individual citi zen at the receiving end of that exercise involve a very considerable abrogation of human rights and freedom. I have no doubt that if the honourable member for Mackellar were driving his car along one of the roads in the more remote areas of Queensland and were stopped by a member of the Queensland police force, he would be treated quite differently from the way in which an Aboriginal driver would be treated. That is not some thing that I am throwing in a glad-handing exercise. It is demonstrated time and again in the reports which have come before this Parliament,

reports which have been ignored by this Government and honourable members opposite.
What this legislation is designed to do is to go through the exercise of saying to the people of Australia that of course Malcolm Fraser cares about human rights and one can trust Bjelke Petersen on issues such as the right to march and Aboriginal land rights. We all know that deep in his heart he has really only been misunderstood on these issues, and we should ignore the track record! The problem with this legislation is that whilst it says yes, we will be very serious in our im plementation of human rights documents and we will be very concerned to see that our international obligations are honoured, we will be rely ing upon the very governments, the very Ministers and the very administrations that have been named time after time, day after day, page after page as being in continual infringement of these rights. Now they will be partners.
Mr Carlton You had better have a chat with Casey.
Mr HOLDING-They will be partners with the honourable gentleman opposite in enforcing international conventions. I do not believe it. The people of Australia certainly do not believe it. I do not think that in his heart the honourable member for Mackellar believes it. He does not believe there has been a change in the attitude of the Queensland Government concerning the con demning of Commonwealth policy which increasingly allows for Aboriginal land rights, cus tomary law and tribal language to be developed as goals in themselves. Federally he has supported the concepts but they are condemned in the re ports of the Government of Queensland. The honourable member surely does not believe that there has been a change ofheart.
Mr Carlton-Why don't you go and get your act together in Queensland if you want to do something about it?
Mr HOLDING-I prefer the integrity of the actions of the Labor Party in Queensland to the wretched performance by one of the most corrupt governments that has ever besmirched the whole concept of the Westminster system in Australia. I suggest that the honourable gentleman ought to make his contribution to the Bjelke-Petersen Foundation. He is not prepared to stand up to the Queensland Premier on issues such as Aboriginal freedom or any of these basic issues, and that is what this legislation is all about.
Mr Viner-This Government has a better record than the Whitlam Government ever had.

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 937

Mr HOLDING-This Government has a reputation. When the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) was Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and the choice had to be made between the rights of the minority groups in this community-and I refer especially to the Aborigi nal minority groups-there was not a single occasion when the Minister at the table or his col leagues were prepared to take on the Bjelke Petersen Government or the Court Government, and he knows it. The Government is asking this Parliament to make these State governments equal partners in enforcing international conventions on human rights. This legislation-whatever good might be extracted from it-essentially is a smokescreen designed to dismember the existing Racial Discrimination Act; it is designed to force the present Commissioner for Community Relations out of office; and it is designed to dis member the whole structure of administration which has been created over a period to enable the people of Australia to have reported to them on a continuing basis infringements of human rights and exercies of racial discrimination which have taken place in our community.
I could say much more on this matter but the h onourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) has a contribution to make and I yield to him. I fully support the amendment moved by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition ( Mr Lionel Bowen) .
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (9.5 1 ) -1 support the amendment moved by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) . I wish to say a few words also regarding the in clusion of three declarations in the schedules to the Human Rights Commission Bill. Australia does not have a constitutional Bill of Rights and, until recently, had no guarantee of protection of individual freedoms. This was very eloquently spelt out by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) who preceded me in the debate. Recently, legislation has been passed in the human rights area at both Commonwealth and State levels but that legislation basically con centrates on prohibiting certain actions on specified grounds such as racial discrimination under the Racial Discrimination Act 1 975. Under section 5 1 of the Constitution the Commonwealth can make laws in respect of external affairs for the peace, order and good government of Australia. This power extends to the implementation of an international treaty which imposes obligations on Australia. The general rule is subject to some re strictions so that the treaty is not used just to at tract domestic jurisdiction.

The Human Rights Bill introduced in 1 973 by the then Attorney-General, Senator Murphy, re lied on those external affairs powers as a means of enacting legislation covering civil rights in Australia. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1 966 and entered into force in 1 976. Australia signed the Covenant in December 1 972. The Human Rights Bill 1 973 sought to give parliamentary approval to its ratification by Australia. It is interesting to go through that Covenant and to repeat the rights contained therein. The Covenant covers such rights as the right to life, freedom of speech, free dom of assembly and association, freedom of re ligion and conscience, freedom of movement, the right to vote and to hold public office, the right to privacy, freedom from arbitrary arrest, the right to a fair trial and the right not to be subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment.
The Human Rights Commission Bill 1981 adopts an approach completely different from that of the 1 973 Bill. It does not confer human rights on anybody, it does not override inconsist ent State laws, and it does not allow for court pro ceedings if human rights are infringed. It is based on the Covenant which is set out in Schedule I to the Bill and also on the three international declar ations which are included in the schedules to the Bill and which concern the rights of the child, the rights of the mentally retarded and the rights of disabled persons. There is provision also for other covenants or declarations to be added.
The definition of 'human rights' in the Bill is the rights set out in these declarations. However, only human rights under Commonwealth jurisdiction-that is, under Commonwealth law or practices or in territories other than the North ern Territory-are covered. The functions of the Commission are basically to examine Commonwealth laws and proposed laws to see whether they are in conformity with the Covenant. The Commission can examine also the three declarations-that is, the declaration concerning the rights of the child, the mentally retarded and the disabled-and any new covenants or declar ations that are declared. It will report on laws that should be made about human rights and on action necessary to comply with the covenant and other instruments. It will inquire into any act or prac tice that may be inconsistent with human rights. The last function of the Commission involves the examination of acts or practices by the Commonwealth or its authorities based on the Commonwealth law within a territory or partly within a territory.

938 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

The Commission's powers, when inquiring into an act or practice, are sufficient to enable it to call for information or papers and to call witnesses. Failure to assist the Commission when directed is a criminal offence even though some evidence may be withheld on a certificate from the Attorney-General. A person about whom a com plaint is made must be given an opportunity to make a submission.
There are some glaring weaknesses in the powers of the Commission. It does not have the power to make orders, not is there an entitlement to go , to court if conciliation fails. The Commission is to report to the Minister where it finds that there has been a breach of human rights following an inquiry and where it has not sucGeeded in conciliating the matter. What can we expect from this Government when that happens? It does not appear that these reports have to be tabled in the Parliament. However, the Commission must make an annual report on its operations which is to be tabled in the Parliament. If a State or the Northern Territory makes an arrangement with the Government the Commission will be able to perform functions on behalf of a State or the Northern Territory, or jointly with the State or Northern Territory authorities. From past performances this would not lead to people having a great deal of confidence in the Commission. Apart from that, the conduct of the States and the Northern Territory will not be at all affected by this Bill.
In August 1 980 the Government lodged an in strument of ratification of the Covenant with the United Nations. That Covenant has now come into force in Australia but it was subject to reservations, by far the most important of which was in relation to Article 2 and Article 50 which state that as Australia is a federation it will be for the Commonwealth to implement those matters in relation t9 which it has power. It will be for the States to implement those matters in relation to which they have power and, where both have the power, the implementation is to be by the consti tutionally appropriate authority. The international legality and domestic effect of this reser vation is not clear.
Under the Vienna Convention on Treaties res ervations are allowed but they must not expressly prohibit or be incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty. Article 50 of the Covenant is an attempt to prevent federal states from opting out of their responsibilities. It can be argued that the reservations to Article 2 and Article 50 may be regarded as being prohibited by Article 50. If not, it can be argued that a reservation which leaves responsibility for implementing the great majority

of rights to State governments is contrary to the object and purpose of the treaty and, as such, is invalid. If provisions of the Covenant are not implemented it will be the responsibility of this Parliament and not of the States. It has become quite clear that reservations in relation to Article 2 and Article 50 by this Government were for the purpose of satisfying the States and, therefore, the Commonwealth could not in the future use the external affairs power to pass legislation overrid ing State laws. The argument would be that no ob ligations had arisen under the Covenant for the Commonwealth to legislate except on matters where it had exclusive powers. Accordingly, no occasion has arisen for the use of the external affairs power. Against this it could be argued that if the reservation is illegal internationally it has no effect and cannot be seen as limiting the obli gations placed on the Commonwealth to have the convention implemented for Australia.
I wish to comment briefly on the provisions of the Bill and to make a specific reference to the unborn child by means of the inclusion of the United Nations Declaration of the Rights of the Child. That declaration contains a preamble which reads in part:
Whereas the child, by reason of his physical and mental im maturity needs special safeguards and care, including appro priate legal protection, before as well as after birth.
Some honourable members could say that as the honourable member for McMillan, I have more than a casual interest in matters relating to this issue. In 1 980, in this House, Mr Martyr moved an amendment which was further amended by my predecessor. That amendment was passed by the House of Representatives but was never accepted by the Senate. I am pleased to support the in clusion of the reference to the unborn child. I made it quite plain last year before the election that I intended to support legislation which recog nised the rights of the child before birth. I believe in 198 1 we are far past unscientific ideas as to when life begins. Today it is an undisputed scien tific fact that human life begins at fertilisation.
Recently I had the privilege of hearing Dr Ber nard Natheson speaking at Melbourne Univer sity. Dr Natheson, who was in the forefront of the campaign in the United States to get early available abortions in that country, spoke eloquently about certain new data and information which he now specialises in. This new data has convinced Dr Natheson that the life and rights of the child before birth ought to be protected by law. In fact, he goes so far as to say that in the United States it should be done by constitutional amendment.
Those in Australia who are concerned with human rights should be pleased that for the first

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 1 981 REPRESENTATIVES 939

time in Federal legislation the child before birth is getting explicit recognition. It should be seen as a first step, a step forward in overcoming the dis crimination practised against the unborn. I wish to quote from an article which I read in the Age dated 24 March. The article stated:
A girl born as doctors were trying to perform an abortion on a woman about eight months' pregnant was "stabilised and . . . doing fine", hospital officials in Phoenix, Arizona, said yesterday.
The woman told doctors she was 19 weeks pregnant. The only examination she received before the operation on Friday failed to reveal how advanced the pregnancywas.
Those operations are taking place in the United States. With the repeal of the laws which have taken place there it is no wonder there is some need to protect the rights of the unborn. That is the way I see the recognition of the unborn. I would hope that the Commission will take a lead in educating the Australian community in the true status and rights of the unborn child. The Commission is to promote an awareness of human rights and to promote an understanding and an acceptance of those rights. If the Commission ex ercises its role in relation to the child before birth, it is hoped that we will see a decline in the present figure for abortions, which almost everybody agrees is quite unacceptably high. I look to other measures in the future designed to reduce the loss of human life resulting from abortions.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) ( 1 0.2)-I would like to comment on one or two aspects of the Human Rights Commission Bill. I support the amendment moved by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) . When the Government considered this Bill it was presented with an opportunity to make full use of its external affairs power as defined in section 5 1 , placitum (xix) of the Constitution to remedy abuses of human rights in this nation. This is evident from the fact that it is essentially international convenants which the Bill utilises to provide the criteria against which human rights violations shall be judged. In the Bill the Government has chosen not to do this. It is largely on its failure to make the operations of the Human Rights Commission ap plicable to areas of State jurisdiction and even the Northern Territory and to provide it with teeth to enforce its findings that we object to it in its cur rent form.
This Bill is a monument to the poverty of the Liberal Party's philosophy, about which we are supposed to hear a great deal in this Parliament. There is the assertion that this Government is committed to and values human freedom above all other considerations but we cannot permit a

Bill to apply to State legislation and actions because this would upset the separation of powers between the States and the centre, a separation based on political expendiency at the time of its enactment and justified in the long term in terms of administrative and political convenience. Ad ministrative arrangements have been elevated to the plain of high principle by this Government. As this Bill stands, they override considerations of human freedom. That is done both explicitly and tacitly throughout the Bill. Occasionally an argument is put forward by honourable members opposite that this separation of powers guarantees a decentralisation of power which in itself promotes freedom. There is nothing essentially wrong with this argument in principle. Where it falls fiat in this instance is in its application to this Bill and in the operations of State governments.
It might be argued legitimately that the powers of the Schools Commission, for example, ought not be extended because this would encroach on the freedom of local populations to have a say in the educational process. [t might be argued that total Commonwealth authority over determining the pace and character of mineral developments, particularly the developments of mining com munities, undermines to a degree democratic practice and that State rights here are a value. It cannot be argued that in any shape or form the de fence of individual liberties and rights at the ex pense of State authority offends any democratis ing effects of our current Federal arrangements. This is precisely because an appropiately empowered Human Rights Commission would pick up State legislation and action at those points where decentralised power does not have a democratising effect. In other words, an education policy which is good for Western Australia may not be good for Queensland. However, if human rights mean anything at all, in no circumstances can an internationally agreed definition of human liberty be valid for Canberra and a test of Commonwealth legislation but not for Western Australia and legislation in the various States.
The offences committed by conservative governments in my home State against the civil and political liberties entailed in international convenants which provide the frame of reference for this albeit toothless Commission have been gross. They have called into question the rights of citizens to assemble and speak. They have called into question the rights of individuals to vote. They have made a mockery of the extension to the original inhabitants of this land of some form of recognition of their original proprietary rights. These actions are possible largely because the E lectoral Act of the State of Western Australia

940 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

operates in systematic violation of the spirit and letter of Article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which is the basis of the operations of this Commission. In part that guarantee states:

To vote and to be elected at genuine periodic elections which shall be universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret ballot, guaranteeing the free expression of the will of electors.

The term 'equal suffrage' implies an equal value in every individual's vote. Only by such a process can the free expression of the will of the electors be guaranteed. The United States Bill of Rights, which contains similar provisions, has been used to end malapportionment. A proper human rights Bill here might well have done the same and may have stopped the ludicrous situation that exists in Western Australia.

Mrs Darling-And Queensland.

Mr BEAZLEY-And Queensland, but it is

much worse in Western Australia. This is not gen

erally realised. Western Australia is divided into

three zones-metropolitan and country, where

quotas for seats are set, and a northern zone,

where the seat boundaries are covered by separate

statutes. In the metropolitan area the quota for

electors per seat for the Legislative Assembly is

1 7,264. In the country zone the quota is 9,1 39.

The metropolitan zone has a total of 466,1 50 elec

tors for 27 representatives. The country and stat

ute zones have a total of 246,060 electors for 28

representatives. The largest Assembly seat is

Whitford with 30,790 electors on the roll. All

these figures are for January this year. The

smallest seat is Murchison-Eyre, a statute seat,

with one.

1 ,925 electors The situation i

on the roll. n the Upper

THhOelJsrea,titoheisL1e6gitso

lative Council, is even worse. A quarter of a

million country voters have 20 members whilst

half a million city voters have 1 2 members. The

largest Council province is North Metropolitan

with 97,556 electors. The smallest is Lower North

with 5,764. That is a margin of 1 7 to one. It may

well be that in political terms the current govern

ing authorities in Queensland are not the greatest

burglars; they are outdone by those who operate

our system in Western Australia.

If the Human Rights Commission Bill had con tained the capacity to intervene and to examine where State legislation offended against the rights of individual Australians, there would have been some possibility of bringing these matters to the attention of the general Australian community and having them redressed. The Bill denies us that opportunity. Had the Bill been in the same form as it was originally proposed by the Labor Government at least those of us who desire to see

democratic practice extended to the decentralised aspects of the Australian governing process would have found the Human Rights Commission of ready assistance in that regard.
The Bill, in its revised form, now includes within the Commission's terms of reference an area of human rights which are not strictly civil and political. The Attorney-General (Senator Durack) has done this in order to incorporate within the Bill, without directly stating it, an interpretation of the right to life which extends prior to birth. This has been, I believc--I agree here with .the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham)--a positive step. It also needs to be recognised that this extends the nature of the rights considered in this legislation in directions not normally contemplated by honourable members opposite. In dealing with the rights of children, handicapped and disabled people we are entering the realm of social and economic policy. For example, principle 4 of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child states:
The child shall enjoy the benefits of social security. He shall be entitled to grow and develop in health; to this end, special care and protection shall be provided both to him and to his mother, including adequate pre-natal and post-natal care. The child shall have the right to adequate nutrition, housing, rec reation and medical services.
Honourable members have never accepted that these areas of social welfare involve individual's rights. The theory of the social policy of honour able members opposite has always been founded on the notion of the deserving poor. Those termed undeserving have been the object on occasions of attack and vilification. This has been the case, of course, as we are all aware in this House, with the young unemployed. The deserving and the unde serving alike are assigned a status which permits a certain level of government parsimoniousness. That ought not to be permitted if we regard these matters-the Government evidently does, as shown by its approach to this legislation-as matters of fundamental right.
I for one intend to encourage the many electors in my constituency who do not have adequate access to post-natal and pre-natal care for their children with the decline of our hospital system; who do not have adequate housing and recreation; who do not, if disabled, have adequate opportunities to work; who do not have access to free education; and who have had in real terms family support cut back to them to appear before this Commission and demand their rights in the terms that the Government has permitted them to pro ceed to do. If mothers and fathers receive ad equate support in childbirth and rearing-by 'ad equate' I mean support which will permit them their right to pursue a chosen profession as well as

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 941

the assumption of responsibility for the child rearing--this legislation might well have an im pact on abortion statistics in ways not wholly to be anticipated by the way in which the debate on the subject has proceeded to this point. In other words, it will deal not only with the question of the legal rights of the unborn child but also with the level of assistance to the mothers and the parents at all stages not only at the child's birth but also in the child's life. That would create a situation where abortion, for many people who are using the option of abortion at the moment, would not seem necessary.
J do not really think, however, the Government will follow up this legislation with the very necess ary social legislation to ensure that these rights as they are now defined are in fact adequately pro tected. Were the Government to do so, I think we would find, certainly in my electorate, an extremely grateful population. The fact that the Government has not done so imposes upon me an obligation to assist my constituents in whatever way T can, under whatever terms, conditions and opportunities that this Commission provides, to get the limited succour that is possible. I hope the amendment moved by the Opposition is carried. It would give the social as well as the civil and politi cal, libertarian aspects of this legislation a chance to be enforced not only at the Federal but also at the State level. I am pleased to support the very sensible amendment moved by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs) ( 1 O. 1 4) -in reply-I thank honourable members for the contribution that they have made to the debate on the Human Rights Commission Bill. I regret that the Opposition should feel disposed to move the amendment which would have the effect of withdrawing the Bill and therefore defeating its passage. I would have thought, with the time that this Parliament has spent in the endeavours that it has undertaken to put on the statute book a Bill to establish a Human Rights Commission, the Opposition would have been as anxious as the Government to see that this Commission comes into being. The Government cannot accept the amendment for that fundamental reason. We believe the establishment of this Commission and the bringing into operation of the covenants that it endorses are so important that we ought not to delay any longer the passage of this Bill. Therefore, the Government will be voting against the amendment.
Both sides of this House have applauded at least two matters. The first is the declarations with regard to children that were referred to in

my second reading speech-the Declaration of the Rights of the Child, 1 959, the Declaration on the Rights of the Mentally Retarded, 197 1 , and the Declaration on the Rights of the Disabled, 1 975. The Declaration of the Rights of the Child, as honourable members on both sides of the House have recognised, states:
. . . the child, by reason of his physical and mental imma turity, needs special safeguards and care, including appropri ate legal protection, before as well as after birth . . .
The second matter which has received some but not a great deal of attention is the deletion from sub-clause (4) of clause 1 0 of the original Bill of paragraph (f) which would have given to the Commission a discretion to decide not to hold an inquiry with regard to a complaint which was thought not of sufficient concern to the complain ant. That discretion has been removed. Therefore, it should strengthen the power and authority of the Commission.
This debate like so many debates with regard to rights of any kind has evoked a variety of opinion as to what are rights and in particular what rights ought to be protected one way or another within the political framework of the country. Of course, if one goes back through history the debate on the rights of the individual has been one of constant philosophical and social argument. The debate in this House tonight is no exception. History has not changed nor have the attitudes of people. It is a fact that some of us approach the meaning of rights in a different way to others. I listened with interest to the contribution of the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) . Perhaps over the course of history this debate about what is meant by rights is rather epitomised by the way in which St Paul viewed the rights of women and the way in which the Women's Electoral Lobby of today views the rights of women.
Some rights, some of us would say, are fundamental. If we wish to look at the matter in a Chris tian sense, the Ten Commandments are as funda me,ntal as anything which has ever been expressed by humans in the course of history. In the course of legal development through parts of the United Kingdom-the history of that country has been brought down to us through the common law some rights are derived from those fundamental Christian rights, some are the result of the development of human attitudes and are reflected in the statutes of the United Kingdom and hence in this country. It may well be said that the rights ex pressed through statute law are more changeable, more dynamic in a sense, than those that are ex pressed through the common law. That is under standable because people of different views come and go from government. Hence they have the

942 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Human Rights Commission Bill

power which government gives to them through the parliamentary system.
Perhaps the difference of view as to what are rights and whether they ought to be enforced in one way or another meets its modern classic ex pression in the dichotomy of views with regard to abortion. We have heard something about that to night. There are those who say that a women has a right to destroy life. There are others, such as my self and the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) , who say that the right of a person created is the right to survive. That is a modern, classic expression of difference of views on what are meant by rights.
So when we listen to a debate such as we have heard tonight we ought to consider the different expression of views in that way. Therefote, it is fair to say that neither side of this House should gather around itself the cloak of righteousness in its belief as to what is best for individuals in this country. On this side we happen to have a particu lar view based on a philosophy of liberalism, which in its most simple terms is an expression of the liberty of the individual. That does differ from the socialist attitude of members of the Opposition and we will, as long as we are in this Parliament, debate with vigour that difference in philos ophy and uphold the correctness of our view.
Another expression of difference of view is in the way in which we believe that the Constitution of Australia should be utilised for the benefit of the citizens of Australia. Whether the Opposition likes it or not, Australia has a Federal political structure. Again, whether the Opposition likes it or not, our Constitution is based on the fundamental premise of the distribution of power, both legal and political. We recognise that. We believe that it is a virtue in political terms, historically in its recognition of human nature and in the fact that the people of Australia live in geographically different parts; that there is value in allowing people in those different parts of Australia to ex press their aspirations through their own political structure. Of course, that is reflected in the politi cal structure of the States and the Territories.
Quite clearly, if the external affairs power of the Constitution, which has been referred to by the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) with such admiration, were allowed its full blos soming under a socialist government such as we experienced during the WhitIam years, the fundamental distribution of powers, as expressed in the Constitution, would be destroyed by the socialist objective of the Labor Party-to centralise politi cal and economic power in Canberra. We on this side have no hesitation in saying that we believe

that such a concentration of power would be bad. There is no proper distinction, such as the honour able member for Swan sought to draw, between the use of the external a ffairs power in the human rights field and its use in any other field. So the Government has no hesitation in affirming its pol icy, often stated publicly, that it will not use the external affairs power to subvert that fundamen tal distribution of political power that is provided for by the Constitution. Some honourable members opposite have expressed regret that the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights is not to fall within the jurisdic tion of this Commission but as the Attorney General (Senator Durack) pointed out in the Senate, the legislation contains powers by which the charter of the Commission can be extended to include covenants of that kind.
In regard to the complaint-perhaps not un naturally made-by the female members of this House that the Commission's jurisdiction wiIl not extend to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, I would point out that Australia is as yet only a sig natory to that Convention. It was not until July 1980, I believe, that the Convention was framed and Australia became a signatory. As is natural in the course of international events, all countries must consider whether and when they will ratify that convention. Ratification is a separate and distinctive international act which flows from merely being a signatory. So the Commonwealth is conducting discussions with the States in ac cordance with its federalist policy before deter mining whether Australia will ratify that conven tion. When it makes such a decision. it will be appropriate to consider whether the Commission wiII have jurisdiction in regard to that Convention.
[t is always very difficult for a male member of the House to answer comment such as we heard from the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) who declared that much discrimination is perpetrated against women in our community. The honourable member mentioned discrimi nation with respect to employment. I was very glad to support not only the efforts of my Department, but also those of other departments of the Commonwealth, including the Public Service Board, and to identify myself with the actions of the National Labour Consultative Council, which includes representatives of both employers and unions, in embarking upon a vigorous program to promote equal opportunity for the employment of women. That program will be implemented as

Human Rights Commission Bill

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 943

fully as it can be. Likewise, within the Public Ser Opposition moved as an amendment that all vice Board the equal opportunity unit is a vigor words after 'That' be omitted with a view to sub

ous, constructive unit aimed at opening up ever stituting other words. The immediate question is widening opportunities for women to be that the words proposed to be omitted stand part employed. Although certain numbers were of the question.

quoted by the honourable member with respect to the proportion of women who were in the First and Second divisions of the Public Service, I think it is fair to consider history. We can understand why, because of social attitudes, those numbers are so small today, but it is likewise equally fair to judge that, because of the continuing change in those attitudes, and programs such as the equal opportunity program for the employment of

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

60

Noes

44

Majority

16

women, we will sec an increasing number of

AYES

women in the higher levels of the Commonwealth Adermann, A. E.

Public Service and also, I would hope, in the public services of the various States and Territories of

Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W.

the Commonwealth. Some mention was made of the reservations ex

Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N. A.

pressed by Australia in regard to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. I firmly

Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald

believe, as does the Attorney-General, that the reservations and declarations that have been ex pressed are completely in accord with the Vienna

Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P.

Convention. We simply do not accept that, in the form in which they are drafted, the Federal-State

Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dobie,J. D. M.

paragraphs are in breach of that Convention or contrary to the objects or purposes of the

Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D.

Covenant. Indeed, they are consistent with the Federal political structure of Australia and with the authority given by the Covenant to make res

Fire, W. C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J.

ervations and declarations.

Groom, R. J. Hall, Steele

For those reasons, and others which have been expressed in the second reading speeches of my self and the Attorney-General in the Senate, the

Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges, J. C. (Tellcr) Hodgman, W. M.

Government cannot accept the proposed amendment and wishes to see this Bill passed and

NOES

brought into law quickly and effectively.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C.

Debate interrupted.

BBolewweent,t',LNio. nel

ADJOURNMENT

Brown, John Brown, Robert

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-It

Campbell, G. Charles, D. E.

being 1 0.30 p.m., I propose the question:

Child,J.

That the House do now adjourn.

Cohen,B.
Cross, M, D.

Mr Viner-I require that the question be put
forthwith without debate.

Cunningham, B, T. Darling, E. E.
Dawkins, J. S,

Question resolved in the negative.

Everningham, D. N.
Free, R, V,

HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION BILL

Hawke, n. J, L, Holding, A. C.

19tH

Humphreys, B, C. (Teller) Hurford, C, J.

Second Reading

lnne., U. E,

Jenkins, H, A,

Debate resumed.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mil' Millnr)-The Anthony, J. D,

PAIRS

original question was that this Bill be now read a Jarman, A, W,

Howard, J. W, Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde, J. M. Jull, D. F. Katter, R . C. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A, J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore, J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P.J. O'Keere, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, [an Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, 1. MeG
Street, A. A.
Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. r. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.
Johnson, Les (Teller) ones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C.
Klugman, R. Eo
McLeay, Leo
McMahon, Les Mildren,J. B,
Milto n , P . Morris,P, F.
Morrison, W. L. Mountrord, J, 0. Scholes, 0. 0, D.
Scott, J. L.
Uren, T, Wallis, L. G.
West, S, J.
WlIIls, R. Young, M, J.
Jocobi, n,
Fry, K,

second time. To this the Deputy Leader of the Thomson, D. S.

Duffy, M, J,

944 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Racial Discrimination Amendment Bill

Question so resolved in the affirmative. Amendment negatived. Original question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Viner) read a third time.

RACIAL DISCRIMINATION AMENDMENT BILL 1981

Second Reading

Consideration resumed from 24 March, on motion by Mr Viner:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

62

Noes

45

Majority

17

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume, M. E. Birney. R. J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N.A. Burr, M . A . Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom , R . J. Hall , S teele Harris, G. MoD. Hicks , N . J . Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde, J. M. Jull, D. F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. : ;'''h, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee. I. M. Moore, J. e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, r. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A . A. Tambling, G. E. J. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P.N.D. Wilson, r. B. C.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett , N . Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert

NOES

Johnson, Les Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent, L.

NOES
Campbell, G. Charles, D. E. Child, J. Cohen. B. Cross, M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy , M . J . Everingham, D. N . Free, R. V. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E. Jenkins, H . A. (Teller)

Kerin, J.C. Klugman, R. E. Meleay, Leo McMahon, J,CS Mildren, J. B. Milton, P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J . G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Uren, T. Wallis, I..G. West, S. J. WiIIis, R. Young, M. J.

PAIRS

Anthony, J. D. Jarman,A. W. Thomson, D. S.

Jacobi, R. Fry, K. L. Howe, B. L.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time,

Third Reading

Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

Bill (on motion by Mr Viner) read a third time.

ADJOURNMENT
Wages Statistics-Service Pensions-Industrial Disruption: Broken HiJI Pty Co.
Ltd-Community Health Facilities
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr HAWKE (Wills) ( 1 0.45)-I wish to take this opportunity to dispose of a further episode in the pattern of deception in which the Government has engaged in this House in recent times. It relates to certain factual matters concerning what has happened in recent years regarding wage movements and the responsibility for those wage movements. In the House earlier today the Prime Minister (Mf Malcolm Fraser) , in answering a question by me, was pleased to mislead the House. He stated:
The honourable gentlemm knows quite well that the policies that he devised when r  was President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions ttat led to wage increases of nearly
40 per cent in one year, in 1 975 . . . He later went on to say that he was talking about the period of a year up to March 1 975. I want to take the time of the House to put the record straight. I refer to what happened to wage move ments in the whole of the year 1 975. The Prime Minister purported to talk about wage move ments but attempted to justify his argument by producing figures in regard to minimum weekly rates. They hve nothing to do with wage move ments. He took the concocted period Marh 1 974

Adjournment

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 945

to March 1 975 and showed that the weighted av Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) ( 10.5 1 )-1 read

erage minimum weekly wage rates moved by 37.6 an article today in the Melbourne Herald about

per cent. On that basis he attempted to justify this the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke)

exaggerated movement in wages of 40 per cent. which said that he was a very calm politician, and

The average figure for the whole of the year was that he never got riled or ruffled. I think the writer

23.6 per cent. The figure for the period December should rethink the matter.

to December was 1 3. 5 per cent.

About two weeks ago I had probably the mis

Is the logic of the Prime Minister's argument that, because wages moved by 37.6 per cent from March to March and by 1 3.5 per cent from December to December, my capacity to influence the movement in wage rates diminished by ap proximately two-thirds between March and December? That must be his logic because if ! was responsible for what happened to wage move ments apparently my power peaked in the March to March period but diminished by two-thirds in the period December to December. The absurdity

fortune to appear as a witness for a former member of this House, a very distinguished member, well known to the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) . He gave evidence at an appeal hearing. The story that he unfolded was very sad and it was one that made me realise that as young people many of us are completely un aware of some of the problems faced by those people who participated in combat in the theatre of war. The younger generation seems to have for gotten some of the things they endured.

of the proposition only has to be stated for even Today I received a letter from Mr Nelson, the

the braying members opposite to understand the honorary secretary of the Newcastle Wartime

absolute lack of logic in what the Prime Minister Seamen's Association. I read the letter very care

had to say. The period in question is not this con fully and I think he has a very good point. In es

cocted period of March 1 9 74 to March 1 975, for sence the letter states:

which the Prime Minister latched upon the level We solicit your support in an attempt to have proper recog

of 37.6 per cent.

nition of the part played by the merchant seamen during

World War II. The gun crews of merchant ships were respon

The Prime Minister purported to talk about the movement in wages. As all economists know-I know that includes no honourable member opposite-a consideration of the movement in wages involves looking at average earnings. That is what we talk about when we refer to move

sible for the destruction of many hundreds of enemy aero planes, a number of submarines and at least on five occasions merchant ships emulated the heroic actions of the Jervis Bay in taking on many warships of far superior gun power.
At the bottom of the letter, in his O"I"n hand writing, Mr Nelson said:

ments in wages, which is what the Prime Minister said he was talking about-not wage rates; he said

I have been told you have a deep and sincere interest in this particular issue. Your support would be most welcome.

wages. Let us look at the facts so that honourable The Association has my support because I believe

members can consider them instead of the deliber that it has a very good case. Some people who left ate misrepresentations which continuously ema Australia but did not enter the war zone are

nate from the Prime Minister and his lackey, the nevertheless eligible for a Service pension. How

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr ever some of these poor fellows in the merchant

Viner) , whom he sends in here.

marine went through hell and high water during

the war and I am afraid that they entered that ser

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) vice at a very young age. Many are now approach

Order! I ask the honourable member for Wills to ing the age of 60 or they are over 60. They must

withdraw.

have suffered during the war. I believe that it is up

Mr HAWKE-I withdraw; of course he is not a lackey. I refer to the movements in wages-that is what the Prime Minister purported to talk about, not wage rates-in 1975. This is what happened in the quarterly figures for 1 975. The figure for March to March is 26.2; for June to June, 22 per

to every young politician to realise that they were dreadful years. We are apt to forget the suffering of these people, as we forget many other things that occurred during that period. I believe that that Association has a good case and I believe--
Mr Groom-They deserve a fair go.

cent; for September to September, 1 3.4 per cent; Mr GOODLUCK-Of course. The honourable

and for December to December, 1 2.8 per cent. member for Braddon (Mr Groom) said that the

The 1 975 figure for wagemovements was 1 8. 7 per members of the Association deserve a fair go. I am

cent, not the 40 per cent with which the Prime glad that he is helping me tonight with a few

Minister and his representative, the Minister for words. I seem to be stuck. After listening to the

Employment and Youth Affairs, deliberately mis honourable member for Wills all day I am stuck

led this House.

for a few words. As I said, the Association has a

946 REPRESENTATIVES 25 March 1981

Adjournment

very good case and I believe that we should all member for Petrie made remarks to which the

start to fight for it because it deserves a fair go.

honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) took

Mr C H A R L E S J O N E S ( Ne w c as t l e ) exception.

( lO.54)-All I can say to the honourable member The position is that that machine had 1 0 danger

for Franklin (Mr Good luck) is that Bobby Nelson tags on it which said that under no circumstances will be most appreciative of his views. He is a very must it be started. Each danger tag has the name

good and loyal member of the Australian Labor of the operator, the name of the department and

Party. There is no hope of the Liberal Party get the date on it. Yet the supervisor instructed an in ting a vote out of him. I wish to raise a matter that experienced young fitter to start the machine, not

took place on 1 2 March. In speaking to a General withstanding the fact that there were 1 0 danger

Business item, the honourable member for Petrie tags on it. The company's policy is that under no

(Mr Hodges) , as recorded at page 724 of circumstances must the machine be started when

Hansard, said:

it has a danger tag on it. Yet on that day there

Let me go a little further. Ten AMSWU members--

were at least 1 0 tags on that switch. So on this

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member is not free to make allusions to debates of the period. He is making a direct allusion.

supervisor's instruction the machine was started. That is why the men went on strike. I can tell honourable members that any time that sort of thing happens in BHP or in any heavy industrial works, then we will be looking at a stoppage, a

Mr CHARLES JONES-I wish to reply on most justifiable stoppage by the men. If that fitter

behalf of some of the people the honourable and his mate, hanging on that 4-foot length of

member for Petrie unfortunately maligned, not 2-inch pipe had been there another minute, God

knowing the details. I do not wish to resurrect the knows where they would have finished up. We

debate but I feel that the men who have been would probably have had to attend their funeral. maligned are entitled to have their explanation But according to the honourable member for

made in this Parliament by their representative.

Petrie that is a trivial dispute. The men had a dis

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member may proceed towards the objective he seeks, but not necessarily specifically relate his re marks to earlier proceedings.
Mr CHARLES JONES-I take it that I am entitled to refer to what the honourable member

pute. They endeavoured to get the foreman or the supervisor suspended, and they could not. But two days later they did succeed in getting the supervisor suspended because he had not put a danger tag on a switch that he had men working on.

said. He said:

The honourable member for Petrie says that

Ten AMSWUmembers and 18 PIA members employed on No. 2 bloom mill maintenance stopped work at 9 . 1 5 a.m. over

the next day the men went on strike because apprentices did tradesmen's work. That is not cor

the removal of a danger tag. Work was resumed at 7.30 a.m. rect. They went on strike on the second occasion

on 24 February . . . Just listen to the contents of the trivial issue on which the union leaders called them out. On 24 February this year 1 35 FIA members and 10 AMSWU members employed on No. 2 bloom mill maintenance and

because staff labour was used to do work nor mally performed by men who were on strike. It was not the apprentices who brought about the

production stopped work at 8 a.m. in protest at the use of ap dispute. There were three days of disputes. The

prentices during a previous stoppage. Work was resumed at 8 a.m. on 25 February.
I have here a letter from one of the men involved

first day a fitter and turner and his assistant were

fortunate chine was

they did not started up.

get

killed

beca. use

the

ma-

in that matter who came to see me. He was most indignant about the statement made by the honourable member for Petrie, which was not fac tual. The position is that on 23 February this year,

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

the tradesman who came to see me, and his as Mr BAUME (Macarthur) ( 1 0.59)-1 seek

sistant, were working on a. machine in the bloom leave to incorporate in Hansard some statistics

mill, which is the largest rolling mill in the Broken totally disproving a proposition made yesterday

Hill Pty Co. Ltd steel-making process. They were by the honourabler member for Cunningham (Mr

working with a C-spanner to take off a nut. They West) that the Whitlam Government provided

were using a 4-foot length of 2-inch piping to give them additional leverage. They just loosened the

more money for community the present Government has.

health

facilities

than.

nut, took it off, put the spanner down and the ma chine started to operate. This is what brought

Leave granted.

about the stoppage about which the honourable The tables read asjollows-

Adjournment

25 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 947

Table 25 GRANTS FOR COMMUNITY HEALTH FACILITIES, 1975-76 TO 1980-81
($ thousands)

New South Wales

Victoria

Queens-

South Western

land Australia Australia Tasmania

Total

1 975-76 1 976-77 1 977-78 1 978-79 1 979-80 1 980-81 (estimate)(a) (b)
1 975-76 1 976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1 979-80 1980-81 (estimate) (a) (b)
1975-76 1976-77 1 977-78 1 978-79 1 979-80 1 980-81 (estimate) (a) (b)

19,284 25,606 27, 1 1 8 1 7,203 1 9,550 24,220 5 , 1 46 3,328 3,319 2,468
969 680 24,430 28,934 30,437 19,671 20,518 24,900

Reeurreut 7,712 1 1 ,355 14,239 10,528 1 2,456 1 5,925

3,643 4,797 5,190 4,979 4,462 6,140

Capital 3,151 3,660 3,430 1 ,945
678 690

1,778 2,805 1 ,770
254 327 230

Total 10,863 1 5,01 5 1 7,669 1 2,473 1 3,134 1 6 ,6 1 5

5,421 7,602 6,960 5,233 4,788 6,370

1 ,976 3,720 3,655 3,205 2,503 3,5 10
1 ,864 980 630 375 142 50
3,840 4,700 4,285 3,580 2,650 3,560

1,738 2,916 4,366 3,748 4,348 5,550 1 , 1 39 2,780
964 862 471 250 2,877 5,696 5,330 4,610 4,819 5,800

1 ,265 2,038 2,306 1,868 1,880 2,240

35,6 1 8 50,432 56,874 41,532 45,202 57,585

689

13,767

561

14, 1 1 4

297

10,4 1 1

272

6 , 1 25

57

2,643

90

1,990

1 ,954 2,599 2,603 2,090 1,936 2,330

49,385 64,546 67,284 47,657 47,845 59,575

(a) The State-by-State allocation of total available funds is till tentative and no commitment to the amounts shown is implied.
(b) Each State receives a 'block grant' for this Program, allowing flexibility to transferfunds between capital and recurrent components of approved projects as it sees fit. The component amounts shown above are, therefore, notional.

Mr BAUME-These figures clearly demon strate that there has been a rise of $22m in 1 980-8 1 as against the 1 975-76 total of $ 35.6m. They show that in most States except New South Wales there has been a massive increase in the Federal grants matching the contribution by the State governments. However in New South Wales there has been only a small rise because the New South Wales Government does not approach the problem of community health with the same level of seriousness as, say, the Victorian Government, which has doubled its contribution. The Federal Government's contribution to Victoria has, in fact, doubled over that time. Honourable members willsee the differences between the various States. These figures clearly demonstrate the lack of truth in the ludicrous assertions made by the honourable member for Cunningham.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! It being 1 1 p.m. the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 1 0.30 a.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 1 1 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:

Mr Howard to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1 959, and for related purposes.
Mr McVeigh to present a Bill for an Act relat ing to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 25 March 1981 , pursuant to statute:
Audit Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 41. Bankruptcy Act-Rules-Statutory Rules 198 1 , No. 40. Industrial Research and Development Incentives ActRegulation-Statutory Rules 1981 , No. 45. National Health Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 43. Public Service Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981 , N o . 44. Quarantine Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 198 1 , No. 42. Remuneration Tribunals Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 39. Seat of Government (Administration) Act
Ordinance-198I , No. 5-Land Rent and Rates (Defer
ment and Remission) (Amendment).


