House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 125, 1981 Tuesday, 20 October 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Privilege

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2173

Tuesday, 20 October 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
PRIVILEGE
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-Mr Speaker, seek your indulgence to raise a matter of privilege.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-I refer you to May's Parliamentary Practice, which, at page 151, states:
Conduct not amounting to a direct attempt to infl uence a Member in the discharge of his duties, but having a tendency to impair his independence in the future performance of his duty, will also be treated as a breach of privilege.
The matter I want to raise is, I believe, very serious and relates to the possible obstruction of officials of this Parliament in the performance of their duties for members of parliament. You are aware that many members of parliament often request specific items of research from the Legislative Research Service which are confidential and which are marked 'Not for Attribution'.
Mr SPEAKER-I interrupt the honourable gentleman. Did I understand him to base the privilege claim on the obstruction of officials in the conduct of their business?
Dr THEOPHANOUS-No, Mr Speaker. I refer to page 151 of May's Parliamentary Practice which refers to:
. . . having a tendency to impair his independence in the future performance of his duty . . .
Mr SPEAKER-That is, of the member? Dr THEOPHANOUS-Right. May I proceed?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman should proceed.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-I was saying that there are items from the Parliamentary Library which are marked: 'Not for Attribution'. They are prepared by the Legislative Research Service on specific request from a member of Parliament. Papers produced in this fashion are said to be entirely confidential. The only knowledge of the existence of these papers is supposed to be held by the researcher himself or herself and the head of the section. No one else is supposed to have knowledge of what was written, for which member of Parliament it was written and by whom it was written.
Earlier this year, I produced a confidential paper for the Parliamentary Labor Caucus on the

ownership of resources enterprises. Part of this paper was based on a specific project which I worked on jointly with a member of the economic section of the Legislative Research Service. As a result, he produced a paper entitled 'Compare the Revenue Effects of a Resources Rent Tax with 50 per cent Government Equity'. As far as I am aware, no one, except my own staff, knew that the section concerning resources rent taxes was written in co-operation with the Parliamentary Library. Indeed, the issue is so specific and controversial that the natural assumption would be that it was written by my research staff. Yet last week a member of the staff of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) rang Mr Richard Webb, head of the economic section of the Research Service, and requested 'a copy of the paper written for Dr Theophanous on the merits of resources rent taxes'.
It is the practice of the Parliamentary Library not to issue such confidential papers unless the member for whom they were originally written grants his or her permission. Mr Webb thus asked the researcher to seek my permission for the paper to be released to the Prime Minister's office. When this occurred, the response of the researcher and myself was the same: How did the Prime Minister's office know that the Parliamentary Library had written a paper for me on this specific topic? I asked the researcher to ask Mr
Webb about the matter. Mr Webb later rang the Prime Minister's office to confirm that this was indeed what it was requesting. This incident raised grave doubts in the minds -of the research staff in that section as to the confidentiality of their work. I remind the House that each researcher fills in a specific form called a Request Co-ordination Unit form for every job done for a particular member. The form states, amongst other things, the topic of the research. In this case the topic was listed as 'Compare Revenue Effects of Resources Rent Taxes with Alternatives'. That is very similar to the topic requested by the Prime Minister's office. The form, by the way, also lists the member of parliament for whom the paper was written.
This breach of confidentiality was considered so serious that the director of the economics sec-
tion, Mr Webb, raised the matter at a meeting yesterday morning of all sectional directors of the Library. I am informed that no one was able to explain satisfactorily how the breach occurred. Given these events, I and other members of parliament are entitled to feel uneasy aboutthe possibility of interference in the work of the research service and a possible breach of confidentiality of members' work. It raises the suspicion of the

2174 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Privilege

possibility that the Government has been given Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime access to at least the RCU forms, which specify Minister)-I refer to a matter which might need

what has been written by the research staff on beto be examined as one of privilege. I do not want half of particular members of parliament. I am to raise it in a definitive way at the moment, but I not asserting at this stage that this is the case. I say want to bring it to the attention of the House. I

simply that, unless and until further guarantees refer to an advertisement which appeared in the are given, I as a member of parliament, together Melbourne Herald of 16 October at the bottom

with the research staff, will feel uneasy and right hand corner of the front page. The advertise-

obstructed in our duties with regard to work on ment was inserted by Preston Motors, advertising

sensitive and controversial issues.

Mitsubishi products, under the heading 'P.M.

votes Sigma No.1'. The 'PM' could be construed

I believe it is significant that this problem arose as an abbreviation for Preston Motors, but I have over work done on an issue which is of considernot seen that company advertise the use of its inable controversy within the Australian Labor itials in-those terms. When I saw the advertiseParty at present. Was it the intention of the ment I thought-other people who saw it thought Government to gain confidential information likewise-that it was referring to something else through the Parliamentary Library in order to in- .' when it used the initials 'PM'.

terfere in this debate? If that is the case, I believe Mr Young-I didn't because you wouldn't fit in

the repercussions are very serious. I point out that it.

the Government did not approach me for a copy '. Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If the honourable

of my paper on this issue. If it is the case that the member wishes to give the car an adverse report,

Government has access to confidential Library that is his business.

documents, this will tend to intimidate members of parliament and impair their independence. It
will also limit the effectiveness of the parliamen-
tary research staff, who are likely to be much
more cautious in the advice they give to members. I believe that these facts establish beyond doubt a

Mr Young-It is a very good car.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I know it is.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Port Adelaide will remain silent. The House is dealing with a matter of privilege.

prima facie case of breach of privilege and I ask, Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I want to make it

Mr Speaker, for your ruling on this matter.

quite plain, firstly, that I do not vote any motor

. ,ear No.1 and, secondly, that I think the question

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for oj this kind of advertising ought to be examined.

Burke raised this matter with me earlier today and :':- Mr SPEAKER-I did see the advertisement.

I have had an opportunity to consider it. I also -Although the honourable gentleman did not indi-

a.sked him to confer with the Clerk and Clerk Ascate to me that he would be raising the matter, I

slstant. I told the honourable gentleman that &m not surprised that it has been raised. In the ~here wa~ no. prima facie breach of privileg~. My past there have been advertisements containing IllformatlOn IS that the Clerk and Clerk ASSIstant similar characteristics. I will take the matter

have likewise told the honourable gentleman that under advisement and report later.

there was no breach of privilege. I now reiterate:

There is no prima facie breach of privilege.

PETITIONS

The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for

I credit the honourable gentleman with presentation as follows and copies will be referred

honestly believing, in bringing the matter up, that to the appropriate Ministers:

it is a matter of privilege. It most certainly is not. I indicate to all honourable members of the House

Sales Tax on Publications

that if the vehicle of privilege is used when there is -To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

IneogebrI.Seapcuht

0" f
III

pn"v1I ege, Jeopardy.

tIhweI' wllhmo" I aekecoInlf lcqeupmt." e0s apbnovutI

-.,}~)plernetseasnsteamtibvleeds.oTfhtheehCuronmblme opnewt1'te'Iaolnth0
;rens of Australia respectfully showeth:

of fthAeuusntrdaelirasl.ginnePdarC"lilal!--

the ~a:tter raised by the honourable membe.r an~ I ' . That the proposed sales tax of 2.5 per cent on books, maga-

wllllllform the House of the result of my IllqUlrzines and newspapers represents a tax on knowledge which

ies. In the meantime, I reiterate that privilege should not be contemplated in a civilised country. Your pet-

arises only when an action is taken which is likely itioners therefore humbly pray that this proposed sales tax be

to or in fact does influence the conduct of a withdrawn from the Buget proposals.

member in' the House. I do not believe that the And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

honourable member for Burke is likely to be by Mr Beazley, Mr Campbell, Mr McLean and

influenced in any way in his conduct in the House Mr Peacock.

by this matter.

Petitions received.

Petitions

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2175

Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government's decision to impose a tax on books, magazines and newspapers is abhorrent to the notion of the right to information, and
That no such tax is levied on any other country with which Australia is usually compared.
Your petitions therefore humbly pray.
That the Government will withdraw its announced intention to impose a sales tax on books, magazines and newspapers.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade postal and mail services throughout Australia will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
Downgrading a large number of official post offices Reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period Reducing the number of street posting boxes Delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices Downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff Using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Duffy.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the division of Lilley, Queensland, respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade postal and mail services throughout Australia will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
downgrading a large number of official post offices reducing the number of post offices open for business during
the lunch period Reducing the number of street posting boxes Delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices Downgrading post office services by employing untrained and
unqualified staff

Using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services. of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the division of Werriwa respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Milpo, Ingleburn, New South Wales 2174 post office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community:
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the division of Moreton respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade Postal and Mail services throughout Australia, will place in jeopardy the existing services and security of the mails by:
downgrading a large number of official post offices;
reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period;
reducing the number of street posting boxes;
delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices;
downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff; and
using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Killen.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the division of Perth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade Postal and Mail services throughout Australia,

2176 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Petitions

will place in jeopardy the existing services and security of the

mails by:

'

downgrading a large number of official post offices;

reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lu~ch period;

'reducing the number of street posting boxes;

delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices;

downgrading post office servi«es by employing untrained and unqualified staff; and

using private contractors for mail cartage.

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr McLean.

Petition received.

Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services,
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent and Mr Morris.
Petitions received.

Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other business expenses.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray,
by Mr Anthony.
Petition received.

Food Aid to Polish Government
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that recent events in Poland are of such seriousness as to justify Australia's direct involvement in attempts to relieve tension there.

Your petitioners note that food shortages are a major cause'

of civil unrest.

'

Your petitioners Further note that Australia has the capacity to make direct donations' of food at short notice.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:

That the Federal Government make the Polish Government an immediate and substantial offer of food aid.

And your petitioners a~ in duty bound will ever pray,

by Mr Beazley.

Petition received.

Health Care Services

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That the decrease in Federal Government funding for health, transfer of Commonwealth responsibility to the States, application of the 'user pay' principle to health services and encouragement of private business and profits in the health sphere will inevitably lead to a downgrading of health services and increasing health risks among people who cannot afford health insurance or private payment of doctors and hospitals,

That the cuts in Federal Government spending resulting from the recommendations of the Cabinet Sub-Committee of Review of Government Functions, (razor gang), will lead to an 'increase in unemployment and a general deterioration in community services and living standards,

Therefore your petitioners urge that:

1. The Government continue Commonwealth Funding of health services at an improved, and certainly not a lesser, level than that operating prior to 1 September 1981.

2. That recommendations of the Cabinet Sub-Committee

of Review of Government Functions, (razor gang), be

not proceeded with.

'

And your petitioners in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Cadman.

Petition received.

Community Health Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the continued cutback of our local community health centre will lead to a decline in the health status of our community, We appreciate their varied services, which include: baby health services, counselling, chiropody, physiotherapy, community nurses, preventative services etc.
We believe that the community health program will cut rising health costs by supporting people in their own homes, Therefore, we support the basic health care and prevention carried out by our health centre.
We request that adequate funding is provided for the continuation of and expansion of these valuable services to our community,
Your Petitioners therefore, humbly pray that your Honourable House consider this petition.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cadman.
Petition received.

Petitions

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2177

Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australian respectfully showeth:
I. That the Government's Sales Tax legislation imposes an unreasonable burden on the community gener,ally, especially pensioners, families, those in receipt of smaller incomes and small businesses.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will withdraw or repeal its Sales Tax Legislation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Donald Cameron.
Petition received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That the 2t per cent sales tax on books, magazines and newspapers is a tax on knowledge, a tax on information and a tax on culture.
2. That freedom can be protected in a democratic society only if its citizens have access to information and ideas through books, magazines and newspapers.
3. That it is in early life that a taste for books and the habit of reading in the home are most easily acquired. The ability of families to provide the stimulas which books offer will be limited by the higher cost imposed by the tax.
4. That the development of the Australian publishing industry is based on a vigorous consumer demand. Such a tax can inhibit the industry and create unemployment among its workers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will reconsider the proposed tax.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ian Cameron.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
The Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That the Budget imposition of additional sales tax to both existing sales taxed items and to previously exempt goods:
(a) will add to the regressivity of the tax structure by imposing a similar burden on all sections of the community regardless of the capacity to pay tax;
(b) will'be highly inflationary and a disincentive to econ-
omic performance in key sectors of manufacturing in-
dustry, e.g. car manufacturing; textiles and footwear; boat-building;
(c) is yet another breach of Government promise, given the Treasurer's undertaking in the Parliament on March 12 of this year that there would be no increases in indirect taxation (without at the same time giving personal tax relief).
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to repeal the budget amendments to sales tax legislation and to withdraw its sales tax amendment bills which add sales tax to presently exempt goods as from January I, 1982.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the decision of the Government to abandon the only tangible form of direct assistance to Australia's young unemployed, i.e., the Community Youth Support Scheme, will have a serious effect on the thousands of young Australians presently benefiting from the operation of the scheme through almost 300 decentralised CYSS centres around Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will reverse this retrograde decision before the due date of termination on October 31.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Sales Tax
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the pressure of cheap imports, the high cost of new homes and the effects of the credit squeeze are seriously weakening consumer demand for furniture.
That an increase on sales tax for furniture and mattresses would be a complete disaster for the furniture industry causing widespread bankruptcy and unemployment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will not proceed with an increase on sales tax for furniture and mattresses.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Eagle Farm Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That noise levels created by aircraft using Eagle Farm Airport already constitute an annoyance and inconvenience to those residents living near the airport and along flight paths.
That relaxation of the Eagle Farm Airport curfew to allow any aircraft including T AA 's Airbus to fly into and out of Eagle Farm Airport between II p.m. and 6 a.m. would-
(a) substantially increase the inconvenience and annoy" ance caused by aircraft noise because the operation of aircraft at this time would 'seriously disturb people's sleep;
(b) contradict and negate a commendable undertaking made by the Commonwealth Minister for Transport, the Hon. Ralph Hunt, in reply to a Question on Notice in the Parliament, that the curfew will remain on the runways at the existing site at Eagle Farm Airport.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will not approve the application of TAA-or any other airline-to relax or withdraw the curfew at Eagle Farm Airport.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

2178 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Petiti~ns

Social Security Benefits
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that the projected decision by the Government to abolish social security payments for all those under eighteen years of age should not be proceeded with on the following grounds:
I. It will place an added strain on the family unit where children who are almost adults will have no income.
2. It will cause the breakup of many families, particularly those where the breadwinner is on a low income or possibly in receipt of unemployment benefits.
3. It will diminish any personal ambitions that young people may have to improve their position in life.

pensions are inadequate to meet rising prices, comparisons between age and invalid pensions and widows pension indicate even greater disadvantage being suffered by single parents.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will increase the amount of widows pension and supporting parent benefit, index.the guardian's allowance, child's allowance and family allowance, raise the tax-free threshold for income tax, and remove the sales tax increase announced in the Budget from essential items.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

4. Young people without income may be forced into crime which may also be associated with physical violence.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Members of Parliament assembled should take all possible steps to abandon any decision made by the Government to abolish social security payments for persons under the age of eighteen years.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government and Telecom management have presided over the deliberate scaling down of Australia's telegram services, to the disadvantage of those poorer people in the community who cannot afford Telex or telephone facilities and rely on the telegram service in time of emergency; that the Government and Telecom management have underminell the telegram service by increasing the unit cost of telegrams by over 130 per cent in four years with the result that the use of telegrams as a form of communication has fallen by approximately 60 per cent in that time.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government and Telecom management retain the telegram service at a standard and cost that will not disadvantage the ordinary citizen.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.

Garden Settlement Home for the Aged
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That the Government's refusal to approve a subsidy for extensions to the Garden Settlement Home of the Aged on the grounds of excess aircraft noise is unjust and shows a lack of concern for the plight of the elderly in Townsville.
2. That we believe~ (a) The level of aircraft noise at the Garden Settlement Home does not make it an undesirable residence for aged people. (b) The level of aircraft noise to be no higher than in many residential areas of Townsville and considerably lower than in some other residential areas. (c) that aged, sick people should be allowed the dignity of a dining room to take their meals rather than a narrow corridor six feet wide, cluttered with small tables and food trolleys.
3. There is a substantial need for aged persons' accommodation in Townsville and extensions to the Garden Settlement Home will help alleviate this need.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will reconsider the decision not to approve funding for the proposed extensions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrDean.
Petition received.

Petition received.

Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the single parent is part of the most disadvantaged section of the community, that 73 per cent of single parents will not be assisted by the restricted increase in family allowance, that neither the guardian's allowance nor the child allowance is indexed. That sales tax increases on such basic essentials as clothing and shoes will severely disadvantage single parents. That a single parent with one child receives $66.65 per week plus $6.00 guardian's allowance, plus $10.00 child allowance and $3.80 family allowance (totalling $86.45) compared to a married pensioner couple's combined weekly income of $111.10. That the means test for a married pensioner couple is $34.50, compared to $26.00 for a single parent with one child. That a married pensioner couple's income, if shared, will not be taxable, whereas a single parent, even with the lone parent rebate, will pay $386 tax. And finally that, while agreeing that

Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is increasing interest rates on home mortgage loans without due concern for its impact on the general community and ask that the Government reconsider its attitude to low and middle income earners.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to. avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on home mortgage loans which cause financial, social and psychological pressures on families.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Duffy.
Petition received.

Petitions

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2179

Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing effectiveness of the women's refuge program. [n particular that:
1. Realistic funding levels be introduced to maintain existing services offered by women's refuges.
2. That the needs of child care in women's refuges be acknowledged by a specific and adequate allocation of funds for this purpose.
3. That funding be allocated for the purpose of assisting women and children to establish themselves in the community on leaving refuges.
4. That funding be allocated for refuges to address themselves to areas of special needs of migrant women in refuges.
5. That funding be made available for the establishment of new women's refuges.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFry.
Petition received.
Aspect House for Handicapped Children
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. All children in Tasmania are not treated equally.
2. Persons with intellectual, physical and multiple handicaps in particular will be denied access to Aspect House, 6 Warragul Avenue, New Town in Tasmania if the house is closed.
3. Aspect House is faced with imminent closure because of lack of Government policy and on-going funding.
4. Aspect House is the only community-based facility in an ordinary house in an ordinary suburban setting which provides relief to parents and families engaged in the onerous and demanding task of rearing their handicapped children in the community.
5. That the rights of all children to live with their families should be respected.
6. That we seek Government to take immediate action to prevent the closure of this unique facility.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially with the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programmes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHowe.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) the imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to' undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the re-introduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(1) post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students
(2) the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately
(3) the Minister of Education immediately clarify the Government's attitude to the re-introduction of postsecondary tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the proposed changes to assistance to the passenger motor vehicle and components industries after 1984 shall lead to the collapse of the vehicle manufacturing industry in Australia. Your petitioners therefore pray that the Industries Assistance Commission report be not given effect.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that: .
1. The automotive products industry is vital to the livelihood and well being of many thousands of Australian workers and their families.

2180 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Petitions

2. If imported automotive products are allowed to flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the industry of their work opportunities.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKent.
Petition received.
Subsidy Payments for Nursing Home Patients
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The majority of Pensioners in Nursing Homes are currently not receiving any significant rebate after all fees and laundry expenses are paid. This situation does not allow for a basically acceptable quality of life and undermines the dignity of people who are unable to fend for themselves. We call upon the Federal Government to investigate the plight of these people and guarantee them at least the opportunity to financially support their own basic needs.
2. When residents of Nursing Homes go to stay with friends or relatives for short periods (e.g. weekends) they are compelled to pay the Commonwealth subsidy for the period of their absence. This expense is obviously not able to be met by the majority of Nursing Home residents or their friends and relatives. The result is that people who would benefit from short periods away from the Nursing Home are restricted to its confines because they are not in the position to pay for their release. This situation. causes emotional trauma on festive occasions such as Christmas and birthdays.
We feel this is a hardship that should not be borne by Nursing Home residents and call on the Federal Government to relax its policy regarding subsidy payments for Nursing Home residents on short leave.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Government policy on subsidy payments for Nursing Home residents on short leave, be relaxed.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.
Medibank
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
. That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programs will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce Medibank.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Rights for Disabled
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition 9f undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The failure of the Federal Government to seek information from the census re disabled people-i.e. partial or total disability-to enable for adequate planning of, and for, types of services needed by disabled people to be undertaken.
2. The failure of the Federal Government to lead the way in employment of disabled people by employing a gr~ater number of such people within the Commonwealth Public Service-note the small number currently employed within the Service.
3. The wastage of the Federal Government funds perpetuating large, bureaucratic institutions and organisations where there are often few disabled people on their boards and little emphasis is placed on consumer participation in decision making.
4. The failure of the Federal Government to encourage independence of disabled people, or to develop 'normalised' support systems-attendant care.
5. The failure of the Federal Government to provide 'noninstitutionalised, specialised accommodation for those people who would not be able to benefit from, or cope with attendant care.
6. Failure by the Federal Government to alter, or create a 'disability' allowance means test free for all disabled peoplethis would assist with necessary equiprnent and mobility costs.
7. Failure to provide a national compensation scheme thus saving time and enabling people to be automatically covered in the event of a disability.
8. Failure by the Federal Government to abolish tariffs on all equipment available to the disabled-e.g. Optacon.
9. Mismanagement of Federal I.Y.D.P. Funds-e.g. nonreceipt by some States of funds through unresolved negotiations.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that immediate action be taken to remedy the above stated and that the Federal Government recognise that disabled people are citizens who should have equal rights.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Australia assembled. This humble petition of citizens of this country are concerned with increased house interest rates and that this Government has not taken action to peg increases in such rates. We ask that the Government establish a maximum fixed interest rate on a First Mortgage that would cover the entire period of time for which the loan is taken out. The rate of interest to be set at the time of signing the contract.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrScott.
Petition received.

Petitions

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2181

Endangered Species
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the humble petition of we the undersigned citizens respectfully showeth that the trade in products made from animals or plants nearing extinction is not necessary to the existence of Australians or for the betterment of their society.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that prohibition of the sale of these products be effected via the implementation of a new and enforceable Endangered Species Act.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scott.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned members of parents and citizens associations respectfully showeth:
That retention of the Schools Commission and the Curriculum Development Centre in their present forms is essential for the balanced and progressive allocation of educational resources and facilities in the Australian community.
That serious concern has been generated by the decision within the School Commission guidelines, to cut funds to the general recurrent and capital programs by reallocation to transition, the decision not to implement the school improvement program; and the divisiveness created between government and non-government schools due to increases of $43.25 million to non-government schools while government schools funds have not increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will reverse these decisions-will retain the Schools Commission and Curriculum Development Centre in their original forms; retain the Schools Commission proposals including recurrent and capital funding proposals; basket of services and the schools improvement program.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Donald Cameron and Mr Fife.
Petitions received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Federal Parliament, assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned residents of Hindmarsh Division State of South Australia:
Petition that: Competition between banks and finance companies by giving ever increasing interest rates to obtain the investors' capital, is against the nation's best interest. It penetrates every form of activity by constant demands for higher wages to meet these explosive conditions.
It is an intolerable burden to the younger generation of family life, that by necessity are the recipients of these excessive interest rates that are catastrophic to house purchase and natural living. We therefore respectfully petition for an urgent annual realistic controlled reduction right 'across the board' on all existing and future interest rate agreements. With a maximum interest perceniage ceiling on investors' capital, and a scale of interest charges for loans as appropriate.

Your petitioners therefore, humbly pray that your honourable House will give effect to our submissions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrScott,
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Federal Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned residents of Port Adelaide Division in the State of South Australia:
Petition that: Competition between banks and finance companies by giving ever increasing interest rates to obtain the investors' capital, is against the nation's best interest. It penetrates every form of activity by constant demands for higher wages to meet these explosive conditions.
It is an intolerable burden to the younger generation of family life, that by necessity are the recipients of these excessive interest rates that are catastrophic to house purchase and natural living. We therefore respectfully petition for an urgent annual realistic controlled reduction right 'across the board' on all existing and future interest rate agreements. With a maximum interest percentage ceiling on investors' capital, and a scale of interest charges for loans as appropriate. Your petitioners therefore, humbly pray that your honourable House will give effect to our submissions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrYoung.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned students and staff of the University of Tasmania respectfully showeth that the introduction of tuition fees for second and higher university degrees would:
I. have substantial ill effects on the Australian economy in particular, and society in general, by limiting access to education for Australians,
2. be a barrier to increased equality of education for Australians,
3. directly inhibit the ability of Australians to undertake retraining in response to the changing demand for skills within the Australian economy, and
4. curtail the substantial contribution to research and teaching that is currently made by postgraduate students within Australian universities.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
I. not allow the introduction of tuition fees for second and higher degrees, and
2. ensure that any tuition fees are not charged at Australian tertiary education institutions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman.
Petition received.
Housing Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Ballarat respectfully showeth:

2182 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Petitions

I. That the proposed imposition of 2+ per cent sales tax to building materials will have a disastrous effect on the already seriously depressed industry.
2. That the latest interest rate rise of I per cent to home mortgages will now end the hopes of many intending first home buyers. We believe the Federal Government must initiate a scheme of assistance to first home buyers, as proposed by building industry representatives.
In conclusion we reject the Federal Government's lack of genuine interest in the home industry. We also clearly state that the effects of points I and 2 above are not acceptable to us.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the Government give immediate attention to an already seriously depressed industry.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mildren.
Petition received.

Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in South Australia respectfully showeth:

That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B52 bombers:

Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of

all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of

Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the

USA and another power.

.

Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52s:

(a) Carried nuclear weapons

(b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another State.

Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign poli-
cies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy.

Violates democratic procedures in committing the Aus-
tralian nation to participation in future wars without due
consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region.

Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin, in that
noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents.

Negates the potential of the Australian nation to
establish itself as a nation of peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Members of
the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And
that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Young.

Petition received.

MOTOR VEHICLE INDUSTRY
Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) recognises that the motor vehicle manufacturing industry and automotive parts industry are among the major job-producing industries in Australia, and particularly in times of sustained unemployment and low economic growth, require special Government consideration and assistance;
(2) calls on the Government to maintain existing levels of support for the motor vehicle and automotive parts industry by both retaining current quota levels and the level oflocal content; and
(3) supports the establishment of a motor vehicle manufacturing industry authority to advise Government on the management of adjustments within the industry, as proposed in the Opposition policy and as enunciated by the Member for Adelaide.
GREECE: ELECTION OF PRIME MINISTER
Notice of Motion
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this Parliament congratulates Dr. Andreas Papandreou on his election as Prime Minister of Greece and notes the overwhelming support for himself and his party's policies of democratic socialism.
DISTINGUISHED VISITOR
Mr SPEAKER-I draw the attention of the House to the fact that we have a distinguished visitor today, His Excellency Sheikh Mohammad Zubair, Minister of Commerce and Industry in the Sultanate of Oman.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I refer the Prime Minister to the fact that the Government is still continuing to delay an announcement as to whether the Government proposes to commit Australian Defence Force personnel to the Middle East. As this is a matter of vital importance to the nation and it should have the fullest consideration of the Parliament, will the Prime Minister give an assurance that any decision relating to the commitment of Australian Defence Force personnel to the Middle East will not be announced while the Parliament is not in session?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There are one or two things I can say about this matter. The assassination of President Sadat inevitably has had an effect on the peace process in the Middle East. The progress of the peace process, however, does

Questions Without Notice

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2183

not depend on one man, no matter how great his contribution, no matter how much he has done. The process of implementing the Camp David Accords and the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel is under way and, largely because of President Sadat's contribution, now has its own momentum. Although President Sadat's death is a great loss the peace process will, I believe, not be reversed. I welcome the fact that the new President has declared his intention to maintain the direction of President Sadat's policies with respect to the Middle East. Nevertheless, the assassination of President Sadat raises a number of new issues which the Government has had to consider in its examination of the question of Australian participation in the Sinai force and the Government is in close touch with leaders of other governments.
I took the opportunity of meeting with other leaders in Melbourne to discuss the Sinai question. I expect to be in a position to make some announcement about this decision in the relatively near future, but that is not necessarily waiting on decisions of this Government but decisions of other governments. There is no procrastination on this issue by this Government. I think it is sensible to weigh all the factors and the latest developments. The other countries involved in discussions with us on this issue understand and respect our wish to consider the matter very closely and to consult widely on a decision of such significance. It is very difficult to give in categoric terms the kind of assurance that the honourable gentleman wants because the decision of other governments is obviously of vital importance to Australia. I hope that the honourable gentleman understands that. Having said that, I note very keenly what the honourable gentleman has said. Quite plainly, it is a matter which in the normal course, one way or the other, ought to be announced in this Parliament.
NEW INTERNATIONAL MOTOR RACING CIRCUIT
Mr MacKENZIE-My question, which is directed to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, relates to the new international standard motor racing circuit to be constructed near Melbourne. Why has the Government decided to support the construction of a new circuit in Melbourne instead of in Canberra, as was originally announced by the Prime Minister last year? Why were circuits such as Mount Panorama at Bathurst not considered for upgrading to international standard? Is it a fact that the original Commonwealth grant of $2m for the new track in the Australian Capital Territory has been

increased to $3m for the track in Melbourne? As the Australian Capital Territory will still be eligible for the $2m for international sporting facilities, is it now correct to say that the Government will be spending $5m on international facilities in Melbourne and Canberra? Finally, when can the member for Calare anticipate an announcement on Commonwealth funding for other racetracks, including $3m to upgrade the Mount Panorama circuit at Bathurst?
Mr WILSON-I have been aware of the honourable member's keen interest and the interest of people of Bathurst in the development of the raceway in that city. When the Government announced in the policy statement that $25m would be made available for an international sports facilities program, that announcement was made on the basis that funds would be made available to the States and the Territories on a dollar for dollar basis. The Victorian Government, in the light of reports by the Confederation of Australian Motor Sport, has decided in respect of the funds that it would receive as its share of the $25m program to include within the spending of that share the development of a motor racing circuit in Victoria. In the light of that recommendation, the Victorians have requested that their share of the international sports facilities program be attributed, in part-to the extent of $3m-to the building of that track. If CAMS had recommended the development of a circuit for New South Wales or if the New South Wales Government independently had wished to develop a motor racing circuit in that State, that proposal could have been included within the framework of that State's share in the international sports facilities program. But, as I understand it, the New South Wales Government wishes to spend its share of the program on the developments it is proposing for Homebush Bay.
The commitment under the program for the Australian Capital Territory is for $Im. My colleague, the Minister for the Capital Territory, in the exercise of Territory or State-like functions, will provide another $Im on a matching basis for international sports facilities in the Australian Capital Territory. It is a matter for the Minister for the Capital Territory to take advice and to have consultations in the Territory, as he sees fit, to determine the sporting facilities on which that money should be spent. In answer to the. honourable member's question relating to Bathurst, it really is a matter for the New South Wales Government to determine whether it wants to put a motor raceway high enough on its priorities to share within that State's allocation under the international sports facilities program.

2184 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

TELECOM: DATA SERVICE AND TELEX EQUIPMENT
Mr LES McMAHON-I direct my question to the Minister for Communications. Is it true that the media groups, John Fairfax and Sons Ltd through the Australian Financial Review, the Sydney Morning Herald and Weekly Times, News Ltd and David Syme through the Age and the Advertiser group have indicated their intention to work with Telecom Australia in developing a national videotex system?
Mr SINCLAIR-A good many people have been interested in developing a viewdata system. There ate distinctions between videotex and viewdata. The videotex system at the moment is being operated on a trial basis by Channel 7 studios in Sydney. Discussions on this matter do not involve Telecom because Telecom is involved in the cable system. The cable system is viewdata. That is why I am not too sure whether the honourable gentleman's question relates to the development of an inscription process on television so that the hearing impaired can view it. The honourable gentleman knows that within the Budget we provided a sum of money so that it would be possible to develop a viewdata system which could be utilised throughout Australia. The hearing impaired would then be able to have on the bottom of their television screens the transcription of the spoken message heard by those with ordinary hearing. In contrast, the viewdata system is down the Prestel stream. If the honourable gentleman's question was in that direction, I am not aware of discussions between Telecom and those groups, although there were discussions between Telecom and a lot of people regarding the development of the way by which a viewdata system could be developed. I would be happy to hear from the honourable gentleman further. When he identifies just which stream he wishes to follow perhaps I could direct my answer to that.
VISIT BY SOVIET JOURNALIST
Mr DRUMMOND-I direct my question to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I refer to an editorial in today's Age concerning the refusal by the Government to issue a visa to a Soviet journalist to visit Australia. If the Government is as concerned as it claims to be about the refusal of Indonesia to admit resident Australian correspondents to that country, why has the Government refused a visa to the deputy editor of the Soviet Government newspaper Izvestia to visit Australia?
Mr STREET-The current Government guidelines on entry from the Soviet Union do not exclude visits by representatives of the Soviet

media. In fact, there have been several occasions on which visas have been granted to Soviet journalists since the current restrictions were imposed following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Applications for visas from Soviet representatives are examined on a case by case basis. The decision to refuse Mr Kondrashov's visa was made only after very careful consideration of all the factors involved. I know honourable members will understand that there are sometimes factors which cannot be made pUblic. I note that there are resident Soviet correspondents in Australia, representing Tass and Pravda.
So far as Australian journalists in Indonesia are concerned, ;lS I have said before I regret very much the decisions of the Indonesian Government not to renew the visas of Australian resident correspondents there. I have asked the Indonesian Government to reconsider these decisions because I believe that a free flow of information conveyed by the media between two countries is to the benefit of both. I emphasise that the decision on Mr Kondrashov's visa did not relate to his activities as a journalist.
TELECOM: DATA SERVICES AND TELEX EQUIPMENT
Mr SCOTT-My question is addressed to the Minister for Communications. Is it a fact that a large number of private companies, either as suppliers of terminal equipment or providers of information, have acknowledged that the initiative for the development of a videotex system should be taken by the national communications carrierthat is, Telecom Australia? Do these companies include Philips, AWA, Sony and other suppliers as well as national media groups?
Mr SINCLAIR-I think the honourable member again will find he is getting himself mixed up between videotex and viewdata. I understand videotex is the radiated form of this information.
Mr Armitage-You are trying to confuse us.
Mr SINCLAIR-I know the honourable member finds himself in that state most of the time. The viewdata system to which I believe he directed his question was being developed on the basis that most of the terminals and most of the equipment provided would come from the private sector. The fundamental planning involved a negative cash flow for at least the first two years. The involvement of others still left Telecom using resources, which could otherwise have been used for the development of its network, its cable system and the installation of telephones, that were to be used to develop the viewdata operation. The

Questions Without Notice

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2185

Government believed that in spite of the involvement of the private sector, which would have been very extensive under the Telecom-Prestel proposal, it was preferable for the development to be entirely within the private sector. It was for that reason that the Government announced that it sees advantage in the private sector developing viewdata, be it down the Prestel track, the Telidon track, the Antiope track or indeed through the use of any of the other techniques which I understand are not far from being available.
TERTIARY EDUCATION: WESTERN NEW SOUTH WALES
Mr HICKS-My question is directed to the Minister for Education and relates to the threatened closure of the W.S. and L.B. Robinson College at Broken Hill by the University of New South Wales and the Minister's visit to Broken Hill on Friday to discuss the matter with the mayor and other local representatives. Did the Minister undertake to approach the New South Wales Minister for Education to suggest a meeting between the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission and the New South Wales Higher Education Board to consider the whole question of the structure of post-secondary education in the far western region of the State? Has he made this approach and, if so, what response did he receive?
Mr FIFE-It is true that last Friday, in the company of the honourable member for Riverina, I visited Broken Hill to meet the mayor and other local dignitaries to discuss the proposed closure of the College of the University of New South Wales at Broken Hill. I emphasise to the House that, as far as I know, this is not yet a decision but' it is a recommendation that is likely to go to the Council of the University of New South Wales. During the visit to Broken Hill with the honourable member for Riverina, who is very concerned that people in his electorate and in the western districts of New South Wales will be without appropriate tertiary education faCilities, I did indicate to people I met that my prime concern as Minister for Education was to see that appropriate courses and appropriate facilities were available for students. That obviously has to be the prime consideration of an education minister and indeed of a government. How that facility and how those programs are delivered, of course, is another matter.
I suggested, as a result of my observation and the assertion that I made, that the -best-way to progress this matter was to arrange for discussions to be held between the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission and the New South Wales

Higher Education Board. The New South Wales

Minister for Education has been in touch with me

regarding this matter and his concern about the

future of tertiary education facilities out in the

western part of the State. As I indicated to the

honourable member on Friday, I have been in

touch with Mr Mulock and have suggested that

this meeting between our two advisory bodies

might take place. As at an hour ago I had not

received a response from Mr Mulock but I feel

certain that I will hear from him in the course of
this week. When I do t will advise the honourable

member for Riverina.

'

DIAMOND PRODUCTION
Mr KEATING-I refer the Prime Minister to his answer last week on diamond marketing policy. I ask: Does he stand by that answer? If so, does he deny statements in the Press and on radio by Sir Charles Court that he had conveyed to Sir Charles that he regarded diamond marketing as being the exclusive responsibility of the Western Australian Government? If Sir Charles's claims are true, how does the Prime Minister square this with his answer last week and his earlier pronouncements on South African policy as well as the Commonwealth's legitimate constitutional control over exports as it is practised with other significant mineral commodities?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-A sentence which I did use last week was accurate but a number of the conclusions drawn from'it-including I think, by the honourable gentleman-are drawing a very long bow indeed. The sentence which I used last week indicated that there would be no point for Australia in an arrangement that merely served to strengthen an overseas monopoly or corporation at the expense of Australia or an Australian corporation. Without using the exact words, that is the substance of what I said. I am sure that the honourable gentleman would confirm that. That is so no matter what the arrangement is and no matter what the commodity is because we are concerned with the Australian interest, the Western Australian interest and the interests of corporations which operate in Australia. Therefore whatever is done obviously needs to have these considerations in mind.
Quite plainly, the Western AustralianGovernment and the corporation involved are working to achieve resolution of a number of matters. Precisely how the diamonds might be sold has not yet, as I understand it, come on their agenda in any firm way. But when arrangements are made they need to be ones that will be in the interests of Australia, in the interests of Western Australia and in the interests of the corporation. That is not

2186 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

in conflict in any way with what I said last week. If there is any honourable gentleman who believes that it would ever be in the interests of Australia or a corporation which operates in Australia to make arrangements that would serve only to strengthen some overseas monopoly, he has a very strange view of it indeed. But it is worth noting, I think, that these matters need to be worked out.
Four years ago the export of gemstones was released from export controls and there is no proposal to re-establish export controls. But at the same time there are obviously foreign investment procedures, normal procedures and policies of this Government, that operations within Australia need to comply with. That is understood in Western Australia; it is understood by the corporation. There is a great attempt by somebody-I am not sure whether it is the hon()urable gentleman; maybe I am attributing too much to his initiative-to build a difference where I do not believe there is any.
SALES TAX
Mr BAUME-I direct the Treasurer's attention to advertisements appearing in various newspapers in my electorate alleging that taxes on magazines, newspapers, and books are practically unheard of in the free world. Is this correct? Has the Treasurer made public statements outlining the large number of nations imposing such consumer taxes on the written word? Have any metropolitan newspapers in Australia, which are campaigning against the sales tax, reported these statements? Has the Treasurer been obliged to resubmit his public statements on this matter as 'letters to the editor' in order to get them printed in metropolitan newspapers?
Mr HOWARD-My attention has been drawn to one copy of this particular advertisement. It does continue a pattern of incorrect statements, misrepresentation and downright refusal on the part of some people to acknowledge plain unassailable facts. It is not correct to say that the imposition of a sales tax on newspapers and publications is practically unheard of in the free world. In fact, every country in western Europe, with the exception of the United Kingdom and Norway, charges indirect taxes on newspapers, magazines and books at rates in some instances of up to 22 per cent, compared with the 2t per cent level imposed by the Budget.
I have s.aid on many occasions in the past, and I repeat, that of course the imposition of new taxes-the application of taxes for the first time to new areas-is never popular. I am more than happy to engage in a proper debate and exchange

on the merits of doing so, but I would have thought in an area as elementary as this that there should at least be an acknowledgment of basic facts. I reject as completely untrue and distorted much of the campaign that is being waged against the Government in relation to the imposition of tax in this particular area. In no sense, shape or form do our Budget measures or any part of them represent anything in the nature of an attack on free speech.
AUSTRALIAN DIAMOND INDUSTRY
Mr KEATING-I desire to put another question to the Prime Minister to indicate to the Parliament that the Commonwealth, particularly the Prime Minister, has not buckled to parochial coalition interests in respect of diamonds. I ask the Prime Minister whether he agrees that the foreign investment aspects to which he has just referred have already been cleared by the Government, with CRA being a naturalising company and Ashton Mining having been approved as a national mining company? Could the Prime Minister then tell the House, if he says that there is no proposal to establish export controls, what instruments of the Commonwealth he envisages being used to guarantee that the marketing of Australian diamonds proceeds in the national interest?
Mr ANTHONY-Concerning the naturalisation of the firms involved with the Argyle diamond project, I point out that authority has been given for them to become Australianised companies and therefore the majority interest, we hope, within a period of years will be Australian and will be Australian controlled. As regards the style of marketing of the diamonds that might take place, that-is still unknown as the company is carrying out an investigation as to what are the best means it might use to market its diamonds. That might take some considerable time.
If the question is whether the Commonwealth has authority to exercise controls over exports, of course it has; and there is no dispute about that. That is the authority of the Commonwealth government. Whether this Government or any other government would want to get into the area of exercising export controls on precious stones is another question completely. Four years ago we lifted controls on precious stones, covering such things as sapphires and opals, because it was shown that administratively it was an impossible operation. I certainly would not like to think that officials of my Department or other government officials were to be given the job of assessing the value of individual diamonds, a most difficult and complex question. What action might be taken cannot even be considered until the question of

Questions Without Notice

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2187

how the diamonds are to be marketed is put before the Government.

COMMUNITY YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEME

URANIUM SHIPMENTS

Mr LEO McLEAY-I refer the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs to his announce-

Mr TAMBLING-My question is directed to ment of 15 October concerning the formation of a

the Minister for Trade and Resources. In view of task force for the preparation of new guidelines

the consequences that will flow from the closure for the Community Youth Support Scheme. Will

of the Tennant Creek copper smelter and the the Minister provide details to the Parliament of

Gecko copper mine, will the Minister make clear the consultancy arrangements under which Mr

the Government's determination to ensure that Bob Turnbull is to be appointed to the task force?

Northern Territory uranium projects do not Is the Minister aware of any statements attribu-

suffer the same fate through the actions of irrestable to Mr Turnbull when he was a member of

ponsible unionists in preventing the shipment of the Minister's Department which indicated his

yellowcake from Darwin?

opposition to the concept of CYSS? Given that

the other seven members of the task force are all

Mr ANTHONY-Over a number of years the members of his Department, why has the Minister

Government has displayed consistency in it~ seen fit to appoint to the task force an outside con-

uranium development policy and as a result tWQ sultant with a recent background in the Depart-

mines are now operating in the Northern Terri-", ment and thus exclude entirely representation

tory. I trust that, as the necessary clearances are from other community organisations?

evmnisavidol.ernosn,wmmiteohnretatuIh'IresatsnNiuaonmrdthmetihrnnees fLwoar"ilenlldgbneCdeoequvuneilctoiylp,epdtrhion-e. ''

M m. di'c

ar teNdd

"thbAatt'

WBI'RthOrWesNpe-ct.

Th to

eestGabolv'ISehr'mngmethnet

the Northern Territory. These mines are giving new an. e ter Commumty Youth Support employment to people in the Northern Territory. Scheme.' It was ~oncer~ed that there sh.ould b~ a They are becoming an important part of the econvery wI~e-r~ngmg senes of consultatI?ns with

omy of Darwin and other settlements in that recommumty mterests. Of course, the ~evle~ must

gion. People in the Northern Territory, particube understood to be the Go~~r!1ment s review be-

larly unionists, recognise the value of these cause, finally, the respo~~lblhty. rests upon the

projects for their own well-being, for the well-being Gover~ment to make deCISIons Wlt~ respect to the

of Australia and, more importantly still, for the expenditure of money und~r thiS progra~. I

energy needs of people around the world who would welcome representatIOns. or suggestIOns

have less attractive sources of energy than we from the honourable memb~r, or mde~d from any

have in Australia.

other hon~urable member, If he has Ideas to put

forward With respect to the way the scheme can

The closure of the smelter at Tennant Creek . be improved through the guidelines. Advertise-
has certainly been a major blow to employment in'" ments have been inserted in the newspapers and that part. The people who belong to the unions in; ~ letters have been written to community interests volved will realise how important it is that the ' to make it plain to them, beyond any doubt at all, uranium operations continue. If a small group of that the Government is very keen to receive repirresponsible unionists, such as those who are resentations and submissions not only from those stopping the export of uranium on the wharf at comml,lnity interests who have had an active asDarwin, continue to operate in this way and to sociation with the Scheme but also from those jeopardise the jobs of thousands of other people who work in related fields. We want to get their they deserve little respect. The Australian views so that we can make it a better Scheme. Government will ensure that uranium is exported. That is the end objective, the objective to which

I know that Energy Resources of Australia has alwe are working.

lowed a ship to depart from the wharf without a
planned shipment of uranium. It is its judgmen~ that it would rather have time to try to negotiat~,
sensibly with these people so that there can be an
arrangement whereby exports can take place out of Darwin on normal commercial ships. I hope
that the people on the wharves will allow that sort
of export to take place not only for their own
well-being but for tnat of their colleagues in the Northern Territory who depend upon this im-
portant industry.

As I said, the review is a review by the Govern-
ment and eventually the responsibility rests with the Government to make decisions. It has been
suggested that CYSS project officers should be on
the evaluating body. That suggestion seems to overlook a number of problems in following that
course. One problem is that the guidelines must
necessarily touch upon some matters which are of
personal interest and benefit to project officers because their positions will be affected by whatever
provisions are contained in the guidelines. I

2188 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

should have thought it very plain to anyone who thought about this issue that they should not be litigants and judges in their own cause. There is a lot to be said for a degree of independence in this matter and a lot to be said against the suggestion that those who will benefit from the system should take part in making decisions on the future of the Scheme. For those two reasons, it was decided that the review should be conducted by the Government. '
As an additional improvement to the process of consultation it was decided to use Mr Turnbull, who has had wide experience but who is now not employed by the Department. I should have thought that most reasonably minded people would think that was a considerable improvement in the consultation process, the reason being that not everyone doing the evaluation is working currentlywithin my Department. Those who know Mr Turnbull and those who work with him could not but have a high opinion and high regard for the work he has done, not only in the CYSS field but in the whole area of employment and youth affairs. With respect to whether he has made any such statements as those attributed to him by the honourable member, the answer is that I do not know, but I have no doubt whatsoever that Mr Turnbull, because of his experience, is a very valuable person to take part in the evaluation process and will make a great contribution to the process itself.
May I finally say that I hope those who might have any complaints with respect to the process would concentrate rather on making their submissions and contributing to the Government's consultation process in a genuine endeavour to produce the best scheme in the interests of young unemployed people.
TAX AVOIDANCE
Mr SAINSBURYI refer the Treasurer to the extensive legislation of the past three years dealing with tax avoidance. I ask whether he might have any information to give to the House regarding the effectiveness so far of the new general antiavoidance measures of the income tax Act?
Mr HOWARDThe new general antiavoidance section, namely, Part IVA of the Income Tax Assessment Act, was passed in May of this year with the support, I recall and acknowledge, of the Opposition. Whilst evidence at this stage regarding its effectiveness is necessarily anecdotal, lam pleased to say to the House that a number of indications have come to me, to the Government's advisory committee on taxation,

and to the Government private members committee on taxation, to the effect that the new general anti-avoidance section is, to use the vernacular, starting to bite. There is evidence that a number of firms and organisations previously marketing paper schemes on a very large scale have either eliminated or reduced their operations. The early indications are that the legislation, which took so long in preparation and over which the Government and its advisers, both public and private, worked so hard, in fact will match our expectations. I am sure that that development, if borne out by further evidence, will have the support of both sides of the House.
MEMBER FOR CANBERRA
Mr CUNNINGHAM-Mr Speaker, my question which is directed to you refers to an event at Question Time last Thursday, 15 October, and to an article in the Canberra Times on 16 October. The Minister for the Capital Territory, in answering a question in this House, claimed that the honourable member for Canberra came to his office frequently. Because of the innuendo in the Minister's answer and the sexist and schoolboy type of laughter which followed his innuendo, the honourable member for Canberra was angry and embarrassed. She is quoted in the Canberra Times of Friday, 16 October, as saying:
And it was totally uncalled for to have the Speaker reinforce the general mirth by asking me if I wanted to make a personal explanation.
Mr Speaker, will you consider apologising to the honourable member for Canberra for the unparliamentary attitudes expressed within this chamber? Will you consider also requesting the Prime Minister to apologise on behalf of his Minister who, by his innuendo, set the stage for this disgraceful action?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for McMillan had the courtesy to provide me with the question beforehand. I indicate to him that on the occasion of the question and the answer my observation was that it was taken by the House in a spirit of fun, and that was the way I interpreted it. I now appreciate that the honourable member for Canberra may have felt embarrassed and, to the extent that I contributed to that, I of course fully apologise. I think that the point made by the honourable member in his question will be taken into consideration by all members of the House and that they will make their judgments as to their behaviour and that of other people in the House.
BRANDY: DUTY
Mr FISHER-My question is directed to the Minister for Primary Industry. What is the

Questions Without Notice

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2189

Government doing to implement the 1979 Industries Assistance Commission recommendation to increase the duty on imported brandy from the current 8 per cent to 25 per cent? What is it doing to prevent the European Economic Community from banning four-litre wine casks after 1984? Will the Minister request the EEC to drop its present discriminatory and costly requilement of analysis on imported Australian wine?
Mr NIXON-The European Economic Community policies on wine, as do many of its other policies, very much disadvantage Australian agricultural industries. The Ministers of the Government and the Prime Minister have been at pains to point out over a long period just what those disadvantages mean. Indeed, I had the opportunity only a couple of weeks ago of meeting the new EEC Commissioner for Agriculture, Mr Dalsager, and talking with him about these policies. I did not raise the wine question at the time. But the fact is that the subsidised brandy imports from France have been on the increase in recent months. Unfortunately, the lAC's recommendations for increased protection in respect of this matter could not be implemented in 1979 because of technical difficulties associated with the renegotiation of our international commitments under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on brandy. But I am pleased to report that circumstances now allow action to be taken and the Government has taken the first steps towards renegotiating those GATT commitments.
In respect to the second part of the honourable member's question, the proposed European Community's directive on wine package sizes which is to operate from 1 January 1984 makes no provision for a four-litre pack. As the House will know, the Australian wine industry has developed a four-litre pack which has had a considerable imc pact on wine markets. So the directive cuts right across our traditional marketing practices. The Government has taken steps seeking inclusion of this size of pack in the EEe's regulations. I understand that the matter is currently before the Commission and that we can expect an answer in late November or early December.
In respect of the last part of the honourable member's question, Australian exporters, particularly the smaller ones, find the EEC analysis and certification requirements both costly and burdensome. This is another matter that has been taken up with the EEe. I understand also that the United States of America has a similar quarrel with the EEC on the matter. Negotiations are presently under way between the EEC and the United States on this aspect of the honourable member's question. Australia would expect to be

treated in the same way as the United States is treated, as a result of its negotiations. That is the point that we will be chasing.
ICI AUSTRALIA LTD: PETROCHEMICAL COMPLEX
Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Minister for Industry and Commerce. Is Sir Phillip aware that ICI Australia Ltd--
Mr Speaker. I ask the honourable gentleman, in accordance with the practice of the House, to use the title 'Minister for Industry and Commerce'.
Mr HAYDEN-I am sorry. I ask: Is the Minister aware that ICI Australia Ltd today announced that it is deferring indefinitely its proposal to build a $500m petrochemical complex near Geelong in Victoria? Is it a fact that this project would have provided 1,000 full time jobs when completed? Is he aware that ICI has publicly blamed uncertaintyover his Government's support for manufacturing industry as one of the major reasons for the company's decision? Finally, will this latest private sector vote of no confidence in the Government's economic management encourage the Government to reconsider the broad thrust of its economic policy and the damaging strategy of its B u d g e t ? -
'Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-The Government is naturally disappointed at the announcement that ICI Australia Ltd will defer development of the proposed petrochemical complex at Point Wilson in Victoria, although I riote from the statement which has bee.n issued by the company that the economics of the project will certainly remain under review. The company's decision was based on a number of factors which certainly highlighted increasing costs and, most importantly, the effect of wage movements on the construction costs at the complex. I think it is fair to say in response to the honourable gentleman that the world chemical industry, as he is aware, is currently in a position of excess supply which will be exacerbated in the short term by the construction of large new plants in Canada and the Middle East based on low priced feedstock.
I remain confident that in the final analysis Australia, with secure supplies of raw materials, will offer the opportunities for major developments in the chemical industry such as the production of caustic soda from our large and expanding alumina industry. However, as I have said many times and as other Ministers have emphasised many times, resource development projects ar.e neither preordained nor gl\aranteed. They will always be subject to an .ongoing firm

2190 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

assessment of market conditions, costs and other factors. Ministers have constantly stressed the need for projects of this type to remain internationally competitive. ICI's announcement demonstrates the crucial importance of keeping wages and other costs under control so as to maintain the competitive nature of Australian industry.
Finally, although individual projects may be deferred from time to time, there is no doubt as to the overall strength of Australia's investment in industrial development. In the course of the past financial year real business investment rose by 21 per cent and all major surveys point to further significant increases during this year. I say to the honourable gentleman that resource development, the investment which is clearly taking place and the continuing strength of manufacturing industry are a reflection of the strength of this Government's economic and industrial policies and will therefore not be subject to any change of the type which has been suggested by the honourable gentleman.
SHIPPING SERVICES BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND CHILE
Mr O'KEEFE-Is the Minister for Trade and Resources aware of moves to reopen shipping services between Australia and Chile? Does the Government support such moves? What are the prospects for increased trade with the countries of South America?
Mr ANTHONY-I had the opportunity of visiting some South American countries during the winter recess. I wish to report that very considerable economic progress is taking place and that there are obviously considerable markets for many Australian exporters. It appears that the .main disadvantage to Australian exporters is the lack of communication, particularly transport corhmunications, between here and South America. There is little communication at the moment. One of the areas that I have been pursuing with my colleague the Minister for Transport is the possibility of an Australia-New ZealandSouth America air link, which I believe would offer the opportunity to get into the enormous market in that part of the world. I am aware-the honourable member has mentioned this-of a new shipping link that has been built up with Chile. Chile's economy seems to be moving strongly in South America and that, in turn, offers a great deal of opportunity--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr ANTHONY-It is very interesting to hear some of the left wingers opposite reacting. I do not think they have had the opportunity of visiting

Chile. I did, during Allende's regime. I was there when Allende was in power. I saw half a million women out in the streets with their pans protesting against the socialist regime in Chile. Honourable members opposite want to defend that sort of regime. Chile now has a sensible regime under which the economy is moving and working well. The present regime has the respect of the peopte. It has the confidence of investors. I hope that Australians are able to sell their exports to Chile, as they can to any other country.
REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Library
Mrs CHILD (Henty)-Mr Speaker, J seek information in relation to the operation of the Department of the Parliamentary Library.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member will hand her request to the Clerk. If it is in order, it will be printed and in due course I will reply.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython)-Mr Speaker, I seek information on the operation of the Department of the Parliamentary Library.
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the honourable gentleman to hand his request to the Clerk.
Mr JOHN BRQWN (Parramatta)~Mr Speaker, I also seek detailed information in relation to the operations of the Parliamentary Library.
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the honourable gentleman to hand his request to the Clerk.
Dr EVERINGHAM (Capricornia)-Mr Speaker, I also seek information in relation to the operation of the Parliamentary Library.
Mr SPEAKER~I ask the honourable gentleman to hand his request to the Clerk. I will see that it is answered.
Parliamentary Departments
Mr KEIiIN (Werriwa)-Mr Speaker, I seek information in relation to matters administered by each of the parliamentary departments.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will hand his request to the Clerk.
SHIPPING SERVICES BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND CHILE
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide)-Mr Speaker, with your indulgence I wish to refer for one minute to the answer to a question just given by the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony). It was a very sad answer to the question. Amnesty International and the Inter-Parliamentary Union are

General

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2191

investigating the murder of parliamentarians in Chile--
,Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is debating the matter. He does not have leave to do so.
Mr YOUNG-Without trial--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Port Adelaide will resume his seat.
Mr YOUNG-It is an insult to the Parliament when the Deputy Prime Minister makes those outrageous statements.
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Honourable members will remain silent.
Mr Anthony-Do you expect to be respected for what you do?
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable the Deputy Prime Minister will remain silent.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Honourable members on my left will remain silent.
Mr Young-It is to be hoped that you will make a statement--
Mr SPEAKER-There is no matter before the chamber. Iwarn the honourable member for Port Adelaide to cease speaking.
INCORPORATION OF DOCUMENT IN HANSARD
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-Mr Speaker, with your indulgence I wish to raise a matter very briefly. Last Thursday night during the adjournment debate there was--
Mr SPEAKER-Is this a personal explanation?
Mr DAWKINS-No, not exactly; I want you to investigate something for me.
Mr SPEAKER~I will call the honourable gentleman shortly.
AUSTRALIAN DAIRY CORPORATION Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 29 (4) of the Dairy Produce Act 1924, as amended, I present the interim annual report of the Australian Dairy Corporation for the year ended 30 June 1981.
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section 37 of the Australian Industry Development Corporation Act 1970, I present the

annual report for 1980-81 of the Australian Industry Development Corporation.
PRIMARY INDUSTRY BANK OF AUSTRALIA LTD
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section 10 of the Primary Industry Bank Act 1977, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Primary Industry Bank of Australia Ltd.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Department of Defence.
SOUTH WEST TASMANIA RESOURCES SURVEY
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members. I present the report of the South West Tasmania Resources Survey. Limited copies of this report will be available in the Bills and Papers Office, the Senate Records Office, and the Parliamentary Library.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION--
Mrs KELLY (Canberra)-I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable lady claim to have been misrepresented?
Mrs KELLY-Yes, Mr Speaker. I want to correct a typing error which appeared on page 2065 of Hansard of 15 October. The word 'seat' ought to be substituted for the word 'secret' to provide a more accurate account of my interjection at the time. It is very easy to change the terminology in Hansard. However, I am concerned to change the attitude of this House to the presence of female members in the House. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for your apology and for the spirit in which it was made. There has been a tendency in this House to view it as an all male House. Mr Speaker, with respect, I know that it took you some time to get .used to using the term 'honourable member' instead of 'honourable gentleman'. I am afraid that what was not recorded in Hansard was the boisterous and senseless attitude, bordering on sexism, which arose in response to the reply of the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) to the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry). There are only three female members of this House. I point out that the women in this House seek no more rights that those accorded to any other member of parliament. The response

2192 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Unauthorised Arrivals

we witnessed last Thursday demeaned every female member of this Parliament and the institution of Parliament itself.
INCORPORATION OF DOCUMENT IN HANSARD
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to raise a matter.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr DAWKINS-During the adjournment debate last Thursday evening a matter was raised at length by the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey). There was a discussion about whether the honourable member would be granted leave to incorporate certain documents in Hansard. Reading the Hansard does not make it terribly clear which documents were to be incorporated, but it was certainly my understanding that leave had been given for all the documents from which he quoted to be incorporated. What the Deputy Speaker said on page 2150 indicates that leave was granted by the Opposition. However, the documents were not incorporated. Mr Speaker, I wonder whether you will examine the matter to see whether the documents were not provided or whether they could not be handled by the Government Printer in the time available.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fremantle may have seen the ever alert Deputy Clerk hand me a small piece of yellow paper on which is written: 'I understand the paper was not handed into Hansard for incorporation'. That apparently is the explanation. I will inquire further into the matter and let the honourable member know the results of my inquiries.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendments or requests:
Meai Export (Penalties) Bill 1981.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Bill 1981.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Bill 1981.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Bill 1981.
UNAUTHORISED ARRIVALS
Ministerial Statement
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)-by leave-Over recent months my Department received information which suggested that a syndicate operating in a number of countries was planning to send a boat load of illegal immigrants to Australia under the guise of refugees fleeing from Vietnam. The first information suggesting that these plans

may have been put into effect was received on 18 September when we learned that a boat, identified as VT 838, carrying approximately 140 ethnic Chinese, had transited at Pulau Bidong in
Malaysia the previous day with the stated intention of coming on to Australia. There were grounds for doubts about this boat and its passengers based on the facts that the group were determined not to land in Malaysia and be processed there; that the boat was a Thai fishing vessel; and reports from eye witnesses who observed the group stating that they were well dressed and not showing signs of any privations that might be expee<ted of a group claiming to have been at sea eight days prior to their arrival at Bidong.
Against this background, preparations were made for an intensive investigation of the group to commence as soon as the vessel arrived in Australia. A team of specialist officers from my Department and the Australian Federal Police went to Darwin to undertake this task. Assistance was also sought from Hong Kong authorities because of their great experience with the problem of illegal immigration. We were fortunate that the Royal Hong Kong Police were able to send two expert officers to Darwin before the VT 838 arrived. Their contribution with initial planning and during the investigations proved invaluable. The Northern Territory Government was
informed and the Commissioner of the Northern Territory Police Force assigned officers to assist the team with custody arrangements for the group. I would like to extend my appreciation and commendation to all involved in the exercise.
Against the possibility that the people on board the VT 838 were not genuine refugees but part of an organised attempt to circumvent Australia's migration controls, it was decided to advise the Governor-General to proclaim the Immigration (Unauthorized Arrivals) Act 1980. This Act and an amendment Act 1980 were proClaimed on 30 September 1981 to commence on and from that date and gave the Government power to deal with the organisers, master and crew of the VT 838 should they be identified.
The VT 838 arrived at Darwin on 5 October. On board were 146 persons, comprising 53 adult maies, 23 adult fem,ales, and 70 minors. They all claimed to be refugees who had travelled direct from Vietnam to Darwin. On the basis of
suspicions held that the group were seeking to enter Australia illegally, they were taken into custody under the Migration Act and detained at the former quarantine station near Darwin. Intensive interviews were conducted to establish the bona fides of their claim for refugee status. Those interviews have all been completed. Further inquiries

Unaut horised Arrivals

20. October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2193

are being made overseas; but I can inform honourable members in broad terms something about the organisation behind the VT 838 and the people who arrived in her. This information was obtained through statements from most of the adults in the group including two organisers and four crew members.
The organisation of this illegal venture was centred in Taiwan with links in Hong Kong and Thailand. The two principal organisers, a Taiwanese resident and his wife, travelled on the voyage. They were assisted by four crew members who were also living in Taiwan. The organisers advertised their plan by word of mouth amongst the ethnic Chinese Vietnamese community in Taiwan. Most of the passengers were recruited there, though six came from Hong Kong. It is believed that most of them had resided in Vietnam before taking up residence legally in third countries. Their date of departure from Vietnam varied from as long ago as 1954 to as recently as February this year. Some of the minors were born in Taiwan. Almost all the group have relatives there or in Hong Kong.
The cost of the journey was $US2,aaa per adult and from $USl,aaa to $USl,5aa for minors. The families of crew members were charged special discounted rates. By early September a crew and a full compliment of passengers had been recruited. One of the organisers then travelled to Thailand, where arrangements were made with Thai contacts to acquire and provision a suitable boat. Arrangements were made also to receive the passengers and convey them to the place of departure. In the meantime the other organiser made arrangements to fly the passengers from Taiwan and Hong Kong to Bangkok.
On 11 September the Taiwan passengers travelled on three regular international air services to Bangkok. One of these flights transited in Hong Kong, where the six Hong Kong passengers boarded. On arrival at Bangkok members of the entire group were conveyed to hotels, where they remained for two days. During this time the organisers concluded arrangements for the purchase of a fishing vessel. The group members then travelled by train to Hat Yai in Southern Thailand, where they were accommodated in hotels for one night. On 15 September two chartered buses took them to an isolated fishing village near Songkhla, where they boarded a 25-metre Thai fishing vessel. This boat departed the same day under the control of several Thai fishermen and was escorted by another vessel which later took the fishermen back to shore.

When the boat had cleared Thai waters the identification numbers VT 838 were painted on the bow to resemble registration markings on Vietnamese fishing vessels. Members of the group . were then ordered by the organisers to jettison all identification documents and to remove labels from clothing. They then rehearsed a cover story that they were refugees from Vietnam who had left Vung Tau on 9 September. On 17 September the vessel was intercepted by a Malaysian patrol craft and escorted to Pulau Bidong, where there is a United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees refugee camp. The group declined UNHCR encouragement to disembark and resumed the journey to Darwin. Two passengers jumped ship as the VT 838 left Bidong.
None of the group has any claim on Australia to protection under 'the United Nations Convention and Protocol relating to the status of refugees. It is established international practice not to grant asylum to a person who has already established close links or residence with another country as all in this group have done. Their situation' is no different from that or' anyone who, while legally resident in another country, enters Australia illegally. They may well be seeking a better future for themselves and their families, but they do not deserve special consideration over thousands of other people with similar backgrounds who apply to settle legally in Australia each year; nor should they be advantaged over the thousands of genuine refugees from Indo-China and other troubled areas who, unlike this group, have not yet been granted the opportunity to settle permanently in 11 country of resettlement.
Illegal immigration is nothing new. The Regularisation of Status Program, which I announced in June 1980., attracted over 11,50.0. applications from persons who were here illegally. Nearly half of these were from the United Kingdom and Europe. However, honourable members will recall that one of the objectives in mind at that time was to eliminate in the future the incentive for ile legal immigration by taking rigorous action against prohibited immigrants in future. Each member of the group is no longer claiming refugee status. They are currently prohibited immigrants who have sought to gain entry to Australia by a carefully contrived, large scale plan to mislead and put at risk Australia's migration controls.
I want to stress that, in considering the future of the group, my ultimate responsibility is to discourage similar attempts at illegal entry. In this context, I believe the prosecution and eventual deportation of the organisers and crew and the early removal of the fare paying passengers to their

2194 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Unauthorised Arrivals

countries of last residence will be critical in deterring other people from joining similar ventures. I have therefore signed orders for their deportation. Arrangements to effect their deportation, including obtaining necessary travel documents to replace those jettisoned by the group, are expected to take several weeks to complete. Meanwhile a team of officials is preparing the case for prosecutions against the organisers and crew.
In short, the people from the VT 838 are not refugees; they are illegal immigrants. The fact that they have sought to enter Australia purporting to have come directly from Vietnam should not reflect upon Indo-Chinese refugees who have already settled so successfully in our country. It has been a.remarkable demonstration of the maturity of Australia that, in such a relatively short time, it has been able to accept in such a positive way the 56,000 Indo-Chinese refugees who are now part of our community. Those persons, like other legal residents of Australia, should welcome the action being taken by the Government. I should say in conclusion that inquiries have not produced any information linking the VT 838 organisation with earlier arrivals. Interviews conducted at the time of those arrivals did not uncover evidence to suggest that they had not all come direct from Vietnam. I present the following pap.er:
ImmigrantsIllegal' entry-Ministerial Statement, 20 October 1981.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (3.8)-This incident is in many ways very much a tragedy. There is no doubt that some people in Australia would put forward the ,view that Australia could quite easily accomplish the settlement of the 146 people who arrived in this boat, irrespective of the status which may be given to them. In some ways that may be seen as being a humanitarian approach. But I suspect that everybody would reach the conclusion that, whether it be the refugee program or the orderly migration program, Australia must maintain control over the decisions which are arrived at which allow people to settle permanently in this country. We cannot appear to be encouraging decisions being taken overseas which seek in any way at all to circumvent Australian decision making. When I talk of Australian decision making I do not mean just decisions taken by government; I mean decisions taken with the acceptance and the tolerance of the Australian people. The unique movement of the people from Indo-China to Australia over the last five years, whilst resulting from a government decision, really has been done with the approval and within

the confines of the tolerance of the Australian people. That is why it has b.een done so successfully.
I have no doubt at a\1 that the Australian people now would say that we cannot allow people to organise and dupe others into believing that all they have to do is arrive on our doorstep
to be accepted. It may be that they were encouraged in that approach by virtue of the way in which we have operated the refugee program since 1975. But I hope people overseas will get the message that it is the intention of Australia to participate in these programs in an orderly fashion, where that is possible, to eradicate the arrival of people on our shores as boat people-I believe over 2000 have come in that way-and to interview people beforehand to try to get some understanding of their aims so that we can successfully settle them when they come to Australia.
We cannot predict in 1981 what likely future demands will be made on Australia as a country of permanent settlement. No one can predict what lies ahead for our region. At Question Time, for instance, the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) said what a great place Chile was. But there are many people from Chile who are now alive, settled and working in Australia who would have been put to death, without trial, had they stayed in Chile. So it is with so many of the people for whom we have made homes. Hundreds of
thousands of people who have come here since the war had nowhere else to go. It has been a great achievement for Australia, particularly in the last five years, because although we said and wrote for many years that White Australia had gone, it has only been in the last five years that we have demonstrated that. It is to our credit that many of the countries in the region now acknowledge that it is not just words as far as Australia is concerned; it is practice. But again I reiterate that it can be done only as long as we have the confidence of the Australian people to be able to do it.
We should not ignore the fact that there are
problems associated with the settlement of any new grollp. We should not exaggerate the problems but we should not overlook the problems.
Some people in Australia already are alarmed at the numbers of people who are coming into Australia from Indo-China. But I think we can say with a great deal of satisfaction that the settlement of refugees has proved very satisfactory. Everyone in Australia should attempt to understand the enormous problems of those people who have come to live here. People from Indo-China normally do not look' to migrate from their own country. It is only under very special circumstances, which have existed since the' Vietnam

The Economy

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2195

War and which have built up pressures for these people, that they want to leave their own country. It is' to the credit of Australia, the United States of America, France, Germany and other countries that they have been able to offer these people permanent settlement. That is one thing, but the issue we have before Parliament today is quite another matter; that is, the attempt by people to make money from applying a confidence trick to so many innocent people from Taiwan by saying that all that they have to do is to arrive in Darwin to be given the same treatment as was given to all those people who previously had arrived.
I think there is a warning in this for us to double our guard against any person or any group of people who attempt to do this in the future. People who want to come to Australia must join the queue and we must make the decision on how many people we can properly settle, how many people from overseas the Australian populace is prepared to accept and to fit within the confines of what is required in Australia. We have done this very successfully over a very long period. But I have absolutely no hesitation at all, on behalf of the Opposition, in saying that the Government is left with no alternative but to take the action that has been announced this afternoon by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee). I know there will be some complexities in applying what the Minister has announced because of where the people come from, because of the prosecutions that must be launched against the people who have arranged this journey. I repeat and conclude by saying to those people in Australia who perhaps will no~ plead that especially the children and the parents of tho~e children on the boat VT838 be allowed to stay In Australia: There must be a clear demonstration by Australia that people who make their way to this country under this guise will not be allowed to stay here. They will be returned from whence they came. Under those circumstances we ~an continue, with the support of the AustralIan people, a very successful settlement of refugees.
Mr SHACK (Tangney) (3.15)-1 simply want to support the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) in the hard decisions he has had to take and to congratulate the Opposition for the very supportive attitude it has adopted on this matter to ensure the continuing integrity of Australia's migration program and immigration laws. I seek leave to continue my remarks on another occasion.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.

THE ECONOMY
Discussion of MaUer of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Treasurer's failure to acknowledge or prevent the intensifying credit squeeze.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen ill their places-
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (3.17)-Just over a month ago I proposed a matter of public importance regarding private capital inflow and theimplications for the money supply growth of the growing failure of the Government's budgetary strategy for almost half of its projected money supply growth to come from external sources. I said then that if nothing was done to change that strategy there was likely to be a severe shortage of credit and pressure for further interest rate rises. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) said then, and has repeated several times since, that suchclaims were grossly exaggerated and that the-fe was nothing to worry about. However, although he goes on saying that, all the developments since our matter of public importance a little over a month ago bear out and reinforce the truth of what we were saying then. The e.vidence in our submission clearly is that a credit squeeze is developing and is occurring for the very reasons we pointed to a month ago.
I remind the House that the basis of the monetary projections in the Budget are, firstly, that there is to be a target rate of growth in the money supply of 10 per cent to II per cent; that is, the money supply as measured by M3 will increase by 10 per cent or 11 per cent this year. The Government says that almost half-$2.8m-of that growth of 10 or 11 per cent which it expects targeting to achieve will come from external sourc~s; that is, 4.75 per cent of a 10+ per cent growth will come from these external sources. That external source in more technical terms is the surplus on private foreign exchange transactions which in turn is the surplus of private capital inflow over the deficit on private balance of payments current account. The expectation of such a high proportion of money supply growth from external sources was based on the expectation of a further rise in private capital inflow above the enormous levels which occurred last year. Last year we had private capital inflow of an unbelievable $6.5

2196 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

The Economy

billion against the previous record high of $1.9 billion. This year the Budget was framed, according to the Treasurer, on the assumption that the private capital inflow would be a further increase over that $6.5 billion to $7.8 billion in this financial year; that is, four times the level of two years ago which level at that time was the highest ever in our history.
On the basis of that assumption the Treasurer was therefore able to estimate that there would be this 45 per cent of total projected money supply growth coming from external sources. On that assumption, the Government brought in a Budget which was more contractionary than last year. Last year's Budget reduced the domestic deficit by $1,OOOm. It'took that amount of money out of circulation. This year's Budget, being framed on a similar amount of inflow to the money supply from external sources, sought to take out an even greater amount of money from the economy by .increasing the domestic deficit by a further $1.1 billion. So, this year the Government framed its Budget on the assumption that there would be a large inflow of money from external sources
which it would offset by increasing the domestic deficit to $1. 5 billion. It did that by increasing taxes, both income and sales, for all Australian taxpayers and bearing down on Government expenditure through the razor gang measures and other cutbacks. We find that total tax revenue is budgeted to increase by 16 per cent and Government expenditure by only 13 per cent. In that way the Government takes $ 1.5 billion out of the economy to offset what was supposed to come from external sources.
That is the assumption on which the Government framed the Budget. It is an assumption which of course was always a dubious kind of assumption' to make. As the Commonwealth
Bank.of Australia mentioned in its recent economic newsletter, the Budget was based on the most capricious component of money supply formation. Of course, that capricious component is this area of money supply growth from external sources. Since the Government brought down the Budget all the developments have been along the lines which have made unbelievable the assumptions on which 'that Budget was based. It has become clear that the Government's assumption about what would happen in respect of the balance of payments simply will not happen. A dramatic turnaround will have to take place in the rest of this year if the Government's forecasts are to be borne out, and there is no sign of any such dramatic turnaround. The balance of payments figures for one quarter of the year, the September quarter, show that we have an all time high deficit

both in total and on the current account. The current account deficit increased from $1.4 billion in the first quarter last year to $2.3 billion this year.
This reflects the virtually static export figures over the same period because of the world recession. Although capital inflow in the first quarter is up 15 per. cent on what it was last year, our international reserves have fallen by $1.1 billion to the end of September. It seems clear from these figures that there is no surplus on private foreign exchange transactions at all. In other words, the source of money supply growth which was to account for almost half of the growth of the money supply simply has not turned up. There is no growth whatever from that source so far as one can judge from the publicly available figures. Of course, that has extraordinary importance for budgetary and monetary policies.
The evidence since the end of the September quarter shows no improvement to mid-October. The international reserve figures up until last Wednesday show virtually the same level of reserves as at the end of September. Therefore, we can say that in the first half of October there has been no improvement in this situation; in other words, no surplus on private fO,reign exchange transactions is likely to have developed in that period. Thus, with over a quarter of the year gone, there has been no addition to the money supply from this source and no sign that such an increase will eventually be forthcoming. The effect on the money supply growth not surprisingly is that it has slowed down very considerably. The available figures show a quite disturbing picture. The figures for the three months June to August show an annualised rate of growth of money supply of 9 per cent. That is our calculation based on the published figures from the Reserve Bank of
Australia.
I note in passing that the Reserve Bank has recently stopped publishing these figures for reasons which remain unexplained. Up until the last few months we had quarterly figures given on an annualised basis so that we could see what was happening to the trend in money supply growth rates on a quarterly basis. We now have to work those figures out for ourselves as they are not published any more. If they were published, they would show this figure of 9 per cent. That quarterly figure hides what has happened so far in this financial year. If we look at July and August, the two months which are available for this financial year, we see that growth in the money supply over that period at an annualised rate is 4.9 per cent. That is far below the target rate of growth of 10 to 11 per cent. If that were to be continued for any length of time-it has already continued for some

The Economy

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2197

time and there is little evidence so far of any change in September, or in the period since the end of August-then we would certainly have an intensifying credit squeeze, with all of the implications that has for shortage of funds, and rising interest rates, and the effect on growth and employment. This is a very serious development indeed. If it continues and the Government does nothing about it, or does insufficient to deal with the problem, the economy will be in severe straits.
I say in passing that, even if the Budget assumptions were being fulfilled, we would still argue strongly that the target rate of growth of the money supply at 10 to 11 per cent is too tight, given the expectations of inflation of nearly 11 per cent and growth of 3t per cent. In other words, there will be an increase of over 14 per cent in the, money value of output this year, on the Budget assumptions. If there is a target rate of growth of 10 to 11 per cent, it is likely that that money supply growth will be too tight to prevent further pressures for higher interest rates and thus there will be a shortage of credit. Of course, we are not talking about a situation in which the Budget assumptions are being fulfilled. They are being very much not fulfilled in this area of the external source of money supply growth. Therefore, we have a situation where total money supply growth is running far below the budgeted level, with much more severe implications for shortage of credit and rising interest rates.
There is other evidence of credit shortage. Statistics for lending by banks and building societies for housing for the three months to July, which are the latest figures available, show that both the number of loans and the total amount of money lent for this purpose was 13 per cent less in that period than for the same period last year. The latest figures for building societies alone show that in August of this year the total number of loans approved for purchase or construction of dwellings has declined by 38 per cent compared with the figure for the same period last year.
If we look at interest rates, despite the Treasurer's assertions that there are favourable signs, in only the last few days we have seen further increases in interest rates by building societies in Victoria. So we still have a situation in which interest rate increases are occurring. Given that interest rates are at their highest level ever in our history-that is what this Treasurer has been able to achieve for us in his period as the
Treasurer of n,;s nation-if there are to be further
increases in interest rates, that is something which has enormous implications for the people of this country.

What needs to be done? Firstly, we say that the
Government has to do something. It IS not good
enough for the Treasurer simply to say: 'Look, all this is untrue. There is no need to be concerned.' The facts are that there is need to be concerned. The facts support those who are making the assertions that credit is tight, that the money supply growth is far below expectations, and it is occurring in that way because the Budget assumptions simply are not being borne out. It is not enough to make reassuring noises, saying that the Government policy is flexible and that various measures are available for the Government to offset these factors. That is not much good unless these measures in fact are used, and there has not been much sign of that happening, All the Government has done so far is to raise the limit for bank advances from 10 per cent to 12 per cent. That was done a little over a month ago. Although that may be of some assistance, the situation is now so serious that it must be clear that that was a totally inadequate response.
We say that the Government should rel'ease funds from statutory reserve deposits, These are funds which the Reserve Bank of Australia requires the trading banks to hold with the Reserve Bank. An amount of $1.9 billion is held in statutory reserves at pr~sent. That is money which is locked up and which, if it were released to some degree, would be available to the banks to lend out and so would offset this current shortage of credit. We believe that it is high time such action was taken by the Government.
We also believe that there is need for a change in the Budget strategy. The Budget is clearly off target, given that it was framed on an assumption which has failed to be borne out; that is, the rationale for increasing income taxes and for increasing sales taxes. The Government said to the Australian people in a fairly convoluted way: 'We have to do this because we have to offset the money supply impact of this private capital inflow coming in and adding to the money'supply. If we do not increase taxes in this way, we will have a higher rate of growth of money supply than we would otherwise achieve.' That situation is not applying and there is no evidence that it will apply in the rest of this financial year. Given that the basic assumption on which the Australian people are being taxed has been taken away, the reason for that taxation policy and that Budget strategy has substantially evaporated. The Government must now look not only at adjusting its monetary policy but also at adjusting its budgetary policy because the very basis on which it was framed is no longer being fulfilled. We believe that those are

2198 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

The Economy

important factors for this Government to take into account.
1 also draw attention to the fact that, if the Government does not take action, there will, in our view, be further pressure on interest rates. This would be an ironic result, given that the Treasurer has proclaimed that the key objective of this Budget has been to remove the pressure on interest rates. 1 do not have time to go into the reasons why 1 think that is a totally apocryphal argument. Nevertheless, it is the argument that is being used by the Treasurer. It remains the case that if he continues with this strategy and if the current situation continues in respect of the failure of money supply growth to come from external sources, we will find a situation where, with a low rate of growth of money supply there will be increasing pressure on interest rates brought about by a Budget which is supposed to be removing the pressure from interest rates. This is an extraordinarily ironic situation but one which will come to fruition unless the Treasurer faces up to reality, and stops burying his head in the sand and saying there is nothing to worry about, and starts taking some action to ensure that we do not' have even higher interest rates than those that have been inflicted on the Australian people so far.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.32)-1 do not need to condemn the arguments used by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) in this matter of public importance. That condemnation came best out of the mouth of his own leader, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), when he was interviewed on the Mike Carlton show as recently as 16 July 1981. What Mr Hayden said was very instructive.
Mr Willis-Three months ago.
Mr HOWARD-Three months ago, but what he said then was still relevant and remains relevant to the arguments that have been advanced in this debate. Mr Hayden said:
. . . the government won't clamp controls on the inflow of capital . . . 11-
That is the inflow of capital-
adds to the supply of money and the only way the Government can accommodate that extra supply coming in from outside is to squeeze down on the supply available to Australians.
So what the Leader of the Opposition was saying on 16 July was that if too much money is coming in from abroad the availability of domestic credit has to be tightened. The opposite of that is that if there is a shortfall of money coming in from overseas, we can ease up on domestic credit expansion. That is the whole nub of the argument. Unwittingly, without knowing that it might be used against him, the Leader of the Opposition put his

finger on the very argument the Government advances to reject the proposition moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand. It is a serious proposition. 1 put it to the House that in order to succeed the Opposition has to establish two things. It firstly has to establish that so far the evidence suggests that Australia has no hope of achieving the private external surplus of around $2,800m which was projected as a likely outcome at the time the Budget was brought down. Having established that, it also has to establish that it is an automatic consequence of that fact that we will have a drastic shortage of credit in Australia. The Opposition has to discharge both of those propositions before it has any right to concern and scare sections of the Australian community with totally misleading and irresponsible talk about a credit squeeze.
Let me deal with the first of those arguments. The fact is that so far during this financial year the
current account deficit has been very much greater than we forecast at the time of the Budget. That is hardly surprising. 1 think even the honourable member for Gellibrand would agree with me that when we are talking about the external account, we are dealing with a very volatile area
of economic forecasting. It is extremely difficult to predict with any degree of real accuracy what will happen on the trade account, what will happen to invisibles, and what will happen with private capital inflow. Forecasting is a notoriously hazardous exercise in this area. But through a combination of a continually depressed world demand for commodities, many falls in significant metal prices, the disruptive effects of a coal strike in Queensland, the disruptive effects of a number of waterfront strikes around Australia, and other factors, the shortfall of exports to imports has been much greater than we expected. As a result during the first three months of this financial year our current account deficit, not the volume of pri-
vate capital inflow, was significantly different from what we expected. During those first three months the volume of private capital inflow was 15 per cent greater than it was during the first three months of 1980-81.
The other important thing to bear in mind is that it is very dangerous indeed to try to draw
final conclusions about the outcome for the year on the basis of performance during one quarter. Last year, the volume of private capital inflow in the June quarter was $2,306m. In other words, more than one-third of the total record amount of $6,500m that came into Australia from abroad last year came in during the June quarter because that was the quarter in which it was needed. That is the quarter in which traditionally credit is

The Economy

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2199

tighter because of the normal seasonal liquidity rundown. That fact, which seems to have been completely ignored in the remarks that have been made by the honourable member for Gellibrand, once again underscores the danger of grabbing three months figures; muliplying them by four and saying: 'We have doom and disaster'. It is a very hazardous exercise indeed. It is far from proved, on the figures that the honourable member for Gellibrand has advanced, that a private capital inflow figure of $7,000m to $8,000m this year will not be achieved. That was the best estimate that could be made by the Government's advisers at the time the Budget was put together. It was an estimate made in good faith. It was an estimate in respect of which there is no evidence so far to suggest that it will be impossible to achieve.
The prospective business investment figures in Australia, the most recently published quarterly survey of the investment intentions of business in Australia, indicate that prospective business in-
vestment is still very strong. That is as good an indicator as anyone can find in order to try to make some kind of forward projection. Let me say, in case somebody from the Opposition raises it during the debate, the fact that one investment project in Victoria is not going ahead is no reason to suggest that there has been a turnaround in investment prospects in Australia. We ought to get away from having a national inquisition every time an individual investment project does not go ahead. Many investment projects will not go ahead in the future but a great many more will go ahead. We have to look at the overall situation. There can be absolutely no doubt that, by any measure, according to any set of statistics, the
prospects for business investment in this country remain extremely strong.
I use the Scottish nomenclature when I say that the case at the very least is not proven-the case being the suggestion by the honourable member for Gellibrand that we will not achieve the private capital inflow target of $7,000m to $8,OOOm. I suggest to him that he should not jump to conclusions. I suggest to him that multiplying the figures for the first three months of this year by four and assuming that the trade account will perform in the same way for the remainder of this year could well prove to be a very dangerous and unproductive exercise.
But perhaps more important than that is the proposition that even if those predictions are borne out, even if we do not get anything like $7,000m to $8,000m private capital inflow this year, and even if the current account continues in substantial deficit for the remainder of this financial year, there is no reason on earth why we

should have a credit squeeze, given the proper and the right amount of economic management. I win take the honourable member for Gellibrand back to 1974, which was the last occasion on which this country had a very severe credit squeeze. We all remember what happened to the prices that had to be paid by trading banks in Australia for certificates of deposit during some of the more difficult days and weeks of that credit squeeze in 1974. Our financial system has come a long way since those days. It is more flexible, it is capable of a natural response to a tightening in the availability of credit and, through the .external account, it' has more weapons available to it now than it had in 1974. For example, in 1974 there was an embargo on short term borrowings of up to six months, which meant that banks' and other financial institutions caught with a very difficult and unexpected liquidity situation did not have the access to overseas funds that Australian banks, merchant banks and other financial institutions have now to prevent the adverse effects of a credit squeeze from occurring because of unexpected developments in the economy.
Mr Porter-They want to do it all again.
Mr HOWARD-Of course they do. As' the honourable member for Gellibrand said, the Reserve Bank of Australia has available to iUhe capacity to make releases from the statutory reserve deposit. The Government has available to it the capacity to adopt a more flexible approach regarding the financing of the wheal harvest: In recent years, for monetary control reasons, the Government has put the advance payment to growers out to commercial borrowings. If there is a monetary supply reason to qualify or to reverse that in some way the Government has the capacity to do that. It is yet another weapon which is available to the Government to ease the domestic credit situation if it is necessary to do so.
We have a far more flexible exchange rate system than we had when the last credit squeeze occurred. State authorities now borrow for infrastructure purposes. There can be a larger volume of overseas borrowings for those purposes by the State authorities to supplement the external account if that proves to be necessary. The list goes on. There is, of course, the capacity to allow the trading banks to lend larger amounts of money. So when one looks at the instruments that are available, even if I were to accept the proposition of the honourable member for Gellibrand-that is, that it is more probable than not that, on the basis of the performance so far this year, private capital figures estimated at the time of the Budget and the current account deficit will not perform as strongly as we had

2200 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

The Economy

expected-it would not follow for a moment that a credit squeeze ought to occur in this country. I repeat what I have said on a number of occasions over the past few days. The Government will not allow it to occur. The instruments that are available to the Government and the way in which we have shown a flexibility in financial management over the past few years, particularly over the past 12 months, will demonstrate to the. Australian community that it will not occur.
I conclude by returning to some observations I have made on earlier occasions in response to what the Leader of the Opposition and the honourable member for Gellibrand have said on this subject. It is not a Budget strategy to have a private capital inflow of $7,000m to $8,000m. The Budget strategy is to control inflation through a combination of economic instruments. One of those is to run an appropriately tight monetary policy. It stands to reason that if the contribution coming from abroad is less than we expected when the Budget was brough down then we ought-we have the capacity-to make a larger volume of money available domestically. I find it faintly ridiculous and quite ironic that only three or four months ago the Leader of the Opposition was tramping around this country saying: 'Do you know what the Government has to do? It has to stop all that wicked money' coming in'. He was saying: 'Stop it. Block it out. Do not allow it to come in. It is destroying Australia's economy'. The record is replete. On 18 August 1981 the following question was asked in ,the House.
. .". will the Treasurer immediately impose controls on short term foreign capital inflows?
My heavens, where would we be if I had taken the advice of the Leader of the Opposition on 18 August and imposed controls on short term capital inflows? We would certainly have a credit squeeze in Australia at' present. We would have choked off and destroyed one of the most valuable safety valves that this economy has if there is a shortfall of funds from overseas-that is, the capacity for the banking system and the financial system in this country to borrow from abroad on a. short term basis. Yet a few months ago the Leader of the Opposition was encouraging me to do precisely that. That would indeed have caused a very significant credit squeeze.
I reject the basis of the matter of public importance. I reject it because, firstly, the proposition about the performance of our external account has not been established and, secondly and basically, even if it were established, the instruments and the flexibility available to the Australian Government to respond to shortages of money coming from abroad are infinitely greater and

infinitely more likely to avoid a credit squeeze than was the case in 1974 when a credit squeeze last occurred.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (3.47)-We are debating a matter of public importance in the following terms:
The Treasurer's failure to acknowledge or prevent the intensifying credit squeeze.
The Treasurer (Mr Howard) has just concluded his 'defence' of the position which the Government is adopting. In the process of doing that the Treasurer misrepresented not only the economic situation which prevails and the economic situation which quite clearly is developing but also the words of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). I am surprised that an economic lightweight such as the Treasurer would challenge in this House--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member may not use that sort of language. I ask him to use only stereotype language.
Mr ROBERT BROWN-I am surprised that the Treasurer would challenge the statements of the Leader of the Opposition in the way in which he has. He drew attention to a particular reference by the Leader of the Opposition. The Leader of the Opposition was drawing attention to the fact that the Budget strategy of the Governmeft depended upon allowing with minimum constraints or controls of any kind the inflow of foreign capital for all of the reasons that that capital is flowing into Australia and the fact that the Treasurer and the Government were responding to that by applying economic clamps to the Australian community and making the community carry the burden for minimising the impact of that inflow of foreign capital. The Leader of the Opposition in -that question drew attention to the other issues that were involved. He has done this repeatedly and successfully. He referred also to the whole question of Australian sovereignty, Australian control and Australian ownership of its own resources and the way in which that large and continuing inflow of foreign capital is allowing the Australian economy, Australian industries, Australian resources, land and property and Australian businesses to be sold out to overseas interests to a maximum extent, with minimum constraints or controls.
The Opposition is not suggesting and has not suggested that the panic button needs to be pressed. What we have done is to indicate that we expect from the Government and the Treasurer a rational response to the situation which is developing and some form of compensating

The Economy

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2201

measures in the light of these circumstances. We housing. We know that 250,000 people through-

are not satisfied and the Australian public is not out Australia now are living in caravans and that

satisfied with the casual and cavalier attitude in New South Wales there are 40,000 families on

which has been adopted by this Treasurer in the Housing Commission ,list. There is no expla-

asserting that everything' is right when quite nation for those figures other than the fact that

clearly everything simply is not right. The honourthe credit squeeze which the Treasurer denies

able member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) as early exists is taking place now.

as September drew attention to the situation

which was then developing. He sounded a note of Just last night on Nationwide a representative

warning. On that occasion, as on subsequent of Syntec referred to what he chose to call a tech-

occasions, the Treasurer denied that the situation nical credit squeeze existing at present. That is the

that we had been wafning about was in fact first time that I have heard of a credit squeeze

developing and that any remedial action on the being referred to as a technical credit squeeze. We

part of the Government was required.

either have a credit squeeze or we do not. It is

It is becoming increasingly apparent that the position that we have adopted in relation to tht;se matters i,s ~eing vindicated. I indicated in my con- , tribution to the Budget debate that in the first
place the situation in which that Budget was presented to this Parliament was not of the kind that it could adequately deal with. The information
upon which that statement, that position, was based was available to the Treasurer, the
Treasury and the Treasury advisers when the

quite apparent from the figures that exist that the credit squeeze is on now. It is growing and the Government is resisting its responsibility to do something about it. The reason for this has already been made perfectly clear by the honourable member for Gellibrand. During the three months to September 1980 the overall balance of payments was in deficit to the extent of $462m. For the first three months of the current financial year it was in deficit to the extent of $1, 144m.

Budget was being formulated. Our concern-the The Government's Budget strategy has gone concern that we indicated on that occasion-is astray. The Government's Budget and the

now proving to be correct.

Government's economic measures at this stage

The Treasurer has drawn attention, quite legiare not responding to the situation which exists

timately, to a number of economic measures and the situation which is developing. The

which are at the Government's disposal. He has Treasurer and his advisers quite clearly are basing

drawn attention to the possibility of a number of their hopes on a resurgence of capital inflow after

those measures being adopted. He does not need about February 1982 and especially in the last

to tell us of the alternative measures which can be quarter of this financial year. Whether that takes

adopted. We are just as aware of those measures place will depend upon relative interest rates at

as he is. We,are concerned that the Treasurer and the time, upon taxation arrangements within

the Government shoulct show some evidence that Australia affecting overseas investors and upon

in fact these measures are being adopted and apthe investment programs which are being under-

plied. It is of no use the Treasurer, the Treasury taken by overseas business interests.

and the Government basing their economic strategy on the vague hope that some time in the new year, some time after February or perhaps some time in the last quarter of this year things will occur that will perhaps put their Budget strategy into place. It is necessary for compensating measures to be taken now.
The honourable member for Gellibrand drew attention to the fact that the extent of the credit squeeze which exists at present is already becoming apparent. For example, in the first three months of the current financial year the number of loans for housing in Australia were down by almost 8,000 compared with the number in the same period last year. The total amount lent for

I emphasise that what the Government in fact
has done in relation to the Budget is to base its
strategy on one overridingly important parameter, probably the one parameter over which
the Government and the Treasury have least con-
trol. I refer to foreign investment and the effect of the contribution of private sector foreign
exchange transactions on the money supply. Just to illustrate the way in which its value is volatile, I indicate what it amounted to, for example, in
1976-77 and in each successive financial year. In that first financial year, 1976-77, the private sector foreign exchange transactions balance was plus$19m.

home building was down by $200m compared In the next financial year, 1977-78, it was minus

with the amount lent last year. There is no way in $1,202m. In 1978-79 it was minus $254m. In

which the Treasurer or anyone else can suggest 1979-80 it was plus $974m. Last financial year,

that this situation reflects a lack of demand for 1980-81, it was plus $2,839m. Yet, in the light of

2202 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

The Economy

that experience, the Treasurer and the Government based their Budget on the assumption that the situation which prevailed in 1980-81 will prevail in 1981-82. There is no reason for us to accept that as a possibility. In fact, the possibility of that happening is diminishing.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr PORTER (Barker) (3.56)-It was interesting to hear the honourable member for Hunter (Mf Robert Brown) suggesting that on the basis of three months figures the Government ought to abandon its monetary policy and do something about increasing the money supply. He quoted what David Love of Syntec said on Nationwide last night to support his argument, a rather tenuous argument and a rather tenuous quote. I quote in detail what David Love said about capital inflow. He said:
It's running slightly, I'd say, below projection, but on the basis of the way US interest rates are going and the way Australian interest rates are now, J would expect a record flow of capital, higher than anything we've seen, in the period from about March onwards through the June'quarter in 1982.
The honourable member for Hunter advocated that we abandon the monetary policy, increase the money supply in the short term and forget about what will happen in the whole of this financial year. That is a reckless argument without any economic foundation. When looking at the basis of the argument about a credit squeeze one obviously has to consider money supply and interest rates. In the period before the Budget was presented the Treasurer (Mr Howard) had a number of things on his mind. Wage demands were excessive and there was an atrocious number of industrial disputes. Inflationary pressures and interest rates were increasing. This last aspect, of course, is of enormous concern to governments. The effect of interest rates on small businesses, on farmers, on builders and on those seeking or paying off a home loan is of great consequence to this Government and to the people concerned.
Steps were taken to reduce the upward pressure on interest rates and inflation. Earlier this year the steps taken by the Government were to reduce our borrowing program and also those of the States. Further, in the Budget the Governmentclearly looking to this problem of interest ratesbudgeted for a sizeable domestic surplus. In effect that means we have to borrow less. All these steps were taken to reduce the governments competition for available loan funds in Australia. Obviously, on that basis, more of the available funds will go to those small businessmen, the farmers, the home builders-the people we are concerned about, the average Australian. The evidence

available to the Government indicated that there was just not enough money in Australia for those who wanted to borrow it, for those who wanted to expand their businesses. Therefore the Government, bearing in mind the demand for borrowed funds in Australia, accepted that there would be a capital inflow which would assist in meeting those demands. But it is no good for the Government, in trying to solve interest rate problems, to act in a vacuum; in other words, to act on that problem without taking into account the rest of the economy. It has to keep the economy on the rails.
Remember that in the lead-up to the Budget a major consideration was the inflationary pressure in the economy. Therefore, the Budget quite rightly stated that the money supply would be kept under control. To allow the money supply to run ahead of the inflation rate and the growth rate is to invite another bout of inflation in the current economic circumstances. Therefore the Treasurer, bearing in mind the attractiveness of Australia as a place to invest and the need those with the large resources projects to have access to funds to get under way, acknowledged in the Budget that there was likely to be a large capital inflow. That capital inflow will facilitate further development projects and will create more jobs.
However, I repeat that it is important to keep the money supply growth under control. There-
fore, the Budget has taken account of the growth in the money supply, originating from both domestic and overseas sources. The Opposition is now saying that because after the first three months of this year capital inflow does not equal a quarter of the estimated total capital inflow we are entering a credit squeeze. It says that is happening because the money supply will be significaftly less than predicted in the Budget and significantly less than required by the economy. The reasoning and validity of the Opposition's argument are without foundation.
When one looks at the facts it is clearly seen that the motive for the statement made by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) over the weekend and by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) today is to cause uncertainty in the Australian business community and to unsettle confidence in the future of the Australian economy for cheap political gain. I suppose they believe that if they can wreck the economy, causing a recession, unemployment and a lower standard of living, it will increase their political prospects. Such tactics I believe are dishonest. The facts do not support their argument and their goal will not be achieved. The Leader of the Opposition has been notoriously irresponsible in his predictions in relation to the economy. One

Tactical Fighter Force

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2203

can well recall hearing in this House all the statements about Blind Freddie and the exchange rate. None of those projections proved to be correct. Already the claims made by the Opposition spokesmen are being s,een for what they are, .a cheap political gimmick. I quote from the ed~ torial, appearing in the Adelaide Advertiser this morning:
Tm: Leader of the qpposition, Mr Hayd,en, has left hims,:lf open to claims that he is taking risks with the economy whl~e 'playing politics' by warning at the weekend that Austraha faces her 'worst credit squeeze for 20 years'.
The editorial stated later:
Mr Hayden's statement can be regarded ony as alannist since it.is doubtful that in any year in the past decade has so wide a range of options been available to ensure that Australia's money supply grows at the required rate.
The Leader of the Opposition has said many things in the past. He has spoken of despair. In October 1978 he said:

TACTICAL FIGHTER FORCE
Ministerial Statement
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-by leave-The Government has selected, as Australia's new tactical fighter, the FAI8, manufactured by the McDonnell-D?uglas Corporation of the United States of Amenca. In April 1979, I said to the Parliament t.hat ~ur strategic and geographic circumstances differ III many respects from those of the countries for which the contending aircraft were primarily designed. If Qur force is called upon to defend this country or its inte.ests, it may have to do so alone, not as part of a larger allied force having the range of capabilities possible with a mixture of aircraft. We therefore sought an aircraft versatile in several roles, against both air and surface targets, in ~II weather conditions. We could not favour an aircraft because of its excellence in anyone particular quality.

. . . the 1980s are looming as a decade of despair.
Later that year he said:
The decade of the 1980s will be a decade of gloom.
When we got to the 1980s he changed his tune. He said:
By nature, [ am inclined to optimism.
Quite frankly, it is clear that the Leader of ~he Opposition is unbelievable. I cannot remember when he has been right with his predictions. The facts are that capital inflow figures for the last three months are below a quarter of the whole year's estimate. Let us look at the capital inflow figures for last year. They vary enormously from month to month and the first quarter figures are usually low. The net apparent capital inflow for August last year was $264m. The figure for September was $384m and the figure for October was $1 ,072m. That is an increase between months during a period of three months of about 300 per cent. The figure increased from $264m in one month to $1,072m two months later. The Opposition is now saying that because of the first three months' figures of this year we ought to change our economic strategy, release some more money into the financial system of Australia and abandon the budgetary strategy. The Opposition's argument is without foundation. T.here is no cred!t squeeze. It is a blinkered, short-sighted, economically erroneous argument. It appears. th~t t~e Labor Opposition has not learned from ItS time III power in 1974, when it imposed a credit squeeze upon this country.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles) Order! The discussion is concluded.

In air combat, our fighters are likely to have to operate over and beyond our vast northern regions without the extensive ~nd close cont~ol available in the European environment. Hostile surface forces would usually have to cross large expanses of water. Australia's tactical fighter therefore requires long range and endurance to be able to seek out its targets at a distance. It requires a comprehensive array of air-to-air and air-tosurface weapons necessary to engage them. The nature of our land is such that we must be able to deploy our Tactical Fighter Force at short notice, over long distances, into bare bases, and to operate there supported by extended air resupply links. The aircraft we sought therefore had to be maintainable with the minimum of front line support equipment. It had to have superior qualities of reliability and operational availability. We also sought minimal peace time training losses of aircraft and pilots. Because the aircraft chosen must see us through the next 20 years or more, we sought the potential to accommodate the improved weapons and other systems that will undoubtedly emerge during its long life span.
These were the operational factors that bore on the selection-a selection which, to a large extent, will determine the shape of the Royal Australian Air Force into the next century. We had to choose between two magnificent aircraft-the FA 18 and the General Dynamics F 16. Both in their different ways are splendidly impressive and capabl~ machines. However, it has become clear that III relation to the operational factors I have just -indicated the FA18 will be better suited to our needs.

2204 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Tactical Fighter Force

The FA 18 has been developed from the outset as a !llulti-role aircraft, with all-weather, air-to-air and air-to-surface missiles, and all-weather navigation and weapons targeting systems. These systems give it unparalleled flexibility. Because it was designed to operate from aircraft carriers, reliability and ease of maintenance were essential elements of the specification of the FA 18. The testing program has established confidence that these objectives, and from them a very high level of availability, will be achieved. The FAI8 is well suited to deployment and operation from forward bases because it requires relatively little airfield support and test equipment. It is well suited to our operating, deployment and maintenance requirements. It has good potential for adding improved weapons and other systems as these become available. It has features which strongly support the pilot in the efficient and safe prosecution of his mission. Finally, my advisers are unanimous in their advice that, principally because of its twin engines, the FA 18 offers a clear prospect of fewer losses throughout its operating life.
Since the Government deferred the selection last year, teams of RAAF and civilian officers have re-examined and refined their assessments of the two contending aircraft. In their endeavours they have had throughout the unstinting assistance of the United States departments of Defense, Navy and Air Force and of the two prime manufacturers and their sub-contractors. The Government is deeply appreciative of the support given. My senior advisers, and in particular the Chief Defence Scientist and the Chief of Air Force Technical Services, now see no substantial technical obstacles to the development of either aircraft in the form that we have sought.
The aerodynamic problems evidenced in the FA 18 have been satisfactorily resolved. The United States Department of Defense has now given approval for full production of the aircraft in the air-to-air fighter role. Clearance of additional weapons for the air-to-surface attack role is not due until about this time next year. My advisers are now confident that the outcome will be acceptable, but we will be requiring the United States Navy not to place the main contract for our aircraft until this clearance is available. Sufficient structural fatigue testing has been completed to clear the FA 18 for its first ten years of operation. Tests necessary to give assurances of a further ten years of life' will continue until 1984. Any consequential modifications to achieve this end will be known by then. In the case of the F16, uncertainties that earlier surrounded the progress of its weapons enhancement program have receded, but

nevertheless they persist in some respects. Particular doubts have risen about the F16's new all weather targeting and navigation systemsnecessary to meet Australia's requirements.
There will be a very proper concern too that the cost of such a vast project'should be known with confidence. There will be a temptation to turn back to earlier experiences and see them reflected in the future, and there can never, of course, be absolute guarantees about a production program which reaches until the end of the decade, Concerns about cost should be tempered with an understanding of the processes that have contributed and will continue to contribute to our confidence. In their examination of the two contenders, our evaluation teams have had unconstrained access to all of the material on these aircraft that is available to the ,US Department of Defense. That organisation has behind it the experience of managing the world's most formidable manufacturing programs.
The review processes available to me have been strengthened by the defence re-organisation of the mid-1970s. Recommendations now flow from a formalised process of examination which consolidates the deliberate judgments of the most senior specialists in all of the relevant skills-scientific, engineering, financial, legal-contractual and more. It deserves to be said that the professional and technical qualifications of those involved in the new tactical fighter project are second to none. I hope the country will make proper acknowledgment of that fact. To implement the project, we are making arrangements that will allow this country to place its experts within the US Government's project management team. They will participate in its day to day processes. The Government believes that a program can be implemented that minimises Australia's exposure to the uncertainties of the future and that a decision can and should be made now.
The overall project cost of 75 FA18 aircraft is $2,430m in August 1981 prices. This includes the costs of some configuration changes to meet the RAAF's operational requirements and the cost of simulators, spares, test equipment, training equipment and the like. It includes also the cost of new buildings and overhaul facilities at RAAF bases and the costs of establishing important support capabilities in Australian industry. A contingency sum has been included where risks remain.
There has been public speculation about the difference in the cost of the alternative F16 aircraft. The overall project cost for the F16 would have been some seven per cent less than for the FAI8. However, it is estimated that when we take

Tactical Fighter Force

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2205

account of running and support costs and of attrition throughout the life of the aircraft this difference will be substantially reduced. The FAI8 costs have grown during development. I cannot rule out further increases. I have said that there could be modifications flowing from structural testing. They are not expected to be costly.
The chief risk appears to be the possibility of reduction in the production rate in the early years.of the program, thus increasing production costs. To contain cost growth, the Government is stipulating that the manufacture of the first of our aircraft should not precede a specified number of aircraft in the United States program unless we decide otherwise. In this way, we will secure for Australia the benefit of the continuing testing and development of the aircraft and of early United States squadron experience. These and other arrangements too detailed to relate now give us advantages that we have not had in the management of earlier programs. There will, of course, be cost increases due to world-wide inflationary trends. As has been done in the past for other major equipment acquisitions, the Government will keep the House informed of movements in the cost of the project, both up and down, and both real and inflationary, against the base of the August 1981 price levels.
During 1980 I reached with the United States Department of Defense very satisfactory arrangements under which the project has been developed and under which the associated Australian industrial program will be put into effect and managed. The actual purchase instruments will contain more detailed conditions. My Department has necessarily yet to conclude discussions with the United States departments on a number of matters that relate to the specific aircraft chosen. I will not be agreeing to the acceptance of formal purchase documents until a satisfactory position has been reached. On present planning the RAAF can look forward to receiving its first FA 18 before the end of 1984. Pilots should begin operational training with them in the second half of 1985. Aircraft should be flowing from Australian production at a rate of three aircraft every two months by the middle of 1986, and deliveries should be completed in 1990.
I turn now to the role that Australian industry will have in the new tactical fighter program. Establishment of a capability for through-life support in Australia is a fundamental element of the program. The new fighter will be in service with the RAAF well into the next century. Australian industry must command key technologies needed to support it. Agreement has been reached with

the United States contractors on work to be carried out on our aircraft in Australia and on an associated export offset program. The added value of the offset work is to be 30 per cent of the imported cost of the program, and there will be compensation provisions if the United States contractors fail to honour their commitments.
The corner-stone of the Australian industry program will be the final assembly and test of the FAI8 at the Government Aircraft Factories at Avalon. This will equip Australian engineers and technicians with an intimate understanding of the sophisticated sub-systems of the aircraft. The engines will also be assembled and tested in Australia at the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation at Melbourne. Major parts of the aircraft, of its engines and of its electronic and mechanical systems will be manufactured in Australia in order to introduce new technologies we need to support the FAI8. To carry out this work many new facilities and items of specialised production and test equipment will be introduced into our factories. This will have a dramatic effect on our skills in many areas-to name but a few: Radar, digital electronics, control systems and new supermaterials in engines and structures.
Unavoidably the cost of work done in Australia for our own relatively small numbers of aircraft will be greater than those in the United States. These additional costs are the price we have to pay for the self-reliance we want in the support of our own aircraft. They have been included in the total cost figure I gave earlier:. Included also in the costs are investments in tooling, test equipment and machinery, plant and facilities. Much of this investment would be required in any event to support the new tactical fighter in Australia and will have application to other defence programs in the future.
The Tactical Fighter Force project is a major national enterprise. It will involve not only the RAAF and my Department, but also a host of contractors and sub-contractors in Australia's defence-related industry. It will provide us with a central element of the forces needed to defend our nation's security. It will develop our technological and industrial capacity in an area critical to our defences but also important on a wider national basis. The presence, in this part of the world, of repair and overhaul facilities for the FAI8 will be a significant military advantage also for our ANZUS ally, the United States. The benefits of inter-operability and common support will be of value to both nations.
We have not entered upon this large and testing program without carefully weighing the risks. I

2206 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Tactical Fighter Force

am confident that we have in being a work force with the skills necessary to meet this demanding challenge. It would be difficult for anyone not close to it to conceive the scale of the task involved in the tactical fighter evaluation and its industry program. Those who have carried it
through have worked with extreme dedication. I express my appreciation of their efforts. I ask the House to give this undertaking its complete support.
I now inform the House of a further major decision concerning the RAAF and its long range maritime patrol force. Instead of the modernisation announced last year of the older P3B Orion aircraft, the Government has decided to sell the P3Bs and to acquire 10 more P3Cs subject to satisfactory contractual negotiations. The cost of proceedingthis way is estimated at $240m. It involves a premium of some $50m, which, in the Government's view, is worth paying. We shall avoid the major disruption of the maritime patrol force involved in a major modernisation of half of its aircraft. The P3Bs when modernised would have had a life expectancy of less than half of that of the existing P3Cs, which will not need replacement until beyond the end of the century. The new aircraft will be equipped, as are the 10 P3Cs we now operate, for the Harpoon anti-ship missile and the Australian-developed Barra anti-submarine sonobuoy system. I expect the first aircraft to be delivered in 1985 and the entire squadron to be reequipped by 1987.
The House will recall the Government's decision last year concerning the follow-on destroyer project. I announced the intention to build two FFG-type ships at Williamstown Naval Dockyard, subject to a satisfactory resolution of a number of problems affecting productivity there. I expect to be dealing shortly with recommendations about the future of t;lat dockyard. Meantime, the Government has decided to order longlead items from the United States for the construction in due course of the first vessel.
In making this decision now, we make it possible, should the problems that have beset Williamstown in recent years be resolved, to begin construction of the ship there next year. If there is no improvement-I emphasise this and I want this to be clear too, not in any provocative way-we shall have to look to construction elsewhere. An order of long-lead items for a follow-on destroyer involves no commitment to build at Williamstown. Our plans for the development of the Australian-designed minehunting catamaran are proceeding and tenders for construction of two prototypes are presently being evaluated. But to complement these .minehunters we need to be

able to sweep mines. confirm to honourable members that the British Hunt class is under consideration for this role. We have the opportunity
to acquire vessels ordered originally for the Royal Navy. We are investigating the acquisition of two
vessels with an option on a third. The decision will
be made later in this financial year.

In September 1980, I informed the House that

the Government had decided to replace HMAS

Melbourne with a purpose-designed ship to be

equipped with helicopters for anti-submarine

warfare and to have the potential to operate short

take-off and vertical-landing aircraft. I said also

that further definition of the details of the new

carrier would be completed in the next financial

year. These investigations are proceeding and, as

honourable members will be aware, have been

widened to include an examination of the offer

from Britain of an Invincible class ship. I shall

make a statement in due course on the new car-

rier. I hope also to be able to inform the House of

the Government's intentions for the further mod-

ernisation of our three DDG guided missile

destroyers.

.

There have been a number of recent decisions regarding new equipment for the Army. Equip-
ment operated by the Army is characterised by
quantity and diversity. Few items attract the pub-
lie'spotlight sometimes focused on the ships and aircraft of the other Services. The Budget makes
provision for a range of new equipment for the
Army. Several decisions, for example, those relat-
ing to the acquisition of some 2,235 new trucks of
two types, totalling over $150m have been the subject recently of separate announcements.

However, I want to mention three projects today. All three will be implemented in such a way as significantly to enhance Australian self reliance. The first is the establishment of production capability and the initial manufacture by
Australian industry of a new 105 mm artillery weapon of an overseas design. On the successful completion of this preproduction phase, the weapon and its ammunition will be ordered in substantial numbers. It will be considerably more capable than our existing 105 mm guns. I shall be releasing further details shortly.

The second, Project Raven, aims to provide the
Army with a new family of single-channel port-
able tactical radios. The Government has decided to allocate resources to the development of the
high frequency component of the radios by Aus-
tralian industry and to preparations for its subsequent production. This project will transfer de-
sign skills and technology to Australia that will

Tactical Fighter Force

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2207

place this country in the forefront of world developments in the field. Thirdly, I inform the House of the Government's decision to spend over a period of several years some $80m on expanding the Army's operational reserve of ammunition. Some $60m of this will be spent on manufacturing ammunition in Australia, including types of ammunition not previously produced here. The development, within industry, of capacities needed to supply and support the Defence Force, and thus to increase our self-reliance, continues to have a high place in the Government's considerations. Participation by Australian industry in the provision of defence equipment is one important means of implementing this policy. Another involves direct expenditure on facilities in industry.
The 1981-82 Budget makes provision for an approximate doubling of expenditure-to $39.5m --on new plant and facilities in the aircraft industry and munitions factories. Major facilities being established include a nitroglycerine plant at Mulwala, New South Wales, a composite material and bonding workshop at the Government Aircraft Factories, Melbourne and a heavy shell-forging facility at the Ordnance Factory at Maribyrnong in Victoria. We are also expanding the existing facilities for manufacturing Barra Sonobuoys in Sydney and for the production of micro-electronic components in the plants of several commercial defence contractors. Virtually all defence activities depend on infrastructure-bases, barracks, dockyards, workshops, stores, training establishments, communication stations and a variety of other facilities.
In 1981-82, $179m is to be spent on capital facilities for defence, much of it in the north and west of Australia. This month, a new ammunition depot was opened at HMAS Stirling, near Perth and a fuel storage capacity is being provided there. During 1982, the new patrol boat bases at Cairns and Darwin will be completed. Improvements will be made to the RAAF airfield at Darwin, in preparation for the basing there of a tactical fighter squadron, and to the airfield at Learmonth. Work is continuing on the design of theproposed airfield at Derby.
The second major stage in the modernisation of Garden Island Dockyard, Sydney, will be commenced this year. The RAAF's operational flexibility will be improved by additional fuel storage capacity at Tindal, Williamtown, Amberley and Richmond. Planning will continue for facilities at Williamtown to support the new tactical fighter. The Government proposes to improve the airfield at Woomera so that it can be used more intensively by all the types of aircraft operated by the Defence Force.

The increasing technical sophistication of modern defence equipment requires additional trained manpower. Accommodation to cope with extra trainees is to be provided at RAAF technical training schools at Wagga and Laverton. Plans are also being developed for new training facilities at the RAAF School of Navigation at East Sale. New works will be undertaken at the Army's Armoured Centre at Puckapunyal, and improved facilities for training army officers for higher command are proposed at the Army Staff College at Queenscliff. It is also proposed to construct a new building at the Materials Research Laboratory at Maribyrnong to support advanced research and development in laser technology.
An important element of the defence infrastructure is housing for servicemen and their families. Over 200 houses will be provided in Townsville, for members of the Operational Deployment Force and 95 houses at LiverpoolHolsworthy, for members of the Army's 1st Task Force. Some service houses which are below acceptable standards, such as at the Army establishment at Woodside, South Australia, will be replaced. The measures and decisions that I have so far been describing, all involving capital investments, are mostly directed towards longer term objectives. Some, especially those in the areas of industrial capacity and defence facilities development, are specifically tailored to allow us to shift more easily to a higher level of defence preparedness should that later be judged necessary.
Time will not permit me today to describe .the multiplicity of other activities being undertaken with a similar purpose. Many of them are not especially glamorous and do not attract much attention. They concern infrastructure and manpower, especially in areas where there are long lead times for the acquisition of skills. They are, however, very important for their effect on our expansion capabilities for the future. So, too, are the underlying planning priorities that require each new initiative to provide in Australia, managed by Australians, arrangements that will allow us to use and support our weapons, in an independent force: The training schools; the 'software' facilities; the computer-managed stock control systems; the command, control and communications systems; the joint staff training; and the hundreds of other activities that could stand us in good stead should we need greater military strength and have to fight alone.
As well as these longer term measures, we are lifting our levels of defence preparedness in the shorter term by a number of means. I touch briefly, today, on but a few. The activity of the Defence Force has been stepped up. This will

2208 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Tactical Fighter Force

continue under provisions in the present Budget. In particular, maritime operations in our northern
and western ocean approaches have been
increased. Over the . past three years there has
been a significant and sustained increase in com-
bined and joint exercises. Some 53 exercises were conducted in 1979-80, 80 in 1980-81 and 81 are planned for 1981-82.

I should make here a brief reference to exercise
Kangaroo 81, currently being conducted off the
east cost of Australia and in the Shoalwater Bay
training area. The exercise is the fourth in the
series and some 25 ships, 100 aircraft and 20,000 ANZUS and British military personnel are in-
volved. Kangaroo 81 is a complex and ambitious
exercise which has been developed from previous exercises in the series. It will develop further our-that is, Australia's-operational doctrine
and procedures for the command and control of joint and combined operations in our region.

We are steadily increasing the number of reg-

ular Defence Force personnel to support in-

cre~ses in activities and the manning of new

equipment and to expand the training base. The

estimates provide for service manpower increases

of over 1,000 above the level at 30 June 1981. The

Army Reserve has been expanded in less than a

year to reach very close to the Government's tar-

get figure of 30,000. At 1 July the figure was

29,8~2. I want to pay tribute to the young people

of thIS country and also to the work of those re-

sponsible for the massive effort that was involved.

The and

task remains to consolidate

to it.

Aropupnrdoporfifattheipsroacvhisiieovnesmheanvt~

been built into 'the Defence estimates, including

provision for additional modern equipment. ,

.1 should also inform the house that the operatIOnal deployment force or ODF in Townsville
has received the additional personnel needed to
bring it to full operations strength, including integral combat, administrative and logistic support
elements. The raison d'etre for the ODF is to pro-
vide the first land element of the Defence Force
dep!oyed in a contingency. It has completed its eqUIpment program and is now organised to be
transportable in the aircraft of the Australian Defence Force. Provisions have been built into the
Defence estimates for its continued development
and maintenance at a high state of readiness. The cost of the defence program on which we have
embarked will be very heavy. It will impact on
every Australian. It has been necessary this year
to make the largest peacetime allocation-in real terms-to defence ever made in the history of this
nation and at a time of budgetary restraint and continued prosecution of the war against inflation. The effort will have to be sustained.

Over the period since 1976 estimated real growth in Defence outlays has already averaged slightly more than 3 per cent per annum, as compared with an annual average real growth in total Commonwealth Budget outlays, over the same period, of slightly more than 1 per cent. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced early in 1980 that the Govc;;rnment had decided upon greater allocation of resources to our defences. Allocation of resources is made in the context of the Budget each year. However, the Government understands the need for a stable planning base and in March 1980 I announced details of the planning basis for the five years 1980 to 1985. It involved defence spending of some $17,600m in August 1979 prices-over the five years; a~ average annual growth rate of about 7 per cent; spending to increase to around 3 per cent of gross domestic product by 1984-85; and an increase, over the five years, in the proportion of expenditure on capital investme"nt rising to over 25 per cent by 1984-85.
The 1980-81 Budget provided for real growth in defence outlay of about 7 per cent, including a provision towards the purchase of the new tactical fighters. In the event, a number of factors, of which the most substantial was deferral of the decision on the fighter, resulted in a somewhat lower real growth of about 5.6 per cent in' 1980-81. The deferral last year of the decision on the fighter, together with difficulties in progressing other capital equipment projects, will also affect the rate of increase in expenditure in the immediate future. Thus in 1981-82, the Budget provides $4, 112m for defence outlay, a real increase of 5.3 per cent over 1980-81.
However, the obligations already entered into, mainly for capital equipment and facilities, now total $2,580m. These obligations will be further increased by the very large commitments soon to be entered into for the new tactical fighter and for other major equipment projects. Expenditure in the next several years against these obligations will plainly require the allocation of resources to Defence to continue to increase. If I may give but one example, on present projections a little less than $100m will be required for the new fighters in 1981-82. The figure will increase to $400m a year in 1983-84. That is comparable with what we spent in 1978-79 on all capital equipment.
The Government is resolved to sustain the long haul begun in February last year to lift our defence preparedness onto a new plateau. What I have announced represents a significant burden to the Australian taxpayer. I am thoroughly conscious of that fact. Our circumstances and our responsibilities have changed greatly in the course

. Tactical Fighter Force

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2209

of the past ten years. We have a clear commitment to fend for ourselves and to contribute to stability in our immediate region. I find myself in complete agreement with that philosophic view which contends that men and women who have a preference for the estate of liberty must carry with grace the burden of protecting it. I present the following paper:
Defence, Government decisions-Ministerial Statement, 20 October 1981.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Suspension of Standing Orders
Motion (by Mr Sinclair)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Leader of the Opposition speaking for a period not exceeding 34 minutes.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (4.41)-After 13 years of hestitation and apprehension, after nearly a decade and a half of timid backtracking and confused decision making, the Government at last has made a decision on the new tactical fighter. After 13 years of florid rhetoric, during which we were assured that there was an imminent threat to the security of this country, we find a decision has been made. Woe befall the country if that is the basis of military decision-making at a time of genuine peril. I am stunned to find that, for all of the rhetoric, for all of the time which has been absorbed in making this statement to the Parliament, so much which is crucially important to a better understanding of our defence preparedness and a better arrangement of our defence capacity has been left unresolved. Effectively, this statement is an FI8 acquisition statement or, if the media are correct, a grand farewell gesture by the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) before he departs from this country to more salubrious climes. But in the wake he is going to leave the enormous economic burden of meeting the costs of what he has outlined for the rest of the community to bear. It is all very well for him to say, as he did in his concluding peroration:
. . . that men and women who have a preference for the estate of liberty must carry with grace the burden of protectingit.
He could well have deliberated at some length to explain why there have been so many deferrals of crucial decision-making commitments on major capital equipment items for the defence forces so that we have now reached a point where there is a very large bunching up of financial commitments; and they, in turn, will represent a heavy domestic

economic strain and a very serious balance of payments strain in the years ahead.
I said that there are defects in this statement before the House. The Minister has ignored serious defects in the defence arrangements of the country. He has left unanswered major questions which arise merely from the statement he has made to the House, let alone other serious defects of which we are aware in relation to our defence preparedness. For instance, his statement ignores
the fact that the defence system in this country is bewildered, disorganised and has a low operational capacity because of servere restraints which have been imposed upon it by this Minister. We have air crew in the Royal Australian Air Force who spend too much time on the ground.
We have sailors in ships which are harbour-bound and we have an Army which is on short training rations. The consequence of that is extensive frustration, anger and quite noticeable demoralisation within the ranks of the armed Services. Those in the ranks are remarkable people. They forbear with enormous disadvantage unfair burdens imposed upon them by this Minister. But there is a limit. There is a limit to how much confidence, optimism and vitality they can inject into the discharge of their duties in the face of this chronic neglect on the part of the Government.
The defence Services of Australia have been casualties of the grand but empty gesture by the Minister for Defence in the past six years. I will illustrate that. The first five year defence program was outlined in 1976. Four years later it was $1,500m behind on spending target. On capital alone it was $900m behind on the target set. The 1980 program is already $102m behind what was committed less than two years ago. On present indications, and bearing in mind the implications of current economic trends, one anticipates that again promises solemnly made are about to be dishonoured.
Let us look at it another way. The 1976 five year program set a target of defence spending increases in real terms of 5 per cent a year. In fact, the average was much less than 4 per cent. The target to be achieved was 24 per cent of the total defence budget being spent on capital equipment. In fact, it was marginally over 15 per cent. We now have a new five-year defence program. They are recycled every time the previous one is exhausted from neglect, and it is quite obvious that the dishonouring of promises by the Minister for Defence is something that will no longer be forborne by either the community or his backbenchers. We have a new commitment, a 7 per cent increase in real terms in defence expenditure each year of that five-year program. Last year the

2210 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Tactical Fighter Force

increase was much less than 5 per cent and this year it will be about 5.3 per cent. We dispute the figure that the Minister has declared for last year. If it were to be accepted, it would mean very simply, on the Minister's own figures, that the increase in real terms of defence spending this year represents a fall on last year.
The problem with the Government is that it has a preoccupation with big boots that it cannot fill comfortably or adequately. Let me illustrate that with some of the commitments it makes. Let me zero in on the particular case we have before us of the,Fl8 and the unresolved questions associated with it. The Minister for Defence says that the total cost, including spares, training and equipment is $2,430m. That is verifiably a crass underestimation. The United States Secretary of Defense, Mr Carlucci, only a few days ago, said:
Recent pricing and availability data for 75 F / A-IS aircraft developed by the Navy and provided to the Government of Australia include an estimated total program unit cost far in excess of the cost cited by the Australian Press . . . The pricing data provided to the Government of Australia are strictly best estimates.
Guesses are what we are going on, and underestimates at that. I will mention some official sources. The official project unit cost of the F18 to the United States-called the SAR cost-was in December 1980 $24m a plane. That amounts to some $1,800m for 75 planes. One needs to add a minimum of 50 per cent for spares, training and so on. In December 1980 that gave a total cost of $2,700m, which is well above the figure quoted by the Minister, and that was some 12 months ago. The latest United States Navy estimates proposed a cost of $27.7m a plane in 1982, which is a more relevant comparison. Even an assumed inflation rate of only 10 per cent in the United States will represent about $30m a plane for these planes in 1984 when they are declared to commence arriving. If we add on the necessary 50 per cent which I mentioned, in order to get an all-up project cost, we have a total cost not of $2.4 billion but of over $3.3 billion. Now we know what the Minister means when he talks about the fly-away cost.
In addition, we have to take account of the following factors which could add to the $3.3 billion. The net production of a plane is vital to cost. The Marines have chosen some 300 AV8Bs in preference to the F18s. The Canadians are becoming restive about their proposed order. The United States Secretary of the Navy told the National Press Club that if the real increase in price of the F18 continued 'we may be forced to shop elsewhere'. Therefore, the volume of production will fall on that sort of basis. If this occurs, quite obviously it implies a substantial increase in each unit produced because the learning

curve economies are not exploited. Particular specifications that the Government rri~y add will further increase the cost. I repeat: All costs are predicated on the United States inflation rate which has been predicted by the Reagan Administration. The Government Accounting Office of the United States questioned whether the inflation rate, implicit in the pricing mechanisms of the F18, will be met.
If we put all those things together, it is quite obvious that there is only one conclusion: We are not being given all the fads of the real cost of these aircraft. The Minister, on behalf of the Government, has sought to throw dust in' our eyes. The real cost is nearly $1 ,000m greater than the figure he has cited. Later I will come back to the very real and disturbing economic management implications that that portends.
Let us look at the performance of the F18. If the plane did everything originally claimed it would' certainly be an outstanding aircraft, but there are serious uncertainties that it would. It failed to meet its original specifications. Only 12 to 15 aircraft are flying and they are still undergoing evaluation. The FI8 is not operational in any air force. It has not been tested with harpoons which presumably the Government prefers to attach to it. When used in a strike role its air defence capability is degraded because the targeting electronics for the strike role are held in pods which replace its sparrow air to air missiles. Put all these defects together and we almost have a replay of the disaster which was associated with the commitment to a very good aircraft, the Fill, but this is a much more outrageously expensive purchase because the Government did not apply the disciplines that should have been applied right from the start.
I mention in passing-this is relevant to the figures being cited-that there is already a twoyear delay on the stated delivery period given in March 1981. Mr Atwood, a deputy secretary in the Department of Defence, in company with Admiral Sir Anthony Synnot, told the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence that the planes would be delivered between 1985 and 1988. Today the Minister says they will be delivered between late 1984-which for all practical purposes is 1985-and 1990. Already we are running into a delay in delivery. Let us look at one of the alternatives, the F16. I merely mention this, not as any expression of preference, but rather as clear evidence of the lack of disciplined evidence presented to this House to justify this very expensive decision by the Government.

Tactical Fighter Force

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2211

We do not have before us comparative analyses which justify the ruling out of alternative aircraft. I remind honourable members that we are talking about very large slabs of cash which Australian taxpayers will have to meet in the future. We are talking about very large slabs of cash which will go out of this country and which will have to be paid by an extraordinarily resilient and healthy balance of payments in that period. Given the weakening international situation and the weakening of our own, balance of payments account at present which we cannot expect to remain extraordinarily strong in the face of international distress there is every reason for concern about the capacity of the economy to bear this cost and some others which have already been committed either in principle or in fact.
Unlike the F18, the cost of the F16 is known. 'The December 1980 SAR figure was $13.7m which amounts to $1,027m for the project unit cost. The total cost, adding the necessary 50 per cent for an all-up project cost, is some $1,54lm. That is almost half the cost of the F18, not 7 per cent less as the Minister suggests. If we take into account additional cost uncertainties about the Fl8 that do not apply to the F16, the cost could even be less than that half. We could buy something like 150 F16s for the cost of 75 FI8s. In those circumstances, the attrition rate, the loss of single engined F16s as against double engined F18s, becomes somewhat insignificant. The cost of the Multiple Stage Improvement Program for the F16 would give us all that we need. The F16 has some deficiencies in terms of the declared requirements of the defence Services. With the Multiple Stage Improvement Program, we would get all that we need. For instance, it would meet various roles, especially a more effective all weather strike role which has been declared as essential. Its performance is known. It is in service with seven air forces and, contrary to the propaganda, it is not just a simple dog-fighter but has formidable strike capability, attested to in its repeated victories in bombing and strike competitions.
Let us look at the Tornado. My office has received a telex from Panavia in Australia which states:
A package of 75 Tornado aircraft including spares, weapons and ground support equipment would cost in the order of 1508 million Australian dollars based on January 1981 values. A unit fly-away price would be about $15 million as delivered to Royal Airforce.
The operational cost could be increased by the fact that it requires two pilots, but there are strong arguments in favour of two pilots in a multi-role aircraft with its enormously complex

avionics. The fact is that, on the basis of that fiscal evidence, it is still a much cheaper proposition. It is at least technologically as advanced as either the FI8 or the F16. It is rated as probably better. There are two versions of the plane, the strike and the air superiority fighter. There is a 95 per cent commonality between the two versions. It has a short runway capacity and it uses a harpoon equivalent, the Sea Eagle. It has a stand-off defence capability equal to the F 18 and better than the F16 at present, although that will be improved.
On all of these criteria, there are alternatives which could have been seriously considered by the Government and would have been equally as effective. Over all that is the important consideration that we could have saved very large amounts of money as a result of an alternative aircraft being chosen. It may well be, in the light of all the analysis that the Government has carried out, that for all that the FI8 is a preferable buy, but on the basis of what the Minister said in this House today, he has not established that case. He has established an extraordinarily costly undertaking, far in excess of what would be involved in alternatives. There is a lack of fiscal disciplines in respect of that and in the absence of a proper defence of this decision-making of the Government.
I repeat that we have had too many bungles in the past. We seem to have our defence forces operating like motor cars without crankshafts or with three wheels instead of four. I will give honourable members some illustrations. We went through a similar costing farce with the Fill. It was a good aircraft, but I am talking about the fiscal approach of the Government, the conservative Government of that time. The FIll is still incapable of fulfilling its planned role more than 20 years after it was ordered. It still uses outmoded iron bombS. The new avionics Pave Tack system to be attached to it will apparently be used in conjunction with Pave Way bombs, which have a range of less than five miles. This negates any long range stand-off capability for maritime or landstrike. Again, the Pave Tack system is incompatible with the harpoon missile and to fit further avionics to the Fill to handle the harpoon may not be possible. Certainly one suspects, having spoken with people who fly these aircraft, that it will grossly overcrowd the equipment space on the aircraft.
Let me deal with the new frigates. In evidence to the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence on 18 March 1981 Admiral Synnot stated:

2212 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Tactical Fighter Force

From an FFG you can see about 20 miles. If you want to fire something like a harpoon missile over the horizon you have got to know where the target is.
He was talking in terms of the FFGs having helicopters. If the helicopters are not provided on the FFGs, they become extremely vulnerable to attack and much less capable of their offensive role. Turning to the patrol boats, the Fremantle class patrol vessels were' built on specifications which were far too high for the role of fisheries protection. At the moment they are armed with a World War II cannon, the only certainty about which is that it will jam when somebody needs to operate it. No missiles are provided with that vessel. That is an irresponsible approach. I restate what I have said already: There is a serious defective approach to capital equipment acquisition by the Government. It buys large, shiny, speedy, impressive new technology and large, shiny, speedy and highly vulnerable items of capital equipment but it does not buy everything that is needed. So there is a serious distortion, imbalance, defectiveness, in the defence capacity that the Government provides. The Oberon submarines are a classic example of this. We have four and a half crews for six submarines when it was the considered view of Admiral Synnot before the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence of this Parliament that there should be seven crews. I repeat that we are getting the F18, and the purchase has all the hallmarks of a replay of the fiasco of the Fill fiscal undertaking. We do not know the true cost and there are doubts about the real cost capabilities.
Let me move on to the general nature of the defence forces. This is something which should have been considered by the Minister in his address to this Parliament. What are the strategic concepts behind defence thinking? What are the doctrines underlying all of this? It is one thing to buy this expensive equipment, but unless those things are declared cleatiy, comprehensively and practically, the whole thing has very little meaning and can lead to serious distortions in what is provided. In November 1979 the sub-committee of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence reported:
The Committee is not satisfied that ihe core force, as presently constituted,could expand to its required level within a realistic period of warning should the threat of major direct attack emerge in the future.
Nothing there has been disturbed. If anything, the defectiveness is even more serious. We have had 13 years of rhetoric on a new tactical fighter. If it takes that long for decision-making in relatively sanguine times, one shudders with fear and apprehension at the prospects implicit in conservative

government defence decision-making in times of pressure.
There is a desperate need for a clear declaration of strategic concepts, a clear exposition of the doctrines underlying those strategic concepts. I declare mine quite simply. I believe we start off by asserting that we look after No. I first and work on the worst possible scenario-that, for all the rhetoric of our strong and powerful allies always being there, if we make sure that we are always clinging to their shirt tails when there is a presumed need by them for us, we will be saved and they will turn up when we require them. I argue that that is a very dubious proposition, and I do not have to go as far as America in the instances I can relate to justify that view. I have related historical instances before.
I will use an illustration from East Timor, a country which, within its own region, is regarded as a somewhat large and powerful nation. Weall know of the heroic struggle of the East Timorese people in support of the two commando units which were isolated there in World War II. We know the high price and the high personal sacrifices which were involved. Yet it ha~ been decided that the best interests of those people, as they presumably saw it, was of secondary consideration to the views of this conservative Government. We have heard the outrageous reports of the neglect of the enforced famine of these people. Yet there was not a protest from the Government, in spite of the public outrage. It means, very simply, that in the final wash-up we have to calculate that we might have to rely on ourselves. So we look at the nature of the potential threat in our region and our capacity to handle it, the capacity for that threat to be launched, and the sort of equipment we require to respond to it.
In those circumstances it is sheer nonsense for us to be spending large amounts of money on the odd very large, highly vulnerable, capital unit of equipment such as an aircraft carrier. I will give honourable members an illustration of that. There is a proposal to buy one aircraft carrier. If that aircraft carrier is sunk, we have lost all. We have lost the equivalent of 50 Tornado aircraft, the equivalent of 20 Oberon submarines, the equivalent of four FFG frigates and 20 Orion maritime aircraft. We have 12,000 nautical miles of coastline to be concerned about. One aircraft carrier will go nowhere in looking after that. It took five days for the Melbourne to move from Sydney to Darwin at the time of Cyclone Tracy. What sort of deployment prospects do we have if we invest so heavily in that one highly vulnerable item of capital equipment?

Tactical Fighter Force

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2213

I was aghast to hear the Minister mention that the Invincible from Great Britain is being seriously considered as a contender to fulfil that requirement. The Government blindly ignores all the defects-the vibration problem; the compatability problem in electronics and propulsion; the very serious machinery problems; the lack of space, for instance, for the storage of spares and munitions; and the lack of workshop space for the Sea Harrier aircraft. There are very serious defects in the electronics system and an inadequate command control and communication system to maintain the operation of the Sea Harrier aircraft. It is not really an aircraft carrier anyway; it is a cross between an aircraft carrier and a cruiser. It has been built for North Atlantic service and not for tropical and sub-tropical operations. Effectively, it is an anti-submarine unit. That, in itself, explodes so much of what the Navy has been talking about. The Navy has been arguing that it needs this sort of platform to project aggressive air power to perhaps some land area occupied by an enemy. The Navy would have extremely limited capability in that respect were it to be equipped with Sea Harrier aircraft because of their limited operational range and performance. It would require major alterations to operate in this country. It would make more sense to be spending that money on Orions and submarines. Submarines, in cost effective terms, are overwhelmingly the greatest as~.!t in which we can invest, much more so than a highly vulnerable aircraft carrier.
As I have said, we have a desperate need for a clear declaration of strategic concepts and the underlying doctrines. We need to stress deterrents. We need to develop the theory of disproportionate response to ensure that equipment and manpower are organised on a basis which will ensure the maximum impact in defending the shores of this country. Our arrangements, in terms of the acquisition of capital equipment, need to ensure that that there is mobility and adaptability in those units for this vast and very difficult geographical terrain in which we have to operate. Industrial capacity in this country needs to be maintained at a high level in association with our defence forces so that, in the event that we are by ourselves, we can call on that sort of support with confidence. Therefore, it makes nonsense of the Government's decision to close down the Ordnance Factory at Bendigo, which manufactures general engineering equipment, reconditions guns and gun mountings, .produces consumables such as gun barrels, bomb bodies, ammunition clips and links for the armed services, and undertakes a

wide range of services in support of our defence capacity.
When I talk about a disproportionate response I am talking about something like the capacity that Sweden has established. Despite a fairly small defence arrangement necessitated by the limitations of its population and budget, it is still calculated that it would take something like 70 Soviet divisions to overrun that country. In those terms the cost is so extraordinarily high that it discourages contemplation of undertaking such a venture. Let me cite the case of submarines versus aircraft carriers. I wish to quote from wM.t has been said by no less an authority than Admiral Gorshkov of the Russian Navy. I quote him with some. confidence because in the last couple of years the Minister for Defence has been wont to quote him with great conviction and certainty. Admiral Gorshkov said this of the Second World War:
To everyone German submarine the~e was 25 ships of the Allies and 100 planes . . .
These ships and aircraft were tied up because of the existence of one submarine. In his work 'Sea Power and the State' he concludes:
Of all the armed forces in Germany only the submarine fleet, right up to the end of the war, represented a most serious threat and the 'anti-su.bmarine war' ended only after the territory of Germany had been occupied by Allied armies.
What I am saying boils down to the fact that we would be wiser to buy equipment such as submarines, PC3 Orions, surface vessels of the frigate standard, and strike aircraft, but not necessarily at the most expensive end of the ranges the Government is proposing, and improve the Fills rather than extravagantly splurge on a few major items becau~e we want to impress our strong and powerful allies. I have heard only one persistent argument pressed by the Navy, when its other arguments have been resisted, about the justification of an aircraft carrier; that is, that in operations and exercises at sea the Admiral requires a platform because it is very embarrassing with the United States Navy having something smallet than that. That is a very expensive status symbol. It is scarcely justification for the way in which defence acquisition decisions will be made.
We need a new tactical fighter with reliable known capabilities, not capabilities which are guessed at. We need to know also quite reliably the cost factors that are related to this. I will not go into the details, but the analysis that we have carried out shows simply that the total of projects approved, such as this new tactical fighter, the carriers, the destroyers, the tankers and other items which the Minister has announced in his statement-and others to which he has given no

2214 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

River Murray Waters Agreement

commitment on this occasion-will represent, up until 1990, in current day terms, an expenditure of $10,000m. That $IO,OOOm on these capital items to which the Government has been rather casually committing itself is the equivalent of 16 years' expenditure on equipment in 1981-82 Budget terms. That is a lot. In a matter of less than a decade the Government will be required to meet the equivalent of 16 years' capital expenditure on the external account.
I wish now to concentrate on two items-the F18 and the carrier. Payments for the F18 and the carrier-another $200m a year-will be competing with profit repatriation of more than $2,000m a year in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Repayment of private and public debt overseas will involve annual outflows during this period of $1,OOOm to $1,500m on account of resources investment. It remains to be seen whether the extra export income from these developments will be able to accommodate massive defence-related cash outflows on top of the expressed desire of Government spokesmen to stimulate imports further by a reduction in protection levels.
The evidence is clear. The Government just has not thought its way through the economic disciplines which are explicitly involved in this matter. Our aim should be towards obtaining ships and aircraft with a capacity to attack and to sink aggressors before they get here-to hold and destroy them. We need to maximise the mix and maximise the effectiveness of what we do. In many important respects there has to be a trade-off between quality and quantity. We need more of certain things at the expense of some quality. In other areas we will have to maximise the quality. But we can do much better than we are doing at present. If we persist with these sorts of policies we will be weakened by gaping gaps in the defence arrangements of this country that will worsen over time because of the neglect of the Government and the incomprehension of the Minister.
Debate (on motion by Mr Carlton) adjourned.
RIVER MURRAY WATERS AGREEMENT
Ministerial Statement
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-by leave-I am pleased to inform the House that the Commonwealth, New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia have endorsed a draft of a new River Murray Waters Agreement. I table a copy of the draft. I understand that the Opposition has a copy. It is subject to final revision by the Crown Law officers. I table it on that basis and on that understanding. This Agreement was the outcome of a meeting which

the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick) and I attended last Friday in Melbourne, together with the three respective Premiers and their water resources Ministers. The Premiers and I have agreed that the draft new Agreement now be referred, as I have indicated, to the Crown Law advisers of the four governments with a view to the early introduction of the necessary legislation. In the meantime, the River Murray Commission has been authorised to operate fully within the terms of the new Agreement, pending completion of the necessary legislative action.
The draft new Agreement is the result of the first major review of the Agreement signed in 1914. It is now proposed to expand the responsibilities of the River Murray Commission to include water quality in addition to the responsibilities it now has for water quantity in the main stem of the river and associated storages. At the same time, the Agreement is being updated to make it more relevant to present day requirements by giving the River Murray Commission responsibilities in regard to other water management objectives. Under the proposed new Agreement, the River Murray Commission will be authorised to formulate river water quality objectives or standards, as appropriate, for various locations on the river. State authorities will be required to inform the Commission of all proposals under their consideration which could significantly affect water quality and quantity in the river and provide the necessary information to permit an assessment of their likely impact. Obviously, the agreed water quality objectives will be of central relevance to such an assessment. The Commission will be empowered to make representations as necessary to the appropriate State authority on such proposals. Further, the water distribution provisions of the new Agreement will enable account to be taken of the quality of the inflows of tributaries and man-made outfalls in assessing the credits of the States in the Commission's water accounting procedures. Rules are to be drawn up for this purpose.
As in every river system, water quality in the River Murray is the end product of numerous activities which take place in the catchment-in irrigation, dryland agriculture, processing industries, urban centres, forestry and many other activities. These are all State responsibilities. There is no intention of the River Murray Commission having a regulatory function, the power of sanctions in regard to these matters or the right to interfere in the States' affairs. The new arrange-
ments aim at a joint assessment of all relevant water and land use and other factors significantly

River Murray Waters Agreement

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2215

affecting water quality. This is consistent with the development of river management strategies where a river and its catchment fall within the responsibility of a single government. While in this regard the River Murray Commission will have only the power of persuasion, its representations will be based on mutually agreed water quality objectives or standards, and on an ever increasing body of knowledge of the river system and its problems.
Subject to the new water quality provisions, the current water sharing principles and arrangements between the three States will continue. South Australia will be entitled to 1.85 million megalitres annually as measured at the South Australian border in accordance with specified monthly volumes. This includes the recent 23 per cent increase made possible by the completion of Dartmouth Dam. The two upper States will share the balance of the water resources available to the River Murray Commission, but with some flexibility to cope with year to year pressures in water demands.
While the River Murray Waters Agreement is, and will continue to remain, the main policy instrument for the Commonwealth's involvement with the three States in the management of the nation's most important water resource, considerable financial assistance has been provided to the three States for those salinity control and drainage works in the Murray Valley which fall outside the area of the Commission's responsibilities. These are all priority works recommended by consulting engineers, Maunsell and Partners, in the plan of action they proposed in their 1979 report on salinity and drainage problems in the Murray Valley. By the end of this financial year, we will have provided about $18m in grants to the cost of underground and surface saline water drainage works on a dollar for dollar basis with the three States-a total of $36m. Together, we are well advanced in the implementation of urgent works identified in the Maunsell plan of action.
It is the view of this Government that, before any decisions are contemplated regarding a follow-up to the implementation of the plan of action, time must be allowed for the accumulation and assessment of vital information arising from the three .important recent joint CommonwealthStates initiatives. We need to know the effectiveness of the new water quality responsibilities now proposed for the River Murray Commission, the full operational impact of Dartmouth Dam and the efficiency of salinity control projects already completed, or" under construction. Subject to this review, we will give careful consideration

to new salinity control projects in accordance with priorities identified by the States in conjunction with the River Murray Commission. This was done recognising that because of the measures already undertaken the Maunsell report is already to a degree out of date. Basic data for this purpose is already being gathered. The Commission has now established a water quality monitoring network along the river to record salinity lind other key parameters and consultants are being engaged shortly to develop a mathematical computer model to simulate the'operation of the river system, not only in terms of river flows and storage changes, but also in terms of river water quality. This model should be an invaluable instrument in the development and operation of long term strategies to reduce salinity in the river system to manageable proportions, and all efforts are being made to ensure its early completion.
There are already signs that recent initiatives by the four governments are gradually becoming effective. Water quality recordings by the River Murray Commission during last season's severe drought indicated that salinity levels were lower than in previous comparable dry periods. This comparative improvement has been attributed to the initial operations of Dartmouth Dam-now about two-thirds full-and the effectiveness of already completed salinity control works. High river flows resulting from heavy winter rains and melting snow are having a very beneficial flushing
effect on the river system, and adequate water supplies of good quality should be available next season.
It is recognised throughout the world where irrigation has induced salinity problems that techniques which reduce the application of water surplus to plant requirements are essential to the success of any long term strategy to bring the problem under control. Amendments in May and December 1980 to the Income Tax Assessment Act now provide strong incentives to irrigators to improve their watering practices. The new provisions of the Act allow full deductibility of expenditures for income tax assessment purposes on water conservation and conveyance, salinity control and associated drainage works in the same year as they are incurred. We understand that these incentives are now starting to become effective. However, a better definition of the magnitude of the problem is required, and the four governments agreed last Friday that a Commonwealth-States working group should review the extent to which irrigators are adopting improved irrigation practices and assess the possible need for additional incentives. It is clear that without complementary preventative measures at

2216 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

River Murray Waters Agreement

the farm level, initiatives by the four governments in the fight against salinity will be impaired.
The Government is mindful of South Australia's specific problems with River Murray water quality, particularly during prolonged periods of minimum river flow conditions. To some extent, these problems originate outside the State. In relation to drinking water, there is the additional problem of turbidity caused by the presence of suspended soil particles and organic material, which reflect run-off conditions in the vast catchment, including parts of Queensland. Commonwealth financial assistance, already reaching $40m, is enabling South Australia to build a water filtration scheme for metropolitan Adelaide. Two filtration installations are already operational. The scheme, when completed, will contribute significantly to an improvement in the colour and taste of drinking water from the Murray integrated into Adelaide's water supplies.
The River Murray Waters Agreement has worked to the advantage of all three States for over 60 years. Admittedly, managing the river for water quantity is far less demanding than taking account also of water quality, having regard particularly to the constitutional role of the States in practically all aspects of water and land use which affect river water quality. We do not underestimate the difficulties and complex issues which lie ahead. But with good will on the part of all concerned and a determination to make the proposed new River Murray Waters Agreement work, the long term environmental health of the river and the economic well-being of the numerous urban centres and vast irrigation settlements in the Murray Valley can be assured.
The River Murray Commission and the agreement between the States result from the way in which over the years many officials and Ministers have worked together to make sure that that great natural resource is preserved and improved for future years. There are not only many thousands of farmers-many thousands of irrigators-but tens of thousands of people in rural communities, as well as of course the much larger number throughout Australia, who are dependent on the River Murray and its systems. It really is one of Australia's greatest natural resources. In the future it will be used to the best advantage of everyone concerned only while the governments concerned are prepared to work in co-operation, recognising their responsibilities to each other. I pay recognition to the officials of the Commonwealth and the States, the State Ministers and Premiers who helped to bring about this agreement in a way which I believe will be beneficial to

a very large part of Australia. I present the followingpaper:
River Murray Waters Agreement-Copy of draft agreement, dated 16 October 1981, and Ministerial statement, 20 October 1981.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (5.26)-Australia's Federal Constitution has always caused difficulties for the sound and responsible control of the waters of the Murray River. Water management, like the management of other natural resources, is not specifically listed among the areas of Commonwealth responsibility in the Constitution. Whilst that omission has made resource management generally a continuing problem, it has created special problems with the Murray. First, the river forms a boundary between two States; it enters the sea in a third State; and it draws over 20 per cent of its water from a fourth State. Secondly, conservative national governments have used the constitutional omission as a convenient excuse to avoid any substantial responsibility for Australia's primary water resource.
The Commonwealth's involvement began in the interstate royal commission appointed in 1902 to consider the rival claims of the States of Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia to the waters of the Murray. At that time, the primary interest in the river was the need to provide for navigation to facilitate interstate trade. As a result of the royal commission's report, the original River Murray Waters Agreement and the River Murray Commission, formed in 1915, were established to ensure that all steps necessary were taken to regulate the flow of water in the river to provide for navigation, irrigation 'and water supply purposes. But that Agreement no longer serves to protect the river, or indeed to protect the interests of its wide range of users.
Further, the new draft agreement, and the arrangements under which it will operate, while they offer some improvement, are still seriously deficient. In fact, the major innovation in this agreement, the expansion of responsibilities of the River Murray Commission to cover water quality as well as the quantity of water supply, is nothing more than a recognition of what has been happening since mid-1978. In 1973 the Commonwealth established a working party to suggest changes to the functions of the River Murray Commission. In 1975 that working party recommended the expansion of the Commission's role along these lines. Since July 1978 water quality monitoring has been undertaken by the Commission.

River Murray Waters Agreement

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2217

The Opposition welcomes this change, but I point out that in doing so we express our serious concern that monitoring is only a very small part of the task which is necessary to protect the river. Alone, it will not insure that, for example, residents of Adelaide get access to ample supplies of clean drinking water and it will not insure that primary industry in South Australia has available sufficient water to maintain that State's large agricultural output.
The central and most pressing problem with the Murray is salinity, the level of salt in'the water. The World Health Organisation has set a limit of 500 parts per million of total dissolved solids, or salt, in water for human consumption. River Murray water frequently exceeds this level. At Murray Bridge and Mannum, for example, salt levels are frequently above 800 parts per million and, despite assurances in the statement by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), there is no clear evidence that this situation is improving. Yet, this is the origin of much of Adelaide's drinking water. Consequently, Adelaide's water supply is often saline to the extent of 400 parts per million, compared with Sydney's 90 parts per million and Melbourne's 50 parts per million.
Further, the State's irrigation areas produce over 70 per cent of its grapes, 50 per cent of its stone fruit and almost all its citrus fruit. Citrus trees and vines cannot tolerate more than 600 parts per million salt and stone fruit is even more sensitive. These industries support directly 52,000 people in the Murray Valley in South Australia, where the gross annual value of primary production is over $1 OOm.
As I have already said, under the existing arrangements there have been no significant trends towards improved Murray River water quality. The draft agreement announced today, lacking enforceable safeguards, seems unlikely to lead to desirable and necessary improvements. In the absence of any sanctions against unsound use of the river, in the absence of any regulatory function of the River Murray Commission, the Commission will only have 'the power of persuasion'. When conflicting interests exist between users at different parts of the Murray and in different States-they do now-I suggest that this is an entirely insufficient power.
In this connection also, I remind the House that the River Murray Commission has at present a staff of ten. Staff and members of the Commission already feel themselves under public pressure as a result of the river's inadequate management. Clearly, however, it is the terms of the Commission's operation and the poor level of its

staffing which must be held primarily responsible. Mr T. A. O'Brien, Commonwealth representative on the Commission, pointed out last year that the Commission, with its widened powers and responsibilities, would shortly find itself needing to make difficult decisions. There will be conflicting requirements of quantity vel sus quality of water. There will be conflicting needs for recreation, irrigation and flood mitigation uses and there will be decisions with significant effects across State borders. The firm authority needed to deal with such problems is not provided by the new Agreement.
Finally, I point out that if the Government were serious about a long term commitment not only to protecting the River Murray and its various users' interests, but also to restoring its quality for present and future use, it would support the proposal of the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) for the establishment of an institute of fresh water studies. We would move to set up such an institute with great dispatch because of the urgency with which we regard what would be its functions and the need to contribute much more practically and infl uentially towards remedying the problems I have been discussing. There is at present no co-ordinated research of Australia's inland waters.
In passing, I make a point that the first national survey of water use in Australia was based on data collected for the year 1977. I make a further point that many of the mineral development projects now under way or proposed for this decade will depend on the availability of substantial quantities of water. Without adequate information, proper long term planning of our water resource use cannot be undertaken.
In connection with the River Murray the same comment applies. The River Murray Commission does not have a charter to undertake research, despite the extraordinary lack of knowledge of the river's ecology and the effect on that ecology of human demands. Research will not save the Murray, but it is a fundamental need and it is a legitimate interest of a responsible national government. Additionally, opinions exist to indicate that the so-called 'National implied powers' of the Commonwealth would be sufficient to extend the Commonwealth's role into research in that area. As a positive proposal, I commend the institute for the Government's support. It is a matter requiring early decision.
Let me point out the number of other specific problems that need to be attacked and resolved. First, the River Murray Commission has functions limited to the main trunk of the Murray and

2218 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

River Murray Waters Agreement

its tributaries above the Hume. Second, the Commission has no representative from Queensland, despite the fact that that State is a source of over 20 per cent of system's water. Third, the Agreement does not provide for any obligation on the Commonwealth or any of the States to prevent actions which would further damage the river.
In the longer term there is no doubt that the effective management of the River Murray requires Commonwealth constitutional power over its management. I suggest that the most positive thing the Commonwealth could do to protect the different users of the Murray would be to begin the process of seeking Commonwealth control over this national resource. In this respect I point out that the South Australian Government this year has urged the Commonwealth to take full control of the river, regardless of State boundaries. I repeat that the Opposition supports the need to expand the River Murray Commission's role in monitoring River Murray water quality. But I assert, in conclusion, that much more needs to be done by the Commonwealth in the interests of that large proportion of the Australian community and the Australian economy which is dependent upon continued, assured supplies of high quality water from Australia's major river basin.
Motion (by Mr Sainsbury) proposed:
That the debate be now adjourned.
Mr Jacobi-Mr Speaker; I merely want to get an undertaking, if I can, that the matter will be resumed for debate before the end of the session. We do not have the agreement; we have a prime ministerial statement.
Mr Sinclair-We will debate it if we can.
Mr Jacobi-I would have considered the matter of sufficient importance for the debate on it to be resumed before the end of the session.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hawker will resume his seat.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, may I intercede and, through your generosity, ask the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to consider the appeal of the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) to speak on this matter? He speaks logically and rationally. He does not seek to distort the issues. The concern is genuine. The manner of his information on this matter is beyond any doubt. I think he has attracted the respect of both sides of the House by the genuineness of the way in which he has presented that concern. Could he have some time at least?
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to respond. The honourable member for Hawker

(Mr Jacobi) has already had the opportunity to present a second reading speech on the proposal that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has addressed. The Government had time for him to do so. The Government will make time for the Parliament to resume the debate on this matter subject to ordinary Government Business. A number of major statements have been made today, and of course the Government would want to resume debate on those if time permits. I will make time for the honourable gentleman to speak on this matter if it is possible. I agree with him about the significance of the matter, but I cannot provide that time at this stage.
Mr Jacobi-Mr Speaker, may I have your indulgence? I have moved the second reading of my own private member's Bill. I assure the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) that I support the continuity of the River Murray Commission, but it is the conditions and the terms of the agreement about which I am vitally concerned, not the statement of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser).
Question resolved in the affirmative.
PRIVILEGE
Mr SPEAKER-Earlier today the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) raised an issue of privilege. He drew the attention of the House to an advertisement which appeared on page 1 of the Melbourne Herald of 16 October 1981. The advertisement stated in bold lettering: 'P.M. Votes Sigma No.1'. The text continued with the words: 'So join the PM'. To any person reading the advertisement, the first impression would be that the reference was to the Prime Minister and that he endorsed that particular make of motor car.
To some extent the advertisement is similar to one which appeared in newspapers in 1965 wherein the then Leader of the Opposition, Mr Arthur Calwell, was purported to be advertising BMC products. It is obvious to me that unless some action is taken to examine the whole issue we would be inviting advertisers to attribute to any member of this House the support of any product. Accordingly, although the present case raises some complex matters relating to the application of privilege, I believe it is fitting that it should be carefully considered by the Privileges Committee. I am prepared to allow a motion to be moved forthwith to refer the matter to the Committee of Privileges.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister) (5.40)-Mr Speaker, I support what you have said. Anyone seeing this advertisement would have to come to one conclusion. Not only

Privilege

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2219

does it say: 'PM votes Sigma No.1', but also way of repetition that there have been two recent

further down it says: 'So join the PM and drive similar cases, if one takes the Calwell case in, I

Sigma-it's a real vote catcher'. The whole thrust think, 1965, and another one earlier this year. Un-

of the advertisement is that the initials 'PM' refer less the Privileges Committee considers the mat-

to me. I think it is therefore appropriate for the ter, then by leaving a vacuum it will encourage

matter to be examined, as you have so ruled, Mr people to use members of this House, unwittingly

Speaker. I therefore move:

and unknowingly to the member of the House, to

That the advertisement published in the Melbourne Herald
of 16 October 1981 under the heading 'P.M. Votes Sigma No. I' be referred to the Committee of Privileges.

endorse a product. That is a matter which I wish
the Privileges Committee to examine and report to the House on.

Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) (5.41)- Recently another matter was referred to the Privileges Committee which caused some controversy in public and in the House. I would have thought that before we as a House referred another motion to the Committee we should understand what the issue is about. I do not know how many honourable members have seen the advertisemenl to which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) referred. I have not. I would have thought that members of the House ought to be afforded the privilege of seeing the advertisement which is contentious before we make a decision.
Mr SPEAKER-The practice is for the Speaker to examine the matter and draw a conclusion as to whether it should go to the Privileges

Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime
Minister) (5.44)-In my recollection there have
been half a dozen cases over the last five or six years in which firms or advertising agencies have
come to me or to my office, wanting to use either
my name or that of the office in some kind of ad-
vertising campaign. Obviously, they have always been discouraged from doing so. I am not quite so
sure that the use of something like this is necess-
arily as innocent as the Leader of the Opposition . (Mr Hayden) claims. It seems that there is a
definite thrust in the advertisement and in its pur-
pose. That ought to be discouraged, not as a matter of formality but as a matter of practice by this
Parliament.

Committee. I have so concluded, as I have said.

Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (5.45)-1 also

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley~Leader of the Opposaw the advertisement on the date it appeared-I

sition) (5.42)-1 support the matter being rethink it was last Friday. I had the same reaction as

ferred to the Privileges Committee as a matter of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). I

formality, but on the basis of what the Prime Minthought that it was a bit of slick advertising to

ister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has outlined, I do not make it appear that the Prime Minister was gra-

think it is a terribly serious infringement. I am tified by the benefits of a Sigma. But I did not

almost certain that it was not conducted with think we would be debating here the question of it

some sort of wilful desire to affront the Parliagoing to the Privileges Committee. This gives me

ment or its standards. I noted in one newspaper the opportunity of saying that whilst I was

this morning a very large advertisement by a telerepresenting you, Mr Speaker, overseas at the

vision channel. The caption, as well as I can recaU Inter-Parliamentary Union in Cuba, the House

it, stated: 'What does the man in the street think debated another matter which, had I been here, I

about Channel 7?'. I think that was the channel would have voted against going to the Privileges

involved. The advertisement showed a very unCommittee.

.

likely man in the street. Indeed, the photograph Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is

showed a member of this Parliament who was not to refer to that earlier debate.

suitably suntanned and decked out. I would have Mr YOUNG-It seems to me, Mr Speaker,

thought on the basis of a matter of privilege which that we have to make a very fine judgment here

was taken up in this Parliament many years ago about what is happening to the Parliament and

by the late Arthur Calwell, that that was probably the Privileges Committee. I am not so alarmed

a breach of privilege. If these things are correct, it about the advertisement that appeared on Friday

is a responsibility for us to declare fairly clearly as to think that we should turn the Parliament

and concisely what is a breach of privilege so that upside down and send everything off to the Privi-

people do not innocently transgress these stan- . leges Committee to see how we are all being

dards. I am absolutely sure that it is not done in-- affected by it. If the Prime Minister objects to the

tentionally, and with that understanding I support advertisement he can ring up the manager of Pres-

the matter being referred to the Privileges Com':' ton Motors Pty Ltd, who is probably in the Lib-

mittee as a formality.

eral Party, and tell him to cut it out. I do not think

Mr SPEAKER-What the Leader of the Opthat this requires a vote of the Parliament. We

position has said has some merit. I point out by have just been talking about spending $3 billion

2220 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

on F18 aircraft and other matters of great importance. Now we are talking about what car the Prime Minister likes. This matter does not seem to me to rate the importance of referring it to the Privileges Committee; nor did the other matter which was raised during my absence.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (5.46)-The Calwell episode was before my time in this House. As I seem to remember it, there was a court case and damages were awarded to the Mr Calwell. Was that a different case?
Mr Hayden-They were very large.
Dr KLUGMAN-They were very large damages. I think this may be a case where individuals can take legal action if they feel that they have been misrepresented rather than a case of parliamentary privilege. Let us say that it was not the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) who was referred to but that somebody was foolish enough to say that the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) endorses Sigma cars. Would we consider that to be a question of privilege or would we leave it up to the honourable member for Werriwa to take appropriate legal action? I do not see any difference between it being the Prime Minister and it being any other member. I think basically it is up to individual members to take action if they feel that they are affronted.
Mr SPEAKER-I point out to the honourable member for Prospect that there would be no difference whether it was the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) or the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). I want the House to understand that this is not a case of the House now determining any set of rules or making a judgment as to the innocence or otherwise or the propriety or otherwise of the advertisement. The House has established a Privileges Committee so that it can examine such matters and report back to the House. The vote is merely on whether to refer a matter to the Privileges Committee for the purpose of that examination.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Consideration of Report of Estimates
Committee A
Debate resumed from 15 October.
Mr SPEAKER-The question before the House is:
(I) That the following proposed expenditure be agreed to:
Parliament
Proposed expenditure. $22,973,000

Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Proposed expenditure, $76,338,000
Department of ForcignAffairs
Proposed Expenditure, $740,511 ,000
Department of Defence
Proposed expenditure, $3,728,017,000
(2) That the resolution and expressions of opinion agreed to by Committee A in relation to Parliament be noted, namely:
(I) That this Committee resolves that in appropriation procedures for 1982-83 the funds for Parliament should be contained in a separate single line Appropriation Bill and notes the support for this procedure contained in the recommendations of the Report of the Senate Select Committee on the Parliament's Appropriations and Staffing.
(2) That this Committee registers its grave disquiet at many of the proposed cuts in real terms in the budget for the Parliament.
(3) That the expressions of opinion agreed to by Committee A in relation to the Department of Foreign Affairs be noted, namely:
(1) That this Committee expresses its concern at the reduction in contributions to two well-known and respected institutions, the Australian Institute of International Affairs and the United Nations Association of Australia, and requests that the amounts provided to institutions including the Australia-Britain Society be reviewed.
(2) That this Committee is of the view that the Government should accept, and work towards meeting, the United Nations target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product as official development assistance.
(3) That this Committee is of the opinion that the Government should consider the resumption of the two suspended aid projects to the People's Republic of Vietnam as a contribution to the stability of the region.
Upon which Mr Morrison had moved by way of amendment:
Omit the words 'the expressions of opinion agreed to by Committee A in relation to the Department of Foreign Affairs be noted', substitute the following words: 'this House fully endorses the expressions of opinion agreed to by Committee A in relation to the Department of Foreign Affairs and requests appropriate action by the Government'.
Mr FRY (Fraser) (5.49)-When the debate on the consideration of the report of Estimates Committee A was adjourned last week I was speaking in support of the amendment moved by my colleague the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison), particularly in relation to that part of the amendment which supports the resumption of the two aid programs to Vietnam. I was pointing out that the economic deprivation of Vietnam was largely the result of American intervention both in that country and in its interference in the affairs of Kampuchea. Of course, when the Americans completely destroyed the social infrastructure of those countries they then moved out and just left those countries to their own resources. Then, of course, those countries were criticised because they accepted aid from the Soviet Union.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2221

Australia, because of its participation in the Vietnam war, should accept some responsibility also ror the economic deprivation of Vietnam. I think the greatest way that we could do that would be not only by resuming our aid programs but also by acknowledging the Heng Samrin regime in Kampuchea. The Heng Samrin regime has restored stability to Kampuchea. It has stopped the killing-the mass murders that were going on under Pol Pot. The country is now recovering. It is restructuring its agriculture and its industry. We could playa very significant role in the restructuring of Kampuchea. Instead, we hang off and do not acknowledge the reality of the situation and recognise the Heng Samrin regime.
It is interesting to note that the conflict in Kampuchea that was reported over the weekend did not involve Heng Samrin or the Vietnamese forces in any way. It involved the Pol Pot forces and other forces which are unrepresentative of the people of Kampuchea fighting each other in the north of the country. The threat to the stability of the country is not the Vietnamese presence. Of course, if the Vietnamese were to withdraw then the country would be exposed to further killing and depredation by the Pol Pot forces. So, the quickest way to get Vietnam out of Kampuchea is for those countries which are supporting Pol Pot to stop supporting him. His forces could not survive without support from Thailand and, indirectly, support from America and from the Chinese. Of course, as long as that support is forthcoming those forces pose a threat to the security of the people of Kampuchea and the Vietnamese will stay there.
I think that Australia had a wonderful opportunity to adopt an independent policy in relation to Kampuchea. Normally, this Government follows the policy of the Association of South East Asian Nations but on this particular issue ASEAN is deeply divided. We find that two of its member countries~Malaysia and Indonesiaacknowledge that Kampuchea is a legitimate sphere of influence for the Vietnamese forces. They privately seek accommodation with the Vietnamese forces in Kampuchea. On the other hand, China, Singapore and Thailand still support Pol Pot. Even though those countries have communist insurgents in their own countries being supported by the Chinese they still have this divided policy of supporting Pol Pot at the same
time. I find this quite contradictory but it seems that it is possible to explain it in terms of Asian ideology.
I think that we should be taking an independent viewpoint. There are two countries supporting Pol Pot. There are two countries supporting the

Vietnamese presence. The Philippines seems to be uindecided at this stage. We should be taking the lead in giving an acknowledgement of the Heng Samrin regime. We should discourage other countries from supporting Pol Pot so that the Vietnamese forces can get out and concentrate on reconstruction in their own country. There is no way they will get out while the threat of Pol Pot still remains. I think we should stop burying our
heads in the sand over this issue. We should face up to the reality of the situation and realise that we, too, should be trying to encourage other countries to stop supporting Pol Pot so that the Vietnamese forces can withdraw.
Before I wind up I refer to the fact that during the Estimates Committee hearing I asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) for a report on the situation in East Timor. He promised to supply that report. I have not sighted it as yet. Several weeks have passed. In the meantime we have had several reports from other sources about a very serious situation developing in East Timor, including an internal report from the Administration in East Timor to the Indonesian Government in Jakarta. We have had nothing from our own Government. We have had also reports from other sources. I suggest that the Minister has information about the situation in East Timor. I suggest that it is the sort of information that he ooes not want the Australian people or the Australian Parliament to know about. I call on him to take the Australian people into his confidence and to tell us what the situation is in East Timor. Everybody else knows what the situation is. We do not want a second hand report based on a propaganda statement from the Indonesian Government. If the people of East Timor are in desperate need the Australian peopl~ should be told. I am sure that they would respond most generously. I am sure that the vast majority of people
in Allstralia have a great deal of,sympathy for the East Timorese and do not support the shameful way that we have treated them in the past.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (S.SS)----Jn considering the report of Estimates .committ~e A, I want to speak on the subject of foreign affairs.and, particularly, about the possible Australian participation in a Sinai peacekeeping force. I think that Australians should keep an open mind about whether Australia should make a contribution to that force. One of the first things the new President of Egypt, President Mubarak, did after the tragic assassination of President Anwar Sadat was to support the continuing peace process of Camp David. I am sure that all Australians want peace and stability in the Middle East. It may well be more important and more necessary now than

2222 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

ever before for the democratic countries in the Western alliance to support this new regime in Egypt of President Mubarak.
Let us examine the Camp David Accords and the Camp David process. Two nations that were at war and are now at peace are trying to disengage. Israel is handing back territory to Egypt. I believe that no Arab nation will really protest about Israel handing back Arab territory to an Arab nation. The United States is organising an international force to supervise that peace and those Accords. We are having a debate about whether there will be a Sinai peacekeeping force because at the United Nations Security Council the Soviet Union clearly indicated that it will veto any United Nations force. That is something that this House must bear in mind and remember. We are debating Australia's participation in a Sinai peacekeeping force because the Soviets refused to allow the setting up of a United Nations force. The Soviets do not want peace and stability in the Middle East; we must remember that. The Soviet Union is behind a pact between Libya, South Yemen, Ethiopia which is, in fact, encircling and threatening Egypt. That is another reason for the West, at this time, to support the new regime and government of President Mubarak.
Are we in Australia and in the Western World to throw out the opportunity for peace in that strategic region of the world because the United Nations is unable to send in a force because of a Soviet veto? The answer is no. I believe that the West, and Australia in particular, has to keep an open mind on the subject because if we participated only in peacekeeping forces that were UN-backed the world would be in a worse position. The settlement in Zimbabwe came out of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and was a Commonwealth initiative. So, there will be other solutions to peace. We must not throw out a non-United Nations potential solution just because the Soviets veto it.
As events have unfolded it may be more urgent and imperative to support President Mubarak carrying on the legacy of President Sadat and the peace proce-ss. Not to participate at this time may have more repercussions than there were before the tragic assassination. We must, I believe, support the new leadership in Egypt. Not to make a contribution through the Sinai peacekeeping force might, in: fact, encourage radicalism, encourage the Soviets and encourage instability in this region of the world, all of which would please the Soviet Union ..

Sitting suspended from 5.59 to 8 p.m.
Mr SHIPTON-Before the suspension of the sitting for dinner I was speaking about the possible participation by Australia in a Sinai peacekeeping force in the Middle East. I said that in my view Australia, Australians and the Australian Government need to keep an open mind on participation in that force. It is my personal view that if the force is broadly based geographically and politically Australia should participate. But of course as honourable members know, the Government has as yet made no decision on that matter. I was saying that as events have unfolded in the Middle East and Egypt since the tragic death of President Anwar Sadat, it may now more than ever before be important and imperative to support a stable regime there. Today there are reports-as yet unconfirmed-from Washington that the French in some way are sympathetic to participating in the force or may participate. But if that is so, it would add a new dimension to the force because we would have European participation in it.
One wonders what the attitude of the Opposition in this place might be to having a socialist government participate in it because the Opposition has clearly come out against Australian participation in a Sinai force. In fact when I look at the Opposition's attitude on international events-it was negative on the Commonwealth Heads of Government and negative on the Sinai peacekeeping force-I can see an isolationist trend there. The Opposition wants to opt Australia out of the real world. If the French were to participate,as I have said, it would take the situation much nearer to meeting the acceptable criteria from the Australian Government's point of view, as stated by the Minister.
I return to the situation in Egypt and the stability of the regime there following the tragic death of President Sadat. President Mubarak has said that he supports and will follow the legacy of Sadat and the Camp David Accords because the Camp David Accords are establishing peace in the area. It is important for the West that we do have peace and that the Sinai area is handed back by Israel to Egypt. It is important that that process of peace continue and that the stability of the Egyptian regime be supported. But at the same time as this is happening-and it was happening before Sadat's assassination-there is an enormous Soviet buildup in the Gulf and Middle East region. I think that ought to be brought to the attention of this House. The recent alliance treaty between Ethiopia, Libya and South Yemen is creating further instability in the region. The

Appropriation Bill (No. /)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2223

countries have Cuban troops, East German administrators and Russian tanks. In fact an encirclement of Egypt is taking place in a physical and general sense by a Soviet buildup that was occurring before the tragic assassination. So for another reason it is more important for lhe West to make sure there are stable regimes in the Middle East. Let us face it; it is the Soviet Union that, as I have said before, is in favour of instability. It does not want peace; it does not want a resolution of the Palestinian question.
Let us look at what we are talking about in relation to stability in Egypt. We are talking about a stable government that administrates and controls the Suez Canal, that will ensure that there is free passage for the world through that canal and through the Red Sea. Those are the things that are at risk. We must have peace and stability; we must work towards it. That is why I support Australian participation in a Sinai peacekeeping force and why I appeal to Australians to keep an open mind on the issue.
Debate interrupted.
PRIVILEGE
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect)-Before dinner the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) asked that an advertisement from, I think, the Melbourne Herald be referred to the Committee of Privileges. In his introduction he pointed out that he had had a number of requests to be associated with advertising and he had rejected them all. In the Australian Financial Review of Tuesday 13 October, page 18 there is a full-page advertisement by Seven National News, the news authority, which reads: 'Who's that getting on the right side of Ken Begg?' It continues:
In politics its not always whHt you know but who you know, and Ken Begg of Seven National News knows you know who.
We see in the advertisement Ken Begg with another person who certainly is made up to appear to be like the Prime Minister. We do know that the Prime Minister did not participate in that advertisement. I would like this advertisement referred to the Committee of Privileges to see who is impersonating the Prime Minister.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-In answer to the matter of privilege brought up by the honourable member for Prospect, if he will let me have a copy of the advertisement I will refer it to the Speaker who will, no doubt, report back to the House at a suitable occasion.

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Consideration of Report of Estimates Committee A
Debate resumed.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (8.7)-We are discussing a report from Estimates Committee A. I took part in deliberations on the estimates for two departments-the Department of the Parliament and the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. I do not know whether I will have time to talk about the latter, but I will refer to the estimates of the Department of the Parliament and what happened at the Estimates Committee hearing which relate to that Department. I moved a motion, which I will read to the Parliament, as follows:
That this Committee resolves that in appropriation procedures for 1982-83--
The next financial year-
the Funds for Parliament should be contained in a separate single line Appropriation Bill and notes the support For this procedure contained in the recommendations of the report of the Senate Select Committee on the Parliament's Appropriation and Staffing.
I also moved a second motion which was passed by the Committee with support from both sides. It reads:
That this Committee registers its grave disquiet at many of the proposed cuts in real terms in the Budget For the
P~rliament.
I repeat, these motions were supported by members from both sides of the House, indeed by every member of the Committee present except the Leader of the House, the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair). I assert that there is substantial support on both sides beyond the members of that Committee for the sentiments of those resolutions. I am glad that in reporting from that Committee to this House we do note those resolutions. I trust that this House will note them and that the Executive will go further and act on them. The Speaker, who took part in the deliberations and discussions on the estimates for the Parliament, expressed serious concern that the procedures set down for determining the 1981-82 appropriations had not been followed. Following the theme of the Speaker and of others, I believe that Parliament must not be treated as a prize for winning government. It must not be treated as a creature of the E-xecutive. It must have its independence, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President of the Senate must be included in the deliberations when the appropriations of the Parliament are determined. That did not take place in the deliberations leading up to the Budget for the financial year 1981-82. That caused the grave concern which is

2224 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

expressed in the first of the two resolutions which I have read to this chamber.
Savage cuts have also been made to the appropriations for the Parliamentary Library in particular. These cuts have absolutely nothing to do with the fact that provision is being made for a new Parliament House. The cuts are to the dayto-day running expenses-the photocopying and so on-of the Library. Cuts to other areas are less severe but will compound an already serious situation in those particular branches of the Parliament. I want the House to note the most recent report of the Joint Parliamentary Committee of Public Accounts which points to the understaffing of the Joint House Department and to the fact that this is seriously affecting the quality of that Department's work.
I will talk in more detail on the points I have made. The work of all members of parliament is dependent to a large extent on the standard of assistance given, in particular by Library staff. I illustrate this by pointing to the fact that opposition in this Parliament to the Library, or parts of the Library, being moved out of the building is very strong. One member of the Estimates Committee A, the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender), a Liberal member from the other side of the chamber, pointed out that he was strongly against the cuts to the Library appropriation. During the hearings of Estimates Committee A, Mr Speaker said:
I am interested to learn that Mr Spender--
That is, the honourable member for North Sydney-
is prepared to put up with the room he has because that is certainly not the indication I had.
The response of the honourable member for North Sydney to that, and he shares a room, was:
Il is a lousy room, but if it is a choice between the smaller facilities in the Parliamentary Library--
I interpose that the smaller facilities result from the lesser appropriation for the Library-
and putting up with a lousy room I will put up with a lousy room.
I have quoted that as an illustration of a bipartisan approach which is being taken in opposition to the Executive's cuts in the appropriation for Library facilities in particular. Although we can do little to improve the building, much could be done to improve facilities available to members of parliament. Members of the Parliament do not have a good reputation in the community. We have to face that fact whether we like it or not and whether it is deserved on not, but there might be general support for lifting the standards of members of parliament. Therefore, if people are

consistent there would be general support for lifting the facilities made available to members of parliament to do what is a fairly difficult task in this vast country considering the distances we have to travel and the hours we have to keep.
I am not just referring to additional staff for shadow Ministers. The way the alternative government's shadow Ministry has been kept short of staff is a scandal. There is not a ministerial officer for each of the 22 members of the shadow Ministry. I am referring. to simple things such as vocadex machines, photocopying machines, modern furniture and adequate telephones. The improvement of these services would be a great step forward in providing improved conditions, thereby fesulting in improved services given by members of parliament to their constituents and to the nation. Why should Library staff be rehoused elsewhere than in this building where they are available to members while other departments, which are of lesser importance to members in helping them to carry out their duties, are housed here, and the intention is to keep them here? There is not a good answer to that question, and I bring that to the attention of this chamber right now when it is reporting on what happened in Estimates Committee A. Indeed that was the theme of the discussions in that committee of which you, Mr Deputy Speaker, were Chairman and know that what I say is correct.
It cannot be seriously suggested that the provision of a separate appropriation Bill for Parliament is the important factor. The important fact to which we must draw attention at this time when discussing money made available to the Parliament is that the officers of the Parliament, the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President of the Senate and their advisers should be included in the deliberations on the sum to be made available. Control of staffing need not be dissimilar to that provided under the Public Service Act. Already staff on the Opposition side have slightly different obligations under that Act. The pay scale for Opposition staff bears no relation to equivalent pay scales in the Commonwealth Public Service in terms of duties done and responsibilities taken.
I will list some of the worst exampIes of the cuts that have been made. The overall cut to the Library in real terms is the equivalent of 22 per cent. This includes specific money cuts for books of 46 per cent, for photocopying and stationery of 43 per cent and for microfiling services of 63 per cent. Because of new staff ceilings the 2 per cent reduction in the Library's permanent staff ceiling has applied and the cuts to temporary positions are to be met by 30 June 1982. This compares

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2225

with the target date for razor gang cuts of June 1983. The Library and the whole of the Parliament is suffering.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (8.17)-1 want to make some remarks about the fact that the estimates for the Department of Foreign Affairs seem to bear little or no relation to the priorities of foreign policy. Of course, it is true that foreign policy needs to be flexible and to change with the times. But the Department of Foreign Affairs seems to be extremely slow to change its arrangements in response to shifts in policy. We have heard a great deal from the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) about the NorthSouth dialogue. We have been told about his concern for the underprivileged nations of the world. Yet this is not reflected in the Budget Estimates.
Firstly, for a nation pretending to be doing something to assist poor nations; our foreign aid budget is ridiculously low. We announced an increase of $lOOm this year. But we are far away from the United Nations target of 0.07 per cent of gross national product. This alone exposes the hypocritical attitude of the Government in pretending concern for poor nations. It is easy to talk in abstract terms about assisting those poor nations but it is another matter to develop concrete policies. The first and major concrete need is for direct aid. We must ensure that that aid goes to assist the people of those nations to help themselves. Anstralia can do a great deal in this matter; it is not doing enough. Secondly, the very organisation of our embassies and high commissions reflects what little concern we really have for Third World nations. The organisation is an anachronism based on structures which have been built up over decades and which have not been revised in the light of policy.
Thus, on the one hand, according to the estimates 557 people are employed at the Australian High Commission in Britain. On the other hand, in our six missions in black Africa-an area with which the Prime Minister is supposedly very concerned-there are only 88 employees. All the overseas posts in that underprivileged region are in Commonwealth countries. The other nations in that area do not have a single Australian embassy. How can we claim that we are trying to assist these poor nations if we spend most of the money put aside for overseas posts on missions such as those in Britain and in the United States of America, where there are 345 employees in five missions. I ask: How can the Government carry

out the kind of foreign policy required for a genuine North-South dialogue, which it has been advertising to the world, if it bloats its staff in these countries? One wonders what many of them do there. What do the 557 people in the British Embassy do? On the other hand, in many poor countries of the world we have no representation at all.
Furthermore, the contradictions do not stop
there. If one looks at Latin America, one sees an interesting situation. Of the six nations where we have missions, the two which have the most staff are Argentina and Chile. These two nations are well known internationally for their use of horrible torture and the tactics of intimidation to impose a fascist military rule over their bwn people. Earlier today we had the shocking disgrace of this country's Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) attempting to justify the outrageous regime in Chile of Pinochet, whose hands are stained with the blood of hundreds of thousands of people, including the last democratically elected President of that nation, the great Salvadote Allende. While the name of Allende will burn like a torch forgenerations to inspire the people of Latin America towards democracy, our Deputy Prime Minister stands condemned for his love of fascist regimes.
To return to the point, what is the justification for the maldistribution of embassies in Latin America, where the most reactionary have the most staff and countries such as Cuba, Nicaragua and EI Salvador have no embassies at all? It might
be said that we are trying to put pressure on these reactionary regimes to moderate their policies, to release political prisoners, and to distribute wealth more equally amongst the people. But we are not doing that at all. On the contrary, after making inquiries of the Departments of Foreign Affairs and Defence regarding Latin American political prisoners, I was informed that our embassies did not have figures available. They did not even know how many political prisoners there were in the various countries, never mind making any attempt to assist those people, including attempts, with which I am concerned, to bring some of them out of the barbarous situation in which they live and give them a chance to live in another country such as Australia. If that is so, one asks: What are the tasks of these embassies? As far as I am concerned, unless the Government is pressing to achieve reforms in Chile and other such nations, we should close down our embassy in that country as a sign of protest against the continuing denial of human rights and open up missions in more enlightened nations in Latin America.
There is a further element in the estimates re-
lating to this matter which I believe pinpoints the

2226 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

muddle-headed nature of the current administration of the Department. Let us consider for a moment the staffing of our embassies in the superpower nations. We have 38 employees in China, 557 in Britain and 28 in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. It appears that on this Government's priorities we employ more people in the Netherlands than we do in Russia, and more than twice as many people in Malaysia than in China. This Government claims some considerable concern about the state of tension between the super-powers, the avoidance of war, and the attempt to bring about some of kind of dialogue between the super-powers on a whole host of pressing international matters. How is that to be achieved, given the situation of employment and the Estimates as we see them in this Budget? In my view, we have a situation where we do not even have enough staff in China and the Soviet Union to give a substantial analysis of what is actually happening and to give us an idea of how we might act in an independent way to improve our relationships with those nations.
I believe that the facts I have put before the House indicate a pressing need for a further look at the organisation of the Department of Foreign Affairs in relation to its overseas posts and at a better distribution of those posts with respect to what we are trying to achieve in foreign policy. Unles's we actually organise the Department along those lines we will not be in a position to achieve the kinds of foreign policy goals which even the Government claims it is trying to achieve. I emphasise again the importance of more embassies, more staff and greater knowledge in the Third World countries so that we can assist them in those places. Let us completely overcome the situat.ion we have at the moment where certain diplomatic posts and diplomatic missions are no more than c.ushy places where politicians can be sent. We need a situation where the organisation of the Department is brought more into line with the needs of our foreign poli~y.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (8.27)-In speaking to the report of Estimates Committee A, I would like to observe that the 1981-82 Budget has created more discord and unhappiness around the community than any other Budget) can remember. In this controversy very little attention ha:s been paid to one aspect of the Budget that will define to a considerable extent if, and how, we can secure ourselves in a world that is becoming increasingly more insecure. I refer to defence and the way it has been abused by the erratic behaviour of this Government.

In 1976 the Government came out with what at the time sounded like the very last word in fiV,ec year defence plans. In that plan the Government committed itself to an equipment purchasing program that necessitated real annual increases in expenditure of 5 per cent. In the period between then and 1979-80, the increases averaged less than 4 per cent each year. As it happened, that year-1980-8l-in a neurotic reaction to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the air was let out. The first five-year defence plan was deleted and another five-year program was pumped up. Defence spending was supposed to rise by 7 per cent in real terms. In the first Budget of the new plan--- the 1980-81 Budget-defence expenditure rose by 4.8 per cent. In the next Budget, this Budget, in fact it is expected to rise by 5.3 per cent. Already the procrastination that ruined the first five-year defence plan has begun to ruin the second. The procrastination that disfigures out defence procurement programs will put an enormous, perhaps even impossible, strain on our economic resources.
To meet defence equipment commitments that
are firm or reasonably firm, the Government will be facing a bill of more than $5 billion by the end of this financial year. When proposed purchases are added we will face a bill of $10 billion by the end of this decade. At the present rate of defence spending, it will take us 16 years to pay off this debt. We will be trying to pay 16 years bills in nine years expenditure. It is appreciated that defence these days does not come cheap, especially in a country such as Australia with its logistic, topographical, geographical and other complications. But we are entitled to expect that the vast amounts of money we provide through our taxes-remember that this Budget allocates more than $4 billion-are spent carefully and wisely. That is demonstrably not the case. Two years ago the all-party Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence trenchantly criticised our defence procurement practices in a report to this Parliament.
The recent fiasco over the new Defence Integrated Secure Communications NetworkDISCON-illustrates how our purchasing system can lead to expensive mistakes that are not only stupid but dangerous for the defence of Australia. New tenders have had to be called, only 18 months after the initial contract was let. The cost of this large project, originally estimated at $150m to $200m, may now be much higher. The purchasing authorities must have been blind, deaf and idle not to have known that the proposed Univac system was still full of problems. There will be a dangerous gap in Australia's defence at a time

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2227

when new systems, such as a new tactical fighter, will be coming on stream and will require a much more sophisticated and reliable communications network.
I will give the House an example of another fiasco that has not been discussed to any great extent. It concerns the FIll, the aircraft which was chosen in such emotional circumstances in the late 1960s. The FIll has never been free of criticism. Its costs steadily inflated. The production model sold to Australia was never equal to the promises made for its speed and range. Much more serious, however, is that it is now clear that the FIll in service with the Royal Australian Air Force cannot perform the role designed for it. The wings of an FIll with a full load of conventional or iron bombs cannot be swept, thus reducing the plane's performance. Performance is further reduced by the drag effect of the conventional payload. In this condition, therefore, the FIll, with a conventional payload, is no more than just another subsonic bomb truck.
The avionics systems fitted to the FIll may be adequate for several other roles but they are incompatible with most modern air to ground missiles. The only version of these so-called smart weapons possessed by the RAAF is the Pave Way system. The problem is that its guidance relies on the target being illuminated by a laser beam directed by ground forces or from another aircraft, restricting once more the situations in which the weapon can be used. This problem it is hoped will be. overcome by integrating the Pave Tack system with the FllI. Pave Tack is, however, pointless with the Pave Way bomb, which has only the most limited range. Cost apart, the selection of Pave Tack as the way to modernise the Fill also has serious shortcomings. Its United States of America Air Force role envisages it as a short range, high speed, low level penetration weapon, which contradicts, one would have thought, the stand-off role planned for the plane in the Australian scheme of things.
Another potential problem is that, for various technical reasons, Pave Tack is incompatible with the Harpoon air to surface missile, the most likely candidate for the RAAF's smart weapon. In other words, for the foreseeable future, the FIll's present ability to fulfil its long range stand-off role is debatable.
Why do we have this confusion in our defence programs? Why should taxpayers, who are providing more than $4 billion this year on defence, not demand that defence policy and administration be administered with the same cold-eyed objectivity with which the government closes down

colleges of advanced education and child care programs?
The defence farce is not the responsibility of the dedicated men and women of our Services. The blame must be laid squarely on the shoulders of the Government. The duty of a government is to provide clear and achievable guidelines for the defence of Australia. This Government has not done so.
Driven by the mania of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to play a world role, the Government swings wildly between outmoded concepts of forward defence and the compelling logic of the defence of Australia. We must devise strategies and purchase equipment which can deter and, if necessary, defeat any enemy seeking to attack Australian territory. A solitary vulnerable aircraft carrier largely limited to an antisubmarine role at extraordinary expense cannot do this. Half-baked weapons and avionics for the FIll cannot do this. A creaking and disasterprone purchasing system cannot do this. We need many submarines, many maritime strike aircraft, frigates and patrol boats with effective stand-off capacity. We need new doctrines for our land forces, including both the Army and the Air Force.
It is not the task of government to provide a status symbol for admirals, or to make a laughably ineffective attempt to play with the big boys. As the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has stated repeatedly, the Australian Labor Party will play its role in a stable -system of nuclear deterrence by accepting United States facilities in Australia as long as Australian sovereignty is not impaired. But short of a nuclear challenge, our first, second, and third priorities must be the defence of Australia.
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (8.35)-1 will not keep the House very long. I wish to refer to a couple of matters which concern the relationship that Australia has with some other countries and the importance of looking at our standards. I was quite amazed today at the outburst of the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony). He said that, as a result of the protest that people had held in Chile some time ago, he felt that perhaps the Chilean economy had picked up and people werenow better off in that country. The point that was missed by the Deputy Prime Minister-which I hope was not missed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street)-is that at the time he was in Chile at least people were able and had the right to demonstrate against the Government, which" is not a right that they have today. The Deputy Prime Minister should be aware also that some of the

2228 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No, 1)

standards and procedures which have been
abolished in Chile are taken for granted as a democratic right in this country. If we believe it is important for us to resist any dwindling of our
rights in Australia we should apply the same types of standards to those other countries.
Of course, Chile has a very brutal military regime. Had I been given the opportunity after Question Time this afternoon I would have reminded the Deputy Prime Minister that Amnesty International is investigating the disappearance and suspected murder of several of the leading Chilean parliamentarians since the Pinochet coup some years ago. Other international organisations are very concerned about the lives of many people in that country. It is true also that over 2,000 Chileans have made their way to Australia as a result of the political persecution that took place in that country following the overthrow of the Allende Government in that country.
We should not give the impression-especially leading people in public life in this country-that we are in any way impressed by the way in which countries such as Chile may overcome their economic problems. Very serious doubts surround Chile's economy as well, which is not an argument which I want to get into. But I think it is important. I sincerely hope that the Minister for Foreign Affairs is never attracted to the crass ideology put forward by the National Country Party on questions such as this. If the standards spoken of so glowingly by the Deputy Prime Minister appeal to him perhaps he would like to see them applied in Australia and to do away with the rights of people to demonstrate against governments or to protest about government actions. Perhaps people, on reading what the Deputy Prime Minister has had to say, would get the wrong idea. I hope that people outside who are listening to the Parliament or the people who may read about what the' Deputy Prime Minister had to say about Chile in this Parliament today will not for one instant think that what he said represents the views of anybody else in this Parliament. I hope that when the Minister replies to the debate on the Estimates he can say something about the Government's official attitude to what is going on in Chile.
The other matter to which I wish to refer is the recent visit to' Japan of the spokesman for the Palestine Liberation Organisation, Yasser Arafat. For a number of years this country has had the policy that until the PLO recognises the State of Israel we will not talk to the PLO. That is what the Minister for Foreign Affairs said in an answer in this House last week. There should be greater debate on that issue in the Parliament of Australia. Reading the briefing of the meetings

that took place between Arafat and the Japanese Prime Minister, Mr Suzuki, and Mr Sonoda leaves no doubt that the views they presented to him are much the same as those that would be presented by anybody in this House, be he a Government or Opposition member. First and foremost we believe that there has to be recognition of the State of Israel. There can be no bargaining or compromising on the attitude that Australia has adopted on that issue. That is a view that has been put to the PLO representative by the Japanese Government. But the Japanese Government thought it important enough to speak to Arafat to put those views and to put also the views in which it was interested to assist in bringing about peace in the Middle East. Australia may be better off taking the line taken by the Japanese and many other countries in talking to PLO representatives, to say, firstly, that Australia recognises the State of Israel but, secondly, that we would like to assist in the establishment of peace in the Middle East. It seems to me that at least we would have a greater influence than we have at the moment by t,urning our back on those representatives and saying that we will not speak to them at all. That is the view that has not been expounded by many countries today. Most countries ate talking to the PLO. Most countries are trying to have some influence on its view about the State of Israel and in relation to the forming of a homeland for the Palestinian people on the West Bank. The difficulty about formulating another view is that these matters are kept within the confines of the Executive of Government. They are discussed at the Cabinet level but they are never brought into this place for open discussion so that honourable members can put their views about what is occurring in the world. I suspect that that is another matter that ought to be brought into the Parliament.
The third and final matter that I wish to raise is the question of EI Salvador. I raise it because it
seems to me to be a classic example of where Australia may get itself into trouble by having the policy of following the United States Administration irrespective of who the American people elect to be President of that country. For some time it may have been a policy that suited Australia because there was some stability in the presidencies of the United States but at the moment it seems as though the American people will change Presidents at every election. It is true to say that an accurate description of President Reagan is that he is an extremely conservative right wing President of the United States. He seems to be isolating the United States more and more in his policy issues. Except in the case of

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2229

South Africa, the Government seems to be quite happy to go along with whatever the President of the United States does. I suspect that in doing so this Government is t~king us into the isolation in which the Americans now find themselves, whether it be on the question of South Africa, the question of the Middle East or the question of El Salvador.
On the issue of El Salvador, the United States Administration is way out on its own. It seemed to me on a visit to the United States just a few weeks ago that that is not the view of many of the Congressmen or many of the people in the United States, who are very upset about the attitude adopted by the United States. It seems to me that Australia would be much better off supporting the initiatives of France and Mexico in calling for a political settlement in El Salvador and a recognition of human rights in that country. We would be doing ourselves far more good by taking those initiatives and joining with those people than by saying blindly the we are part of the American alliance and that, whoever the American people elect as President, we will go along with United States policy. Obviously, the Minister will deny that that is what we do, but that is obviously how it is interpreted by the people who observe the statements and actions of the Australian Government.
I think those matters are enormously important. The issue of El Salvador is one upon which Australia should have an independent view. In my opinion, that independent view should be more closely allied with the initiatives of France and Mexico. Secondly, there ought to be a debate in Parliament, if we are to have some influence in the Middle East, about how we are to use new initiatives instead of old ideas. Thirdly, I hope that the Minister for Foreign Affairs will dissociate this Parliament from the grubby remarks made by the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) about how good things are in Chile because that is not the sort of thing that we on this side of the House wish to be associated with.
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs) (8.44)-1 wish to confine my remarks to the result of the examination by Estimates Committee A of Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1981-82 in which three resolutions or expressions of opinion were agreed to by the Committee on the proposed expenditure relating to the Department of Foreign Affairs. As a result the honourable member JOr St George (Mr Morrison) has proposed the following amendment:
Omit the words 'the expressions of opinion agreed to by Committee A in relation to the Department of Foreign Affairs

be noted', substitute the following words: 'this House fully endorses the expressions of opinion agreed to by Committee A in relation to the Department of Foreign Affairs and requests appropriate action by the Government.
On behalf of the Government I oppose the amendment. The reasons for the Government's opposition are as follows. The Committee expressed its concern over the reductions in allocations to the Australian Institute of International Affairs and the United Nations Association of Australia and requested that the amounts provided by institutions, including the AustraliaBritain Society, be reviewed. During my appearance before the Committee I opposed this motion on the grounds that the Government's decision in this regard was made in the Budget context to achieve its overall objective. The Government believes that the estimates as presented to the Committee achieve this objective. It should not be inferred that this decision in any way detracts from the Government's appreciation of the very valuable contributions made by both the Australian Institute of International Affairs and the United Nations Association of Australia. in the area of foreign policy concerns. To suggest otherwise would represent a deliberate attempt to mislead this House.
The Government's decision to make an annual grant to the Australia-Britain Society was announced by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in the House on 26 August 1980 and the first grant was subsequently made in the financial year 1980-8l. The grant is closely linked to the Government's decision, announced simultaneously by the Prime Minister, to provide $160,000 per annum to cover salary and travel expenses associated with the Centre for Australian Studies which is to be set up within the institute of Commonwealth Studies of the University of London. To function with full efficiency the Centre needs an effective secretariat in Australia and the grant to the Australia-Britain Society is to enable it to establish and maintain such a secretariat. The objective of both contributions is to strengthen the relationship between Australia and Britain at a time when British attention has focused increasingly on Europe.
The second part of the amendment relates to the view expressed by the Committee that the Government should accept and work towards meeting the United Nations target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product as official development assistance. The Government already endorses the

2230 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

0.7 per cent of GNP target and ~or its part will en-
deavour to maintain its official development as-
sistance at the highest level consistent with the needs of developing countries and Australia's
economic and budgetary circumstances. As a consequence there would seem to be little purpose
in pursuing this matter further in the manner
proposed by the honourable member for St George.

The Committee further expressed the opinion
that the Government should consider the resump-
tion of two suspended aid projects to Vietnam as a contribution to the stability of the region.
Australia decided to suspend its bilateral aid to Vietnam in January 1979 following the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea. The Govern-
ment's action was taken to express its deep con-
cern at Vietnam's policies which were contrary to internationally accepted principles and to the det-
riment of the interests of neighbouring countries.
The question of Australian aid to Vietnam has been reviewed but it has been concluded that it
would not be appropriate for Australia to resume it at this time. The Government believes that the
reasons for the suspension of aid continue to be
valid. We are not prepared to consider a resump-
tion of aid while Vietnam's policies on Kampuchea remain unchanged.

Question put:

That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr Morrison's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr J. L. Armitage)

Ayes

61

Noes

43

Majority

18

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume. M. E. Birney. R.J. Bradfield. J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Cariton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean.A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Groom, R.J. Hall, Steele

Hyde,J. M.
Jarman. A. W. Jull,D.F.
Kaller, R.e. Killen, D.J. Lloyd, B.
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon. Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P.J.
O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair," McC. Street, A. A.

Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodginan, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

AYES

Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W.
White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

NOES
Beazley, K. C. Blewell, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller)

Hurford, e. J. Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R. Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.e.
Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scoll, J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Uren, T. Wallis, L.G. West,S.J. Young, M.J.

PAIRS

Bourchier,J. W. Millar, P.e. Ruddock, P. M. Lusher, S. A.

Johnson, Les Jones, Barry Scholes, G. G. D. Jenkins, H. A.

Question So resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

Consideration of Report of Estimates CommitteeB
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- The question before the House is:
That the following proposed expenditures be agreed to:

Department of Social Security Proposed expenditure, $414,347,000

De partment of Health Proposed expenditure, $471,875,000

Department ofImmigration and Ethnic Affairs Proposed expenditure, $101,474,000

Department of Veterans' Affairs Proposed expenditure, $530,139,000

Department ofAhoriginal Affairs
Proposed expenditure, $130,973,000
Mr KENT (Hotham) (9.2)-1 do not wish to take up the time of the House unnecessarily, especially as I was a member of the committee dealing with the estimates for the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. I had the opportunity to voice my criticism, in particular of the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2231

129.1 per cent increase in the estimate for deportation. This amount was appropriated to deport some over-stayed visitors or a Greek or Polish sailor who jumps ship. At the same time we accept boatloads of people who have jumped the queue. I do not wish to be misunderstood. I have nothing against genuine refugees, people who come from South East Asia and seek refuge here becau~e they feel threatened in their own countries. I think it is our humanitarian duty to accept a number of those people. At the same time, we will be using some of the estimate of $1.69Im to deport Chilean seamen who jump ship because they feel threatened in Chile, and for good reason. There is a facist regime in Chile which is murdering and imprisoning innocent people without trial, including members of parliament. I think that the Government,by such actions, is showing its hypocrisy towards refugees.
However, there is another matter which I bring to the attention of the House today. It is a matter which does not show up directly in the Estimates, such as the appropriation of $1.69Im for deportations. I refer to the general racist attitude governing our immigration policies and practices. At a very young age I came face to face with 'the worst manifestation of racism in human history. I lived through the occupation of my native country by Hitler's Germany and I have seen innocent men, women and children put to death because of their race or'religion. Is it any wonder that I abhor racism in whatever form it is manifested, even in a milder form such as migrant selection in which racial bias plays a part?
In all fairness I have to state that both major parties have been guilty of supporting racist immigration policies and practices. We in the Australian Labor Party have a long history of it, too. The stated aim of the ALP's immigration policy of 1904 was 'to maintain racial purity'. That was later changed to the 'white Australia policy'. It was altered to its present form, which finally eliminates racial bias from our policy. I do not pride myself on being an expert on the Liberal Party's
immigration policy, but I can state without equivocation that the policy the Government administers at present under the Numerical Multifactor Assessment System has inbuilt racial bias. If one adds to this the racist zeal of many immigration officials and the deliberate understaffing of our posts in some countries, one will understand the disadvantage suffered by people from non-English speaking backgrounds or non Anglo Saxon origins.
NUMAS, which served as a thin veneer or a camouflage for our racist migrant selection policy, has been under review because its deficiencies

could not be hidden any longer. It was used as a justification for the rejection of many people who could have been highly successful settlers. It is based on the assumption that educational, economic or occupatiorial characteristics are the most important qualifications for successful settlement. Although these factors are important, it is doubtful that simply having a higher occupational background, more money or a better education automatically means that one would be able to settle more successfully in the Australian community. Kinship, the age at which an immigrant arrives in Australia, and the number of relatives already living in this country are far more important factors
in successful settlement. The present system of selection does not consider family ties as an important factor in migrant selection. Integration into a country is a complex problem. It varies with each group and individual. I believe'that it is impossible to encompass all factors contributing' to
successful settlement in a numerical system, as NUMAS attempted to do.
In devising a successful immigration policy we have two alternatives. On the one hand, because of racist reasons, we can continue to prevent certain people from certain countries coming to Australia or, on the other hand, we can introduce a much more flexible policy which would not, a priori, state that certain. people will make good settlers while others will not. Under this Government's policy we are accepting only 18 per cent of the total intake under the family reunion scheme. From the previous statements of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) it is obvious to me that this will not be altered significantly under the new policy to be announced later this year. Instead of family reunion, the main emphasis in the new policy will be placed by the Minister on acquiring migrants on the basis of
their trades or skills. In other words, he still looks on migrants as fodder for industry.
There is no valid reason why we should not train our own people, our own youth, in skills which Australia will need in future and base our immigration policy mainly on family reunion. To base a migrant intake on the needs of one section of our community-the needs of industry only-is a short-sighted policy. The Minister is proposing to bring in migrants with certain skills, while tens of thousands of our youth are unemployed and tens of thousands more will leave school in a month or two and face the same fate. The Government's immigration policy will not only prevent many of our young people getting jobs and training in our industries,' it will also cause
long term chronic unemployment in our community. I know that Government members will

2232 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

argue that if we bring out migrants under the family reunion scheme, more people will be competing on the job market. Let me tell them that there will certainly be added competition for jobs in times of heavy unemployment, whether migrants are allowed in on the basis of family reunion or on the basis of skill. The only remedy to the problem is to reduce the total intake to a figure our industry can absorb to the number Australia can absorb without throwing our youth on the scrap heap of unemployment.
There is another side to the Government's short-sighted policy of bringing out migrants with skills required by industry. Those welders, electricians or computer experts we invite as migrants today will also wish to bring out their families tomorrow. As a member of parliament I have witnessed the frustration and heartbreak of many migrant couples whose families and relatives are kept out of Australia by this Government. I call on the Minister to adopt a more humane approach to this grave problem. I believe that we need an immigration policy which. places absolute precedence on family reunion. Within the family reunion category precedence could perhaps be given to younger persons possessing desirable skills. Employers recruiting skilled immigrants from overseas should be able to do so, provided that they pay all expenses, including transport to Australia, housing, provision of schools, et cetera. Applications for migration to Australia which were not considered during one year should be automatically reconsidered the next year. The family reunion category should be extended to include, as well as dependent relatives, unmarried children, brothers, sisters, or other close relatives. Our immigration policies should be based on our needs and our humanitarian obligations and they should be administered' with compassion and understanding.
Mr COWAN (Lyne) (9.11 )-1 briefly refer to payments by the Department of Veterans' Affairs. For some time now I have been making representations to the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) concerning the payment of pensions on a monthly or a fortnightly basis into a recipient's banking account. At present such payments are made at the request of the recipient, but there is a delay of three months. Many of the recipients of Veterans' Affairs pensions would like payments to be made into their banking accounts, but the Minister refuses to do that. It might cost more but it would give a service to people. Many of the recipients want to leave their home for a month or more. At present they are dependant on their neighbour or a member of

the family attending their mail box to collect the cheque.
Surely, we can give this servic,e to people. These are men and women who have served their country over the years. I am informed that the Department of Social Security will meet the requests of their recipients in this respect but, the Department of Veterans' Affairs will not. I strongly urge the Minister and the Department to consider what can be done to meet the demands of these people. This is the computer age, as we know. Surely, arrangements can be made to meet the requests of the people concerned.
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (9.12)-It is not my intention to take too much of the time of the House. I know that there are many people on our side who wish to speak. I take up from the point where the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent) left off. I have raised this question with the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee). Very shortly, he will make an announcement to the House about changes in the Numerical Multifactor Assessment System. He is aware, as is everybody else, that there are alle-
gations that NUMAS discriminated against some people who wanted to come to settle in Australia. I hope that the Government will make arrangements so that, when the Minister makes that statement to the House, time is made available for more than one member a side to speak on this matter. People who look at the statement and judge it against what has been in existence in Australia over the years can then make some con-
tribution to the Parliament. I very strongly believe that the only way policies on immigration and refugee programs can work successfully is, firstly, through the general agreement of the Parliament and, secondly, with the confidence of the Australian people. To that extent I think that over the years, to a very large degree, members of parliament have been ignored.
I put to the Minister tonight for his consideration what I believe to be a very important step that the Government ought to take on behalf of the Parliament. When I was overseas recently visiting Washington, Madrid and Rome I talked to people from the immigration programs of those countries. I spoke particularly to people from the United States of America. I had lunch with sev-
eral members of the United States Congress, all of whom were part of the congressional committees which had travelled to the problem areas of refugees-to central America and to Indo-China. They had been in our region as members of their own congressional committees looking at the problems of refugees, trying to define what policy the American Administration ought to follow. I

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2233

must say, as I said this afternoon, that many of those people went home convinced that the policy being adopted by the American Administration was not the policy that they themselves favoured.
I do not want to belittle or denigrate the role of public servants in this field. Immigration seems to me to be a far more important issue than one which involves sending public servants on an errand to try to sort out what ought to be the policy adopted by this Parliament. We have had a very vigorous migration program operating in
Australia for a long time. Many different decisions have to be made from here on. The last five years have demonstrated the sort of massive changes in Australian attitudes that will have to be adopted. It seems to me that, in those circumstances, there is great pressure for us to have a look at the mechanisms that are used to adopt these policies.
I think it would be of great advantage to the Australian Parliament to have a committee on immigration and refugee programs so that parliamentarians could visit and talk to the people involved, particularly the professional people from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. We are not just talking about our region; we are talking about 10 million refugees spread all over the world; we are talking about a million people who make preliminary investigations to come to Australia to settle. I do not believe we are dealing with this matter as professionally as we should be. There is too little debate in the Parliament about these great issues. There is too little scrutiny by parliamentarians. There is too little involvement by parliamentarians in reaching the end result about what the future programs of Australia ought to be. If we are all to be involved, if we all have to defend what we are doing in Australia at the moment in our electorates, our regions, our constituencies, then we should hav'e sonte part to play in the finalisation of this program. I ask the Minister to look at the matter seriously and discuss with the Government the way in which both sides of the Parliament could be used to look at this question.
The honourable member for Hotham, of course, spent a great deal of time on the old sys-
tem, as we call it, NUMAS. I think the Minister is aware of all the criticisms that have been made at the venues that we have attended throughout the year. There is no doubt that the ethnic communities in Australia quite legitimately believe that family reunion has been submerged as a result of the introduction of NUMAS. This flies in the face of the evidence that has been given to the Department by virtue of the research done on the migrants in Australia, which shows what a strong

feature proper settlement of migrants in Australia is as a result of family reunion programs. There can be no doubt that any new migration program announced by the Minister in the next few days must have a very strong link with family reunion. All of us have to understand also that Australia has changed a great deal. We will be faced with problems in the 1980s and 1990s that we certainly did not face in the 1950s and I960s. It is no good bringing a lot of people here if they have no future. We will have to make some .pretty tough decisions in determinin'g which people we want to settle in this country.
Running parallel to that we must also recognise
that we have an international responsibility in the refugee problem. Of course, we have always acknowledged-I do not expect that we will see any change in this-the relationships we have with New Zealand. I know that it causes some heartburning in the ethnic communities when they see New Zealanders coming to live in Australia and being counted as part of the migration program. There may be some case for isolating the New Zealanders from the total migration and refugee program. Nonetheless, I cannot see any move or support for a move to change
the very good relationships we have with that country or to change New Zealanders' access to Australia or Australians' access to New Zealand. There are some problems there but I think that by and large they can be overcome if we have a genuine, greater involvement of parliamentarians.
The Parliament is changing very radically. In this Parliament we have numbers of people, particularly on our side in the House of Representatives and the Senate, from the ethnic communities. They are people who have experienced coming here to settle and have now found their way to represent in the national Parliament not only their communities but also the Australian community in general. They are more aware of these problems than perhaps parliaments of the past were. I respect their voice on these questions. ' I think that they want to be more active in the formulation of the policies concerning the ethnic communities and the people who may seek to come here.
There has been a lot of speculation about the Ministry being reshuffled when the House goes into recess. I say quite categorically on behalf of the ethnic communities of Australia that we do not want the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) shoved off to immigration and ethnic affairs. I think he should be shoved off to the back benches because he has made a mess of Aboriginal affairs, industrial relations and employment. He is not trusted by anybody in this community. We

2234 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

certainly do not want the honourable member for Stirling, the Minister for Industrial Relations, shoved off to the ethnic communities of this country because he is not wanted by anybody else. We consider that the policies and problems ofmigrants and refugees and the post-settlement services of the ethnic communities in Australia are far too important to be given over to a person such as the honourable member for Stirling.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (9.22)-The Australian Labor Party never fails to amaze me. Day after day we hear the Government being harangued and criticised by honourable members opposite. Yet when it comes to a question of immigration, on one hand it says, 'This rotten, lousy country of Australia' and on the other hand it says, 'Australia should open its doors and let thousands more enter this wonderful country'. When it comes to consistency, honourable members have absolutely--
Mr Kent-Who said that?
Mr DONALD CAMERON-So the honourable member for Hotham thinks the Government is doing a good job. It is nice to hear the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent) and the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) taking that approach. I never cease to be amazed, if this country is so bad, at the numbers of people who continue to knock on the door of Australia saying that this is the country for them. Previous speakers from the Opposition spoke about the need for family reunion. I believe in that as strongly as any other member of parliament believes in it. But that is the sort of speech they are making tonight. Their speeches tomorrow, Thursday and next Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday will be about unemployment. They will be kicking the can and saying to other communities which do not have a migrant content, that if the Government only closed the door on some of these unskilled people, things would be better.
I must admit that although I am not carried away with the plight of unemployed people in this country, I am concerned about them. I recently wrote to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee), who is sitting at the table, asking him to present me with the figures concerning the unskilled people entering this country. I admit that I believed that there were thousands upon thousands of unskilled people coming into this country under the guise of being reunited with their families. Most thinking Australians would have shared the view often espoused by honourable members opposite that we should shut the door on the unskilled immigrant because we have so many unskilled people looking for work in this

country. I do not disagree with that basic philosophy. But the Minister, in a letter dated 12 October which is only 8 days ago, supplied me with figures which show that 1,269 unskilled workers entered this country under the family reunion program. Under the general eligibility category there were 737 immigrants. There were 6,790 refugees and under the special eligibility category there were 926 immigrants. So out of a total figure of 9,700, 6,700 entered Australia under the category of refugees.
Honourable members opposite have stood up tonight and have beaten the drum, but it is a different speech to that which they will make tomorrow night. Tonight they are saying that we should be allowing more people into this country under the category of family reunion but tomorrow they will ask: 'What is the Government doing to assist the unskilled person to obtain a job in this country?' In all fairness I believe that this Government and the Minister at the table have adopted policies which are realistic as they relate to the long term good of not just the families of migrants who live back in their own countries but of each and every Australian.
At the last election two members were elected to this Parliament whose origins of birth were different from that of the vast majority of honourable members of this Parliament. I say to them: 'Welcome, it is good to have you aboard because you are representatives--
Mr Kent-Thank you.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Sitting next to the honourable member for Hotham is the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott), who has the same origin as I have. He has an accent different from mine because my ancestors saw the light a long time before his ancestors did. On the other hand it is all very well to make political comment which will beat up the migrant vote and make one look good to small sections of the community at the expense of the vast majority.
I remind honourable members opposite that regardless of whether they like it we on this side of the House still recognise the plight of the 300,000 unemployed. We recognise also that, whilst 300,000 people have obtained work by virtue of new jobs created over and above those which previously existed two years ago, we have an obligation to assist those who have not yet found a job to allow them to settle into the work force. There is absolutely no point whatsoever in bringing thousands upon thousands of people to Australia as migrants under the family reunion program if we are going to sentence them to nothingness. If they do not have the skills that this country needs

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2235

are we to put them on unemployment benefit and leave them to rot and become demoralised? That is why I say the Minister sitting at the table and this Government are adopting a policy in relation to immigration which is best suited to the long term interests of Australia and to those people who want to come here and make this country their home. Mr Deputy Speaker, you have a responsibility to ensure that honourable members opposite do not 'stand up in this House and talk codswallop because that is the exercise that they have been indulging in previously tonight. You have been here long enough to know better.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond) - I trust that is no reflection on the Chair.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-No, I thought you were somebody else.

Committee will see that, at a generous estimate, 50 per cent of them were mere waffle. We might call him 'Waffles MacKellar' or 'the Minister for Obfuscation'. We are not getting the information when a Minister behaves in that way at the Committee hearings.
It might be suggested that he was protecting his public servants from showing their ignorance. I do not think that would be fair to the public servants. For instance, in the Estimates Committee in the Senate when the officials were unleashed and able to answer questions they did so in a highly informative way. Indeed, if the Minister, when he bothers to come into the House, looks at the way Senator Baume handled questions he will see that he was a model of succinctness which he could very well copy.

Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (9.27)-1 remain The Minister for Health is clearly not

convinced of the value of Estimates committees interested in providing information. Like his mas-

despite the best efforts of the Government to ter, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), he

devalue them. the ways in which they are believes that an informed Parliament will be a

devalued are obvious: The very short time that we troublesome Parliament and that ari informed

are allowed for debate in this House and the fact ' public will be a troublesome public. So what we

that we debate the Estimates in a completely get are these vacuous cliches which are enough for

jumbled way with four or five departments being the Parliament and the public.

discussed together. We have short, confused Esti-
mates debates. I am sure that they could be much better organised. I believe,as I have argued in the
past, that the resources of this Parliament and of
the Public Service would be better utilised by having joint Estimates committees. I believe that
that would be a better way of using the limited and spare resources that we have in this Parlia-
ment and in the civil service rather than having
separate Estimates committees for both Houses. I continue to support the Estimates committees de-
spite the efforts of the Minister for Health (Mr
MacKellar) to make the Estimates committees, at least as tl)ey relate to the Department of Health,
simply as uninformative as the usual Question
Time in this House. I am not surprised at the way
in which he treated the Estimates Committee. As I move around this country among health pro-
fessionals of different political persuasions I am
discovering that there is a growing dissatisfaction
with the bland, uninformative cliches that substitute for information from this Minister. If one

Similarly, if we look at what the Minister says during most of the debates on matters of public
importance, we will see that he has hardly ever
answered the charges and substantive arguments of the Opposition on health. All we get are these
same tired cliches trotted out again and again.
Some of them are now looking pretty mothworn.
For instance remember all that rhetoric about the
Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the
Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals, about
how the new health scheme was based on the Jamison committee and about how the best ideas
in it derive from the Jamison report. It was
Jamison this, Jamison that in virtually every de-
bate. 1 will state what one of the three com-
missioners in that inquiry thinks of this Government's response to the Jamison committee in
terms of its new health plan. I think it is pretty im-
portant that we get this on the record. The views of Dr Yeatman, one of the three commissioners, are given in a report which reads:

looks at the transcript for Estimates Comittee B The report of the Commission has, by and large, been when it examined the estimates of the Departignored by the Government . , .

ment of Health one sees that the officials had In the current proposals,-

scarcely an opportunity to provide answers. The Minister responded to-lam not saying that he answered-nearly all questions, not, of course, that he knew the answers or if he did he lacked the ability to present those answers clearly and suc-
cinctly. I suggest that anyone who does the test of

That is, the latest health plan-
he adds, the Government 'is simply arranging a transfer of their own expenses to the individual-that is, away from the taxpayer to the user-without in any way~
Despite all the Minister says, all the waffle-

going through the Minister's replies given to that affecting the total amount involved.

2236 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Dr Yeatman went on to comment on the way the Government has responded to the report. He stated:
On the provision of funds to the States, the Commonwealth has not adopted the adjusted per capita basis for funding which was strongly recommended', and which must eventuate if equity in health care is to result for all Australians.
Not just those who live in Queensland. Dr Yeatman continued:
The increased subsidy for surgical patients in private-hospitals was not recommended: Further public funding of the private sector, other than for the purpose of keeping it financially viable, was not advised by us.
The re-introduction of the means test was not recommended by the Commission 'and, as proposed, will prove to be a tremendous burden for the hospitals and the Department of Social Security; so much so that the cost of implementing the system could well outstrip the additional finance it might generate'.
That is the view of one of the commissioners on the Government response to the Jamison committee report. Yet the Minister has constantly argued that all the Government's plans derive from the Jamison report. That is what one commissioner thinks of those cliches.
Last week in the Parliament I asked a question on the abolition of the National Health Services Advisory Committee. The Minister, in his reply, gave no reason why this Parliament was never informed of the decision to abolish the one national monitoring body which represents professional, administrative, educational research in user interests in Australian health care. The Minister gave no reason whatsoever why this body should be abolished. The nearest he got to an explanation was a fatuous comparison between the NHSAC and the 50 advisory committees and subcommittees of the National Health and Medical Research Council. These committees are just not comparable in status. I suggest that anyone who doubts that look.at the Commonwealth Government Directory. It was a totally inadequate answer. No information, no explanation was given by the Minister. Of course it is another effort to cut back information because the abolition of the National Health Services Advisory Committee is designed to suppress information. At the moment we are watching the disintegration of a national health system in this country, with different patterns beginning to develop in each of the States. Over that disintegration the National Health Services Advisory Committee could have acted as a .monitor in informing this Parliament of these developments but, of course, the Minister does not want that monitored.
Now we learn, not of course from the Minister, that the Australian Prescriber, the only source of

objective information not tainted by commercial-

ism in the pharmaceutical field, is to be ter-

minated. One more solirce of objective infor-

mation is to be killed off. This is being done in

defiance of the recommendations of the Senate

Standing Committee on Social Welfare report

'Another Side to the Drug Debate

a

medicated society?' which recommended that the

Australian Prescriber continue to receive

Government funding. So the decision is in

defiance of the Senate Committee but even more

interestingly it is in defiance of the Minister's own

Department. The Department of Health said to

that Committee:

. . . much of the drug promotion (mainly carried out by 'medical representatives' or 'drug detailers') is unnecessary,
must obviously include a significant bias and should be largely replaced by objective information to doctors from authoritative and non-biased sources, for example the Auslraliall Prescriber.

So in this case even the Minister's own Depart-
ment recommends strongly against the decision that has been made. Again we have asked the Minister for copies of medical and hospital benefit
circulars which are sent to the funds. They would be very useful in helping us to try to assess the
working of the health insurance system. It is not a
secret document; it is sent out to some 80 organisations. But all we get from the Minister is a completely negative response. No doubt when the
Minister gets up with one of his usual clichesthis is also pretty mothworn-he will say: 'Well, you know the Labor Party does not tell the Parlia-
ment and the public about its health schemes'. That has been one of his favourite defences of the
last few months. There are just two responses to that. Firstly, unlike the present Minister and the present Government, we will present our health
scheme to the Australian people before the election and not, like the Minister, after the election. Secondly, this Minister has lost, I think, all moral authority to chide anyone on telling the public
anything. We all know by now that on 9 October 1980 the Minister said:

. . . . there was absolutely no truth in the-

Doctors'Reform-

Society's statement that the Government was planning to restrict patients' free access to public hospitals by re-imposing a means test for hospital care.

In the midst of the last election campaign he told everyone that there was absolutely no truth in
that statement. Seven months later, in May1981,
the Minister sought to compel the States to restrict patients' free access to public hospitals by
reimposing a means test for hospital care. Anyone who has done that has lost any moral authority to
make comments on the policies of the Opposition.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2237

Mr McLEAN (Perth) (9.37)-The outstanding feature of the estimates for the Department of Social Security is their size and their growth in recent years. It amazes me that a country such as Australia, with 14 million to 15 million people, with a high living standard, which is rich in resources, with well developed education and health systems and which will spend about $11 ,357m this year on social security and welfare, still has areas of poverty and real needs which are not being adequately catered for. It is not the size of the welfare cake, rather the way in which it is distributed, which is the real problem. I think a classic example of this occurred in the recent Budget regarding family allowances.
The Government decided to increase by 50 per cent the family allowance for third and subsequent children in all families in Australia. The -cost of this initiative in a full year is $142m. That is big money but in my opinion it is not well directed. This money is distributed universally; that is, on the basis of a certain specified contingency-the number of children in a family-and not on the basis of whether a family is in a situation of financial need. The trouble with this approach is that millionaires' families and high income families, such as those of members of this Parliament, if they have three or more children, will get help while low income families with two children or less will get nothing extra. I cannot see the equity in that. It means that those families in real need are not being specifically targeted for assistance. Low income families with three or more children will certainly benefit from this initiative, and that is highly commendable, but they will benefit accidentally rather than as a result of deliberate Government policy directed towards the needy.
The Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) has recently made statements to the effect that unless we place greater emphasis in our welfare policies on the neediest sections of the community,' a number of things will happenparticularly given the fact that we have an aging population with a declining section involved in a productive capacity. One effect will be that a crippling tax burden will have to be placed on the productive capacity of the economy, thereby reducing our ability to provide adequate welfare resources in the longer term future. Another effect will be that the Government's capacity to assist the poorest sections of the community will
be diminished. I think the Minister is quite correct in expressing that concern. However, this last Budget presented an opportunity for implementing a needs-based approach to welfare through the family allowances program. The Government

did not accept that opportunity, in a program which will involve expenditure of $1,040m in 1981-82.
The Minister has also referred, in recent times, to the future trends in pension appropriations with the aging population and has related this to the way in which many relatively well-off people are circumventing the income test and hence gaining access to pensions to which they would not normally be entitled. In relating the pension to needs-based welfare, the Minister and the Government face a real dilemma in confronting the two principles of, firstly, the need to direct greater assistance to those in greatest need and, secondly, the desire to maintain in the pensions area a system of official pension benefits which does not discourage people from providing for their own retirement.
We have a pension system whereby those who rely on the pension as their sole source of income and have to pay rent can fairly ask why their share of the welfare cake cannot be increased rather than having millionaires and well-off individuals receiving a means test free pension after reaching the age of 70 years. We also have wealthy people or relatively well-off people over the age of 70 stating that they have paid taxes and deserve a pension irrespective of their needs. We have an income test which allows married couples to receive some pension when they have a private income of up to $256.70 a week. The free private income limit under which a full entitlement to a pension is allowed has remained unchanged since 1972 and this has effectively tightened the income test. Those with a small indexed private superannuation income feel that the income test penalises them because as relatively low income earners they made sacrifices during their working lives to make provision for their retirement, but inflation and an uncha'nged free income zone has made that provision inadequate. We also have a situation in which both major political parties in this country are increasingly seeing the need for a greater concentration of welfare resources on the needy.
Given these important and conflicting but very arguable views of the income support system, given the present and future budgetary and social importance of this issue, given that it embraces the whole question of national superannuation schemes and the question of universal versus needs-based welfare, given that it involves a politically sensitive area of policy making, given that it involves a consideration of the relationship between and integration of the income support and taxation programs and given that it involves hundreds of thousands of Australians, I believe the

2238 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

whole matter should be referred to either a standing committee of this House such as the Expenditure Committee or , more preferably a joint select committee of the Parliament. I make the suggestion because a subject of such importance as this should receive the kind of bipartisan examination that only a committee of this Parliament could provide and it should involve the widest possible consultation with the Australian community and particularly the pensioner groups throughout Australia.
I also want to make the point that in the welfare area one does not have to spend hundreds or thousands of millions of dollars to provide necessary assistance to needy groups. In fact many of the areas of great need in our society are catered for by the financially less significant programs of this Department. I will cite two examples in which I have been involved. I have long advocated in this Parliament the need to increase the subsidies payable under the Homeless Persons Assistance Act, an Act directed towards helpingthe homeless, the destitute and the derelict and an Act which in 1981-82 will involve an expenditure of only $6.3m. Between 1974 and 1980 the subsidies for meals and accommodation paid under this Act remained unchanged. In a number of speeches to this House I sought to have the subsidies increased, and in the 1980 Budget increased funds were appropriated. These increases came to about $1 m but they meant so much to those approved institutions under the Act which provide meal ancl accommodation services to a very needy section of the community.
Another example is the Delivered Meals Subsidy Act, which is designed to assist the establishment, the expansion, the improvement and the maintenance of approved meals on wheels services. This service, which is estimated to cost some $4.13m in 1981-82-a small appropriationmakes possible the provision of a most essential service to so many sick and aged persons who still seek to retain their independence by living in their own homes in familiar surroundings but who still need this kind of help to enable them to do so. Again, in 1980, this Government, at very little cost to the Budget but to the very great benefit of those organisations providing this essential service, increased the subsidies payable under the Act. I simply cite these two examples because I have been involved in seeking more assistance for these programs and because they constitute two of the very many areas in the welfare field in w~ich small adjustments and small appropriatIOns can mean so much to the beneficiaries of these services and the beneficiaries who have very

genuine needs. If we are to concentrate more resources in the future to these most essential programs the Government will have to ensure
that its larger welfare' programs are not directed
to the relatively well-off.

Another example I could cite relates to the present inquiry of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure which is looking into the accommodation needs of the aged. Although I do not want to ,pre-empt the findings of that Committee, it is. becoming Qbvious that over the years successive governments have been pouring hundreds of millions of dollars into providing institutional accommodation for the aged without actually determining what it is that they desire. It is becoming obviou~ tp me, and I think to the Committee, that many aged people would in fact prefer to remain at home as long as possible provided they can receive adequate domiciliary support.

Of course, institutional accommodation will have to be expanded but a change in the emphasis
of funding might be necessary. l.mention this not to comment on what this Committee might report
but simply to make the point that the aged, and
those representing them, have nor actually been asked what accommodation preference they may
have. Again, we may be able to provide at much
less cost than institutional care a service which is
both cheaper and more in tune with the needs of
the aged. I refer to services such ,as meals on
wheels, chiropody, home help and-hOme maintenance, all of which are highly efficient and cheap
and directed to those in real need.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Order! The honourable ""member's time has expired.

Mrs CHILD (Henty) (9.46)~lllddtess my re-

marks on Estimates Committee-B to the appropri-

ation for the Department of. Health-and in par-

ticular to the area of community health.

Community health virtually disappears from the

Commonwealth Budget as it is almost entirely ab-

sorbed in the block grants to the States. The com-

ponent of general revenue grants to the States in

respect of community health represents a 10 per

cent increase over the Commonwealth contri-

bution for 1980-8l. However, it is entirely up to

the States how they spend this below inflation

amount, and the prospects for community health,

in some States at least, appears bleak when we re-

alise that it will be entirely up to each State how' it

spends the money it receives:

..-

The community health, centreseVolved under

the and

concerned Labor through the last

Gyeoavne(rnhmaevrlet-porf-61~972t-h7e5i;

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2239

worth to the community in both services and cost. If the Whitlam Government could be accused of extravagance-this seems to be the one consistent point that members on the Government benches hammer day in and day out-this Government emerges as the exponent of false economy. Preventative health care is cheaper than hospitalisation or institutionalisation, and those centres which employ salaried doctors have proved this over and over again. If this Government were genuine about trying to contain health costs it would encourage the development of salaried medical services rather than support the openended fee for service system.
A reduction in health centre services, which is imminent with the Commonwealth's opting out of the responsibility to f1,lnd health centres, will drive more people back to the public hospital casualty centres and out-patient departments, which of course are dearer to run than community health centres. We will also see the same situation we had pre-Medibank in which people will neglect primary health car,e and warning signs and will seek treatment when their case becomes urgent. The financial cost increases along with the unnecessary suffering. The community health care program focuses on two main objectives: The provision of improved community health services to those living in areas where there are significant unmet needs and the promotion of aspects of health care prevention, health maintenance and rehabilitation that have been neglected in the past.
It is irresponsible for the Federal Government, having given birth to community health centres, to now opt out of the direct funding. The program sponsored projects in such fields as community health and mental health centres, alcohol and drug treatment centres, health education, geriatric and rehabilitation services, domiciliary and
home nursing services, staff training programs, women's health services and youth and adolescent services are vital to our community. The com-
munity health service program has financed some projects to meet the special needs of rural and remote communities, immigrants, Aborigines, family planning and occupational health. The main virtue of the program is that it has focused on the real needs and, despite some problems of management, on cost effectiveness in meeting them. With the advent of block grants to the States, we will have differences within the States.
Victoria, for instance, is now asking the community health care centres to ask for payment for service. The administrative costs of collecting those payments will far outweigh the amount received. This will give the commuriities who use

those health centres a totally different psychological feeling towards the centres. At the moment people in the community see them as their health centres. They are staffed very strongly by people who relate to the communities in those areas. The number of voluntary helpers outstrips the number of paid staff by about two to one. Once we start asking people who cannot afford to pay anyway to pay for those services they will develop a different attitude to the programs being run.
The Government's own policies have increased the demand for community health services. Not only are more people sinking below the poverty line, but also the rising cost of health insurance has forced more and more people to seek less expensive care. In addition, and I think the Department of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) published this in its report last year, they have also reduced the number of services needed from psychiatric or mental hospitals and from public hospitals. Preventative health care is cheaper to the community in the long run. It gets away from some of the suffering people undergo about whether they should or should not go and find out what that pain in their back or in their shoulder is. When they cannot get free service from a community health centre, they will put up with the pain a lot longer than they would normally. The end result will be, as it was pre-Medibank, that people will put up with their gall bladders or their bunions until it becomes too much for them. They will land in hospital and the Government will have to face the extra hospital costs.
I think the Government has been extraordinarily short-sighted. This was one program that should have been kept in Commonwealth hands and should have been funded by the Commonwealth. It should be freely available to all the people of Australia and not peddled around, as it will be, depending on who is the government in which State. New South Wales will fare much better than Victoria. I do not think that is fair to the people of Victoria. I suggest to the Minister that it is not too late to think again.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (9.53)-1 will not detain the House tonight for any length because I have a sore throat, and I will ask for leave to incorporate most of what I would like to refer to. I discussed this matter with the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affair (Mr Macphee) before he left the table. I wish to refer to the question of refugee status and not to the people referred to in the statement made today by the Minister. There does not seem to be any doubt that they were not proper refugees. The general question of whether people who leave Vietnam or other countries at present are real refugees or whether they are what

2240 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

are called economic refugees-in other words, people who just want to better their position in life-is an important question. The Council of Vietnamese Organisations in New South Wales, which is based in my electorate, has produced a paper which has probably been circulated to every member of parliament. I think it is important that it receive maximum exposure in the media and that as many people as possible see the point of view of those who have been genuine refugees from Vietnam. It is a lengthy paper and I will quote only a little of it, but I will ask leave of the House for it to be incorporated in Hansard. It is nine pages and I hope it can be incorporated instead of my making a lengthy speech. I ask leave of the House to incorporate this paper in Hansard.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond}-I should point out to the honourable member for Prospect that, subject to clearance by Mr Speaker for technical purposes, it may not be possible for Hansard to accommodate the honourable member in this exercise.
Dr KLUGMAN-I realise that.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Under those conditions, leave is granted.
'The document read as follows-
There has been debate in Australia as well as in many other countries concerning the status of the refugees coming out of Indochina, particularly Vietnam. There have not been enough participation from the Indochinese Communities themselves in this public debate. Since it is such a crucial and vital debate concerning ourselves that the Vietnamese Organisations in Australia decided that it is in our interests to put our case before the Government, the Opposition and other interested parties, hoping that it will help all concerned to be better informed of our reasons for leaving Vietnam.
We understand the apprehension and share the concern of the Australian people, regarding the issue. It demonstrates the fact that members of the society do care for the future and the well-being of the country. It teaches us that the responsibilities of being residents and citizens are t~ protect the society and to strive for the betterment of Austr ia, the country that has opened arms to give us a chance tq; egiri a new life. It is also in our and our children's interests for the country to maintain a good moral as well as materials standards and to further advance in all fields, including humanitarian and we have to take part to help achieve it.
What we attempt to do is to present our case from the point of view of the person who has lived in Vietnam, understands the workings of the society over there and who has the first hand experiences about the effects imposed on them by the political decisions, particularly the people who have some connection in some way with the previous regime or the Americans.
We will not debate the appropriateness of the Hanoi's Government policy, though some times it is difficult not to give views on it. In short, we will concern ourselves with people, not politics. We will do it by examining various arguments that have been put forward to question the refugee status of the Vietnamese, aiming at reducing or terminating the Indochinese program.

Statement: Most of the people connected with the Saigon regime have already left.
This is simply not true. Since the first groups of people who left during the last few days of the Saigon regime up until now, there have been about 630,000 refugees coming out of Vietnam. Yet we must remember there were 1,200,000 soldiers in the Republic's Army, over 200,000 police and between 600,000 and 800,000 public servants before April 1975. That is we have not counted the few hundred thousand people who worked for the Americans and the allies, in various capacities. Now, if we take into consideration their families, including wives, children and others, we are in for some 10 million people. Comparing this figure with the number of people who already left, we see the fallacy of the argument.
Question: If there are so many people, how can any country help all?
From our first hand experiences, we know the desire to run away from tyranny is always there, but that is not going to be the decisive factor. The overiding factor is whether the people have the ability to do what they wish to do. As of now, that important factor is diminished every day. The good boats are gone. It is increasingly difficult to find boats in the country. It is getting more and more difficult to find the fuel (State owned and even the State is short of it). The equipment for sea going such as compasses and sea charts are no longer available. In addition the government's patrols are getting tougher and tougher and more and more efficient. People may say you can buy off the officials. That is partly true but you can buy only one locality, not all of them along the way. Therefore the chance of being arrested is always big. It is also known that the longer people stay in the country, the less able they can afford the price to buy off the officials. Once you get out of the Vietnamese water, you have to face the storms, the wind, mechan. ical problems, and food and water shortages and most disastrous are the pirates. Even if you overcome all these obstacles, you still have the hostility of the first asylum countries who are getting tougher and tougher. Just like anything else in life, the events we are looking at have their beginning, so they must have their end. We can see it coming.
It is therefore reasonable for us to ask Australia to extend their tolerance and patience, so that things can have time to work themselves out in a natural way.
Question: There needs to be persecution for a person to claim the refugee status. How are the Vietnamese persecuted?
Persecution refers to the circumstances in which life, liberty or security of a person is threatened. In the case of Vietnam, a person's life, liberty or security or all of them is threatened if that person belongs to a certain group before April, 1975 and that group has been determined by the present government to be "guilty".
Unfortunately, it has been a policy of the present government to make as many people as possible to feel gUilty. This is demonstrated by the fact that in all political indoctrination sessions, people including soldiers, workers, farmers, professionals are told that they are guilty. A nurse is guilty because he or she has helped the sick and the wounded to regain strength to fight the "revolution". A farmer is guilty because his crop is used to feed the Saigon Army. A worker is guilty because he has produced not for the "revolution" but for the enemy. In short, everyone is guilty, except those who have directly participated in their side. This line of argument is repeated in all political indoctrination sessions in the neighbourhoods, the factories, the offices and schools.
In that atmosphere where everyone is made to be conscious of his past in a negative way, people begin to withdraw to themselves, fearing associated with anyone because he may be accused of forming a conspiracy. The tragedy is that the more guilty you feel, the harder you try to stay away from those

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2241

who are in the same boat due to the fear of "conspiracy" accusation. Yet everyone has reasons to feel guilty. The whole society becomes a place full of suspicions and feelings of powerlessness. In effect, the regime, by its imposing on the people the feelings of guilt, has succeeded in separating people from each other.
We should further emphasise that once you feel guilty or made to feel guilty, you feel very vulnerable. If you are arrested, then by that time the guilty feelings already penetrate you deep enough that you tend to give up much more easily because of the odds against you. You know you have no chance of defending yourself. You are at the mercy of the regime. All these "crimes" are "political crimes", therefore they carry the heavy burden of the charge for crimes "against socialism, against the people".
Obsessed with the idea of class struggle, the regime treats people differently depending on whether they belong to "reactionary" or "proletarian" and "revolutionary" class. The concept of "who is friend, who is enemy" is very clear. Unfortunately, if you happen to be a soldier, a businessman, a person who has worked for a foreign organisation, property owner, public servants, intellectuals not trained under socialism, farmer or fisherman against collectivization, you are a reactionary. A person is treated according to the group he associated with in the past, not the individual he is. And yet if we remember that the power of the State is much more than that of a government in the West, then we can see the vulnerable position a person considered to be enemy of the regime is in.
So, the persecution in Vietnam is carried out against a class of people, not necessarily against an individual person although it becomes the case of individual when it is put in practice at the local level. Take for example the case of going to the New EcollOmic Zone. No one wants to go there, including those policy makers who pretend to be idealistic or great ideologists. The question comes down to deciding who has to go. At this point, political factors are decisive. Those who have to go or will be "encouraged" to go include former soldiers, army officers, traders, businessmen, public servants, the newly-released from prisons, writers or artist who do not "repent"; in short all "undesirables" politically. The economic advantage or disadvantage is solely decided by political consideration. In any factory or office, whenever comes the reassessment for wage increase. The first group of people to be considered are party members and the last ones are the people who have connections to the past. In fact the last group should feel lucky, simply because they are still there. But a person with any past connection will never be eligible for party memberships, the group that have the highest priority and privilege in everything.
Take another example: enrolment for tertiary or vocational educations. The children of those who have "unclean" past are excluded.
It may be appropriate to remind everyone that the intention of any communist leadership is to create a new "ruling class", coming from the people they believe were "persecuted" in the past and demonstrated by the "revoluationary" zeal. If someone proves to them that the lowly-paid public servants and soldiers of the old regime may be the ones most disadvantaged in the past, though they had no influence in the history they were forced to take part, the communists would have nothing to do with this reasoning, believing instead that these people are dangerous agents of capitalism.
Up to this point, we have only proved that the people are disadvantaged, discriminated but have not attempted to prove they are persecuted.
We say that are persecuted as a class of people. Take the soldiers of the old regime. In many provinces and in the outer districts of Saigon, whenever there is irrigation or other public

work to be done, these soldiers are rounded first and told to work, of course unpaid (forced labour). If there are antigovernment leaflets, they will be the ones rounded up first for a session of "education" lasting from one, two days to a week or ten days. If the authorities perceive threat during occasions such as the National Day, Ho Chi Minh's birthday and "liberation" day, these people will simply be detained as a preventive measure, for a few days or longer.
The above treatment is given not only to soldiers, but to any one or group of people who they believe are against the regime, and that invariably are the people with past connection. We can also tell you that for many people, they still have not given back what is called "the rights of citizenship". The law is written by the regime, interpreted and carried out, then enforced by it, you can see the awful position any individual with past connection is in.
We can further say that the people with past connection or against the collectivisation are persecuted because they are the ones who always get the attention of the local policeman whose role in one's life can be unbearable. It must be known that in Vietnam now for every 20, 25 families in a neighbourhood, there is a policeman who lives right in the middle of the neighbourhood. Part of his job is to know everyone, particularly those with a past, or who is believed to be against the regime. These people are good target for blackmail or harrassment which HAVE become a way of life over there. The people feel so powerless as there is simply nowhere they can confide at or ask for help.
It must be realised that in Vietnam the only employer and food and other essentials distributor is the government. It would be most unfortunate if anyone is disliked by that important body called government. If that government decides to link your past or its suspicion with the security of your job and the continuity of your food ration card, then you will be in for big trouble.
A word about the food ration card. This is a big weapon the government uses to carry out their policy. For example, if you belong to the group that have to go to the New Economic Zone and you do not go, the regime will not have to put a gun into your head and tell you to go. They simply have to take away the validity of ration card, then you go. If you do not go to neighbourhood political meeting or do not go to vote on election days, they can always hint on the validity of the ration card, then you go!!!
The conclusion is that if you have a certain connection with the past regime, or in some way are perceived as having some link or tendency against the regime or unhappy with it, then you will receive the full weight of the regime. It would be very unfortunate if you are discriminated by a government in the West, but it is a lot more frightening if you are not liked by the Vietnamese communist regime because the communist regime has the controls on a lot more aspects ofyourlife.
We would like to emphasize that the communists work on association, so that if you are not "progressive", then they will have the same treatment to your children, parents as they do to you.
Question: It seems that the people are running away from economic hardship rather than political persecution?
It is true only if we are confused between the effect and-its cause. As we say earlier, economic advantage or disadvantage is decided by political factors. If a teacher is denied the opportunity to teach, just because of his past and told to go to New Economic Zone, a professional cannot practice because of his past, then it is not economic. It is political. Furthermore, as reasoned by the Wall Street Journal, since when did it happen that the economic order does not follow the political order? We can also tell you that Vietnam has had economic trouble in the past, including a famine in 1945 that killed more than 2 million people, but the question of leaving the country was not

2242 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

the thing to do. Just like any other peoples who are rooted deep into the land on which they live, the Vietnamese would be the last ones who will be willing to leave the land that holds memories, ancestors and every meaningful thing in their lives.
Therefore when people leave, they leave because of political discrimination, political persecution that threatens their liberty, their security or their lives. That persecution is having effects not only on their liberty, their security, but also economic well-being which is mostly only what outsiders see.
Argument: But we see a lot'of young men in the camps. They are running away from the draft, aren't they?
Anyone who studies Marxism and Leninism would have known that the regime considers the army as the hammer of the CLASS (so-called proletarian). Their role is to use "revolutionary violence" to smash the reactionaries and the enemies of the "proletarian". For that reason, the regime selects soldiers very carefully. Their consideration is based on class background, for three generations back. The background has to be one that the regime can instill the class hatred to motivate the soldiers to fight. That explains the reasons why Ha Noi would not draft the Catholic youth in North Vietnam during the Vietnam War until they ran out of politically acceptable men in the middle and toward the end of the war. These Catholics can never be more than soldiers ..
Although being in the Army does not necessarily give the soldiers any direct material rewards, but they do give political priorities when it comes to the question of party membership. When you are a party member, you are .in the elite. People in the West think of communist party 'membership as a result of great ideological commitment. It should be but it is not. It is looked upon as a mean to get promotion, to have priority in job, in having annual wage increases and other advantages.
Knowing the role of the Army, you will realize that the children of the people with past connection will not be "qualified ideologically" to be in the Army. Instead they are taken into the "Volunteer Youth League" to clear the jungle, the minefields, to dig irrigation canals. They are taken out of the school, given no work, not permitted to be in the army and especially the police (need to be even more ideologically qualified). All doors and windows are closed except volunteer youth league. The local police and communist youth league (a different organisation) come to their houses all the time to "encourage" the young man or woman to "volunteer". Your mental resistance can only offer so much resistance and you give in after a while, knowing that the past of your family can be questioned if you persist in declining to go. Then you go.
It is a disguised discrimination and persecution. Remember that these young "volunteers" do not have wages or salary, only food eaten in collective dining hall, but very often not enough because of their heavy work. We should once again say that the death or the cost on the young "volunteers" are never in the regime's worries when we are reminded that their motto is to build socialism on the blood and sweat of the "reactionaries", among others.
These young are destined, in terms of ideology, to be in such organisations as "volunteer youth league". If there is any change, it is due to the need of the regime at a certain period. Looking at it under this light, we will realize when the regime began to take these people into the Army in 1979 because of the military need in Kampuchea (to free the "true" soldiers to go North facing China), they did it just as when they took the Catholic youth in the North earlier. They did it because of their needs and discrimination and the suspicion will go to these people in the Army too. They are to carry ammunition, doing hard labour work, only soldiers under North Vietnamese officers' command.
Therefore when these young men leave the country, they are running away from persecution, not running away from the draft in an ordinary way.

Question: What about the fishermen and farmers, why would they be the victims of discrimination and persecution?

If they are in any way having connection with the regime in

the past such as being in the Army, rural pacification program

or rural officials, public servants, anti-communist religions

like caodaism, hoahaoism or Catholics or their parents or chil-

dren having that sort of connection, then they are marked per-

sons. Furthermore, if they are against the collectivisation of

means of productions such as farms, fishing boats, then they

are marked persons too. More than anyone else, as a group of

people, the farmers and fishermen cherish private ownership.

The farms and fishing boats ARE their lives. They are born

onto it and they will die with it. The collectivisation makes

them feel lost and dispossessed. The general assumption is

that they prefer city and industrial life. There is nothing more

wrong than that. Th~y are not mobile as people in indus-

trialized countries. As a result, they are against collectivisa-

tion, violently. The precedents have been established every-

where that the farmers and fishermen would not agree to

collectivisation. When it is forced upon them, they either re-

belled, slaughtered the cattle or in the case of Vietnam, "leav-

ing" the country because they see no chance in uprising and

yet if they stay, they will be subject to harsh treatment. In

short, the farmers and fishermen ARE simple people, but they

are still victims, targets of persecution if they have connection

with the past or have attitudes that do not conform to that of

the government.

'.

Question: How can the situation be so bad? If it were, the regime would not have lasted that long.

In terms of human sufferings, the situation is very bad. We must remember that it was a civil war lasting for many decades, therefore it involved everyone on both sides. If the victors are not serious' in national reconciliation as promised, everyone will be in for a bad time. In the South, if you remember that there were 2 million Catholics, 1.2 million soldiers,
200,000 police, 600 to 800 thousand public servants, 2 million Chinese, 3-4 million Caodaist and Hoahao (two religious sects vigorously against communism), I million northern refugees
of 1954 and if the regime does not restrain its obsession with "enemies from within", then the regime will be bound to act
on their obsession which will result in wanton discrimination and harsh persecution. That is exactly what is happening. Therefore to the people who have connection to the past in
some way, the regime is currently pursuing a policy of active
discrimination and disguised persecution.

Concerning the second part of the question, why the regime
lasts, we can point to the role played by police at all levels and furthermore, the "guilty complex" described earlier has made people afraid of each other and can never talk to each other
trustingly. In addition, the method of preventive detention also helps foil all possible conspiracy against the regime.

Question: OK, the people are persecuted and there are many of them, how could Australia possibly help all of them. We are limited in our means.

We fully share the concerns. In fact, that is one of the factors that make us hesitant or timid in participating into the de-
bate. We realise Australia is doing its share, and we do not want to appear to push or take advantage of the good will of
Australians.

However, with your understanding and permission, we take the liberty to put the following suggesting forward. We
suggest that Australia maintain the Indochinese refugee programs. Our suggestion is based on the following:

I. The refugee flow will end by itself. We said earlier that the difficulty in finding boats, fuels, seagoing equipments,
government patrols, storms, wind at sea, the pirates and the hostility at the first asylum countries will act as obstacles to
the wish to run away from tyranny.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2243

2. The UNHCR still considers the Vietnamese as prima facie refugees.
3. A reduction in Indochinese refugee intake will act as an encou'fagement for the hostility of new arrivals into the first asylum countries. It will put the Vietnamese at even more danger with the priates. It will also have the effect of undermining international efforts in accepting the refugees, particularly with such a country as Canada whose Minister of Immigration has declared in Hong Kong that his country will maintain the present program last month.
4. By maintaining the program, Australia shares the problem with Asia.
5. We also believe that Australia should not be one of the first countries to announce a reduction or a tough refugee policy. She does not need to. Even if Australia has a bigger refugee program, but if the camps in Southeast Asia are empty, she would not have people to fill the program. In another word, if Thailand (already tough), Malaysia and Indonesia decide not to be the countries of first asylum any more, then the camps will be likely empty. In that case, Australia will be released, yet still be praised for her high humanitarian concerns which are not numerous in' this world.
In order to obtain public support, we suggest Australia broaden the concept of persecution. This concept, as we understand it, is never defined clearly any way. In the case of the Vietnamese, we maintain that a person is discriminated, persecuted because he or she has some connection to the previous regime and that, as a result, threatens his or her liberty, life or security. One needs to understand the narrow concept of class struggle and the overwhelming role played by the State in Vietnamese communism to explain the fact that sections of the Vietnamese population in the South are discriminated and persecuted because of their past.
Finally, we would like to present some intriguing thoughts toyou:
Try to imagine a society in which if you want to go to another district, you have to get written permit from your village authority. When you arrive at the destination you have to report to the local authority over there.
Try to imagine if you want to go to another province, you must get written permission from the district level and if you want to go to the border provinces or the beach you must get written permission from the provincial level. You simply cannot spend overnight at your parents, your friends or relatives without asking permission and many times it is not given, particularly with those who have past connection because they want to limit your mobility.
Try to imagine that your ration card is often used to whip you into doing what the government wants. You must offer free labour for so many days a year to "build socialism". You should attend weekly or forthnightly political study sessions in your neighbourhood, you should go to vote on election days; otherwise.your ration card will be a topic to be discussed in the Committee. Try to imagine the government wants you to go to the New Economic Zone and if you resist, one of the methods used is to take away your ration card. A whole society cannot think of anything other than to avoid troubles with the authority and "my food ration card".
And remember this practice is not temporary. It is a permanent feature because it is ideological. We speak from personal experiences, coupled with the understanding of the ideology behind it. We have lived under the regime that we are talking to you about today. It is honest, true and not intentional communist-bashing. There were so many idealists, so many social reformers, so many nationalists before April 1975 and are presently in Vietnam. They are the people most unhappy and have a great deal of regrets. Before, they could not believe the new regime can be that bad for the people. Now they

know, but it is too late. They are condemned to live there for the rest of their lives, our poor compatriots.
People talk about the family reunion scheme under the "orderly departure program ". It is very good and we hope it will get started soon. However, it ha~ to be carried out along with other refugee program from the camps. The family reunion only helps those who already have close relatives overseas, but what about the people who do not? They m~y need even more help.
One final thought. Vietnam is being ruled by Marxist revolutionaries. As experienced by many people, we believe it is sometimes bad to be ruled by politicians, but we can assure you it is most frightening, most fearsome to be ruled.by revolutionaries, especially Marxist revolutionaries.
It sounds like we are asking too much from the Australian Community. Ifit does, we can only hope the noble tradition of Australia of giving refuge to the poor, the homeless, the disadvantaged, the displaced and the refugees will win over. We will enlieavour to demonstrate with time that we are not burden to the society. On the contrary, we have every intention to contribute, to love and to defend this country as much as we love our unfortunate Fatherland, Vietnam.
Mr KLUGMAN-This material, or argument, has been prepared by a group of Vietnamese. Their English grammar is not perfect, but I am sure it is much better than the grammar of most of us who claim to be able to speak foreign languages. It attempts to answer a number of questions, although I do not necessarily agree with all of the answers. One of the arguments is on the matter I mentioned earlier, and on this point the document reads:
Question: It seems that the people are running away from economic hardship rather than political persecution?
I think it is important to look at it from the point of view of those Vietnamese who have left and to read what they are saying about it. Certain groups of people, they argue, are being discriminated against-I do not think there is much doubt about that-people who were associated with the previous regime in Saigon before the communists won in 1975. They are persecuted, they say, as a class of people. They talk about not only soldiers but also other people who the present regime believes are against it and invariably these are people with what they call past connections. The document states:
We can also tell you that for many people, they still have not given back what is called 'the rights of citizenship': The law is written by the regime, interpreted and carried out, then enforced by it, you can see the awful position any individual with past connections is in.
They are talking about what people with those past connections, such as soldiers of the previous regime, are forced to do. They continue:
In many provinces and in the outer districts of Saigon, whenever there is irrigation or other public work to be done, these soldiers are rounded first and told to work, of course unpaid (forced labour). If there are anti-government leaflets, they will be the ones rounded up first for a session of 'education' lasting from one, two days to a week or ten days. If the authorities perceive threat during occasions such as the

2244 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

National Day, Ho Chi Minh's birthday and 'liberation' day, these people will simple be detained as a preventive measure, for a few days or longer.
We can further say that the people with past connection or against the collectivisation are persecuted because they are the ones who always get the attention of the local policeman whose role in one's life can be unbearable. It must be known that in Vietnam now for every 20, 25 families in a neighbourhood, there is a policeman who lives right in the middle of the neighbourhood. Part of his jOb is to know everyone, particularly those with a past, or who is believed to be against the regime. These people are good target for blackmail or harrassmeilt which have become a way of life over there. The people feel so powerless as there is simply nowhere they can confide at or ask for help.
It must. be realized that in Vietnam the only employer and food and other essentials distributor is the government. It would be most unfortunate if anyone is disliked by that important body called government. If that government decides to link your past or its suspicion with the security of your job and the continuity of your food ration card, then you will be in for big trouble.
I suggest that people who speak rather blandly about some of the refugees being economic refugees should read the statement from the Council of Vietnamese Organisations. I hope they will come to a different point of view.
I will devote one minute to a suggestion relating to select committees, which the House ought to take seriously. If we consider the House of Representatives and the Senate, there are 64 senators and 125 members of the House. There are, of course, a larger number of Ministers in this House than there are in the Senate. Nonetheless, there are many more people left in this House than there are in the Senate to deal with the committees. If we look at the Senate Notice Paper for today, or for any other day, we will see some nine pages of committees and the matters that have been referred to them. I first became aware of this when Senator Haines moved originally for the referral of the question of private hospitals and nursing homes to the Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare. That Committee already had a significant number of other references to deal with. Therefore it was decided to set up a Senate select committee. I notice that the only person on the select committee is Senator Haines. I think that is unsatisfactory. The Government-the people who run the business of this House, such as the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar), who is at the table-ought to look at it. There are some people with specialist knowledge in this House. There ought to be a possibility of setting up reasonable committees in this House which will deal with these matters.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Order! It being 10 p.m. I propose the question:

That the House do now adjourn.
Mr MacKeIlar-1 require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 19U-82
Consideration of Report of Estimates CommitteeB
Debate resumed.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (10.1)-1 conclude by reiterating that there ought to be a possibility for propositions in this House to be put before either select committees or the more general types of committees such as those the Senate has-committees comprising people who have some interest in, for example, questions of social welfare, health, immigration or finance. I feel that with the help and advice of experts outside this Parliament it may well be possible to improve the workings of government and make reasonable recommendations. In a large number of cases a bipartisan policy will, in fact, arise. I appeal again to the Minister and to the Government as a whole to have a look at the question of committees, so that when propositions are moved in the House of Representatives it might be possible to refer them to such committees.
Dr CASS (Maribyrnong) (10.2)-1 wish to comment firstly on the contribution made by the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) when he was dancing around in the aisle lecturing us on the illogicality of the Australian Labor Party's approach to immigration. He asserted that on the one hand we wanted to bring in hundreds of thousands of people and that, on the other hand, we cried about the enormous rate of unemployment. He questioned why we wanted to increase immigration in massive numbers and encourage family reunion and then complain about increasing unemployment when, according to him, most of the people likely to come into Australia under the family reunion category would be unskilled people.
Our position on this matter has been quite clear and consistent. We acknowledge that; in economic terms, there is a problem at the moment in the Australian community, as there is throughout the rest of the Western world, leading to an increasing problem of unemployment. For this reason the policy of the Australian ''Labor Party has been quite consistent. We have been opposed to bringing in large numbers of people. In fact, during the years that we were in government the number of people coming into the country was lower than the number of people being brought in under the present Government's Numerical

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2245

Multi-factor Assessment System. We have said also that we believe NUMAS should be abolished. As our spokesman, the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young), pointed out, we be-
lieve, and all of the evidence seems to suggest, that NUMAS in its actual workings had been biased against non-English speaking people. It certainly has been very biased against family reunion.
In our view, in the present climate we should not be seeking to plunder the rest of the world for skilled workers. That does not mean that we should cut off our noses to spite our faces and not have any skilled workers coming to Australia. If skilled workers are to be allowed to come here it should be only because there are specific jobs for them to come to. There should be none of this nonsense that we 'will have all these great
Eidorado schemes, or development projects for which we will want umpteen thousands of workers whom we will bring in from overseas. In the first place many of these development projects have fallen flat; they will not eventuate. All the estimates of the number of skilled workers that we would need have been grossly inflated. Of course, these projects will not need skilled workers in the immediate future anyway. If we had the will we would have the time to train those people who are already here-old and recent inhabitants of this country, people born here and people who come here as immigrants, people whose skills are no longer required-or the children of those immigrants who are coming out of schools with practically no options at all. We could train them to do those skilled jobs.
We have been against the trend pursued by the Liberal Government of seeking to invite more and more skilled workers to this country, bringing with them dependants-wives and children. Often they will bring in wives who are not skilled, but who feel they will need to work like many other wives of working men in this country. When we bring in skilled workers with no family attachments already in Australia we increase the pool of people in the country who may want to bring their relations to this country at some time. They are people. They are human. They are not just skilled workers. Often they are a part of a significant family group. When they come here, as the Minister would have done if he had migrated from somewhere, and as my parents did when they migrated here, they come in the hope that if they find the country to their liking and can settle they may bring the rest of their families here. That is a natural human instinct.
Our answer to that difficult situation is that we should train as many of the skilled workers as we possibly can. However, we should recognise our

obligation to the immigrants who have come here, who have helped to build this country in the last 20 years or 30 years through programs that both parties have supported. Those people have rights. Whatever number of immigrants it is considered that we can absorb-as a rich country, despite the difficulties, we can absorb some-we should concentrate on that number of immigrants being mainly family reunion cases. I am leaving aside our responsibilities in the refugee area, which is a difficult question. We agree with the Government that that should be governed by negotiations and agreement with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. We pick no quarrel with the Government on that. We are talking about the non-refugee immigration. We are suggesting that, at this time, for the reasons that I have given, we should concentrate on family reunions.
Mr MacKellar-How do you define the family?
Dr CASS-We owe it to those people who are already here. Our definition, which would be rather wider than that of the Government, would go beyond the immediate family members of husbands or wives, fiancees and dependent children as defined by the Government. We stated quite clearly in bur policy that unmarried children would still be considered dependent irrespective of tijeir age. We considered also that other relations should be given the opportunity within the quota system that is obviously envisaged by this Government if it is to allow 70,000 immigrants into this country. There would be nowhere near that many immediate close relations wanting to come in to fill that whole quota.
Mr MacKellar-It depends on how you define 'relations'.
Dr CASS-I am talking, for instance, in terms of unmarried children of any age. There would not be--
Mr MacKellar-But you mentioned others?
Dr CASS-Precisely. There would not be the numbers to fill the quotas. Whatever number is left could be filled by other members of the extended family such as sisters, brothers, uncles, aunts, nieces and nephews who, at the moment, have no chance unless they qualify under NUMAS as having particular skills. We suggest that most people in the' country do not see the family as just the nuclear family. They see it as the extended family. I certainly am aware that my family, and most people I know, consider it in that way. Yet our immigration policy limits the family to the nuclear family, cutting it off dead once a child reaches the age of 18. We think that is wrong.

2246 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Mr MacKellar-And if the extended family too~ up the whole of the quota there would be no skilled immigrants?
Dr CASS-I ask the Minister to hold on. Obviously it would have to be done on a quota system. We would have to have some priorities. But at least we should give some hope to the other family members to get here over the course of some years. At the moment there is no hope. I do not wish to continue the debate in this way as I want to turn to something else. I think I have stated quite clearly how our policy differs from that of
the Government.
I conclude with a few brief comments about the short-sightedness of the Minister for Health in emasculating the community health program by just putting the funding for that program in a block grant to the States and leaving it to the States to administer. I say that it is short-sighted because we are told that the purpose of the exercise is to cut down the cost of health care in this country. I wish to give the House some interesting figures. If we compare the amount spent on health as a proportion of gross domestic product in the United States of America, Canada and Australia we find that in 1975-76 the United States spent 8.4 per cent, Canada spent 6.8 per cent and we spent 7.7 per cent-an enormous amount of money. When we look at how that money is carved up we find that the doctors, as they often claim, are not responsible because their fees are not the main cost. That is true. In 1975-76 medical fees totalled 19 per cent of health care costs in the United States, 16 per cent in Canada and 17.9 per cent in Australia. But the cost of hospital care as a proportion of the total health bill was 39 per cent in the United States, 50 per cent in Canada and 54.4 per cent in this country. Most of the cost re-
lates to institutional care-hospital care.
The idiocy of the Government's approach is that it does not recognise that the community health program will help keep people out of hospitals. Because this program is to be based on salaried medical service it will reduce the incentive for d9ctors to supply the sorts of services which require admission to hospitals. After all, when the Government set up the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and
Administration of Hospitals, it failed to note that the hospitals do not have patients but doctors have patients; that patients do not admit themselves to hospital to have their appendix out, their hernia done or anything else. It is doctors who make those sorts of decisions. It is doctors who determine the level of utilisation of those services. It is doctors who determine ultimately the total cost of health care in institutions; it is not patients

and, I suggest, it is not even governments, other than when they are idiotic, such as this one is being at the moment by cutting back the one program which could reduce the demand for hospital services by increasing the capacity of the community health centres to provide the sort of preventive health care which will be available only in community health centres.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (10.12)-1 wish to deal with the estimates for the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. As a member of the Estimates Committee, I am bound to say that a great deal of information was provided to that Committee, much of which was very useful. Unfortunately, with all the information that was provided, it was not possible for the Committee to go to the great questiQn of Aboriginal affairs in Australia in 1980 and, I suspect, in 1981 and 1982. I refer to the question of Aboriginal land rights which, of course, provides the basis for Aboriginal identity. Upon that issue depends the future preservation of Aboriginal culture and Aboriginality in Australia.
Aboriginal demands for the return of property and for compensation as they are being put to this community at the moment represent essentially a plea for the restoration of a just relationship with other Australians. It should not be forgotten that when white settlement of Australia first' took place every Aboriginal clan was in possession of its land, the boundaries of which were largely defined and understood. White settlement involved a massive exercise in dislocation, dispossession and genocide. In many parts of Australian society those issues have come to be understood only lately. The 1967 referendum which gave the Commonwealth constitutional power to deal with Aboriginal affairs was, I think, a recognition by a dominant white Australian community that the responsibility rested fairly upon the Commonwealth Government and upon a government with the sorts of resources that are available to the Commonwealth to do something to redress the balance.
I think it is true to say that the extent to which advances have been made-c-advances have been made-has been largely due to the funds that have flowed from the Commonwealth to the States. The major advance, of course, came during the Whitlam years. Whilst it has been fashionable Jor this Government and for the present Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to criticise many aspects of the policies of the Whitlam

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2247

Government, to try wherever possible to dismanWhat he means by that is that it supports Aborigi-

tle the effects of those policies, the one area in nalland rights in--

which they have not been able to achieve any real or effective success is the area of Aboriginal
affairs, not because they have not wanted to do so
but largely because the Whitlam years gave Abor-
iginal communities throughout Australia a sense of confidence, a sense of belief in their own des-
tiny and a sense that perhaps, by throwing up a
whole new generation of leadership-that is what
has occurred-they could stir the conscience of the Australian people. There is no way that the
Whitlam years have not permanently changed the
relationship between a dominant white Australia and its Aboriginal community. That is one of the
facts that I believe this House now has to face.

A Government sup!'orter-Land grab.
Mr HOLDING-I take the interjection of the honourable member because it represents the selfish, greedy attitude of the party that he represents. That gentleman's remarks will be recorded in Hansard. I venture to suggest that any land that he has acquired through his ancestors was probably stolen from the original inhabitants of this country. I say to the honourable gentleman that his statement represents the real view of this Government. The Minister in the Senate and his spokesman in this House, if asked tomorrow, 'What is your position, your policy on land rights?', will say: 'This Government supports

All governments in Australia in recent times,
including the Fraser Government, have been prepared to use Commonwealth powers to provide
funds, to create Aboriginal institutions and fund
them, to create land councils and to recognise the demands for self-determination in almost every

them'. But of course, the real voice, the real power
behind this Government, as everybody knows, lies with the bushwackers from the National Country
Party. As far as they are concerned, land rights mean land grab, as the honourable member opposite said. We reject that view.

area-health, housing, legal aid and education. To
that extent there is a consensus between the major . political parties in the Commonwealth. While it
may be good enough for the Prime Minister to
handle the difficult and awkward questions that
may have flowed from Commonwealth heads of state at the Commonwealth Heads of Govern-
ment Meeting by saying, 'Of course advances have
been made', it would be absurd and, I believe,
very dangerous for this Parliament and the Aus-
tralian people to continue to endeavour to deal with the claims that are now coming from Abor-
iginal communities throughout Australia by say-
ing: 'Because some advances have been made we
do not really have to face up to what is increasingly to become a major problem'.

What is more important is that ultimately the people of Australia have said to the Commonwealth: 'It is your constitutional responsibility to protect your institutions. It is your constitutional responsibility to legislate to give some justice to that most depressed section of the Australian
community'. Therefore, this Parliament and this Government have to come to terms with the atti-
tudes of the Bjelke-Petersens and the Courts of the world. The fact of the matter is that, for all the talk of the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs-he
says he is negotiating; this Government says it has been negotiating with the Bjelke-Petersen Government on this affair for as long as I can remember-on every issue what we have had to deal with is the rights of the Aboriginal people in

This will not be merely an issue of justice in dealing with an important section of our community which has a terrible history of social depri-

terms of land which they have traditionally occupied since the birth of this nation.
Mr Mildren-And still occupy.

vation; it will become a major political issue by . Mr HOLDING-They still occupy that land.

virtue of the fact that other nations are now startBut on every occasion, confronted with the in-

ing to judge Australia in terms of our attitude transigence of the Bjelke-Petersen Government or

towards our Aboriginal people. It will become a the Court Government, the Commonwealth

major issue because no Commonwealth GovernGovernment has backed down. A government

ment can ultimately espouse concepts such as selfcannot go on demeaning its own policies, aban-

determination at one level, create a whole range doning its own constitutional rights, in the face of

of Aboriginal institutions to service those conthat level of confrontation without doing a great

cepts and then allow those concepts to be continudeal of damage to the whole fabric, the whole

ously eroded by State governments which reject structure, of Commonwealth-State relations.

those concepts at their level. The day of reckoning When one looks at the sorts of statements made

must come. The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs by the Premier of Queensland one sees that he

(Senator Peter Baume) will say quite openly in does not recognise the land rights of Aboriginals.

the Senate: 'Yes, of course it is the policy of this His view of Aboriginal history in Australia is

Government to support Aboriginal land rights'. about as perverse as are his plans for the future of

2248 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Aboriginals. To quote the honourable gentleman, as he was quoted in July this year, he has a policy that will make Aboriginal Queenslanders 'just like myself'. That is a thought that must appal any decent Australian. Even the average white fellow would not want to be like Bjelke-Petersen. But such is the view of that man, such is the view of this Government, that what they are about is to refuse to recognise, to impede at every point, to oppose at every point, policies which this Government has a moral duty to stand up for, to fight for and to implement.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (10.22)-1 wish to make a statement on a matter relating to one of the departments considered by Estimates Committee B, namely, the Department of Social Security. It is a matter which has concerned me for a great deal of time and I am sure that when I draw the House's attention to it in this the International Year of Disabled Persons it may well strike other honourable members of the House in much the same way. I see nothing particularly remarkable in the estimates for that Department in the sense that I see no particular change from pre-existing policies that perhaps reflect our attitudes towards disabled people in our society, probably not only in our society but also in many other societies. I really do not see much point in actually directing attention to specific sums of money outlined in the estimates papers. I merely say that they reflect an attitude towards the disabled which does not really consider the disabled people to be citizens of this country along with the rest of us, having the normal rights for development of whatever talents they have.
I would say that all political parties, my party not excepted, reflect the kinds of attitudes which are inherent in our society. We have an attitude towards the disabled which states, I think, that it is reasonable for them to be objects of charity. In fact, very many very fine, well-intentioned people in our society join charitable organisations and conduct all sorts of campaigns to raise money to provide a start on some kind of treatment for disabled people. That is a very archaic way of looking at the matter. It is an attitude that probably was left over not just from the nineteenth century but from previous centuries, an attitude whereby we see disabled peoples as being not whole, not complete human beings; as being people who are simply there for us to dispense our charity on; as being perhaps to some degree people who are to be tolerated. In our society we even go so far as to say that it is reasonable to distinguish between

them and others before they are born and, if possible, to make it convenient for other people by dispensing with their lives. I find that totally abhorrent and I find it abhorrent that people, after
they are born, are treated as less than human beings.

I believe that the policies reflected in the state-

ments by the Government in the estimates for the

Department of Social Security indicate that we

have a long way to go. We are approaching the

eleventh hour of the International Year of Dis-

abled Persons and I do not believe that this society

has indicated very much enlightenment on this

issue. I do not believe that our society has

indicated that we have gone very far at all along

the road towards recognising the rights of those

people to be considered fully as citizens of our so-

ciety. I would like to see all parties accept the

proposition that from here on in disabled people

should not be given rights that are just equal to

those of other people-that would not be

sufficient in terms of funding-but that we should

take affirmative action and use positive discrimi-

nation in their favour. The able-bodied people of

this country must bear the brunt of the financial

sacrifice necessary to ensure that disabled people

are given the maximum opportunity to develop

their talents. No matter how meagre those talents

might be, those people must be given the right to

fulfil their lives.

.

I know that many people are stunted in their
development through charity. Charity is not bad, but it does not get to the root of problems; it
leaves the problems unsolved. Many people-
people with cerebral palsy, for instance-are treated as children all of their days by well-
intentioned people in our society. I look forward
to the time when all parties of this nation demon-
strate a maturity of understanding of what it is to be disabled and demonstrate a will to overcome
the problems that confront the disabled. I hoped
that in this Year of Disabled Persons a start might
have been made in that direction. I think that is a
charge to the conscience of members of this House, to the conscience of the parliamentary
leaders of our society. It is not good enough that
we just reflect the attitudes that are still held in our society. Parliamentary leaders should take the
lead and demonstrate a will of their own to pro-
vide a decent world, a world of true equality for
the disabled persons of our society.

Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (10.29)-1 would like to respond very
briefly to a couple of the points raised by honour-
able members during this debate on the Estimates. I point out that, in relation to the Community
Health Program, the Commonwealth really does

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2249

have more faith in the State governments than obviously the Opposition in this place has.
Dr Klugman-Ours is variable.
Mr MacKELLAR-I agree with the honourable member; his is very variable. We believe that voters in the States have the opportunity to make known their points of view and impress them upon the various State governments, regardless of the political complexion of those governments. If the States agree with the points of view in relation to the worth and benefit of community health centres, as put forward this evening by various speakers, particularly from the Opposition side, there is nothing to stop those governments, regardless of their political complexion, from organising their community health programs in that way.
We are seeking to bring about a situation in which the allocation of scarce resources is such that the taxpayer is put upon to the least possible extent. If there is a divided responsibility on these matters there is a very great tendency, the Government believes, for an untoward amount being required from the individual taxpayer. If we move in the direction in which the Government has moved we believe that there is more likelihood that efficient administration and efficient use of total community resources will be the final effect. This has been demonstrated very conclusively already in New South Wales. Shortly after the Commonwealth put aside the hospital cost sharing arrangement with the State governments, the New South Wales Government found that doctors were taking advantage of the situation by undertaking weekend work in a particular public hospital in New South Wales to the extent that the taxpayers were being required to pay an extraordinary amount of money to fund the work of those doctors in what can be described only as moonlighting activities during the weekends. What we seek to achieve is high quality health care services, available at the least possible cost, so that individuals in the community will not have to face an ever-increasing burden, in tax or in any other payment, for high quality health care.

which only those committees which are performing a role of continuing significance remain in
existence. That is not to say for a moment that some of those committees which have been dis-
banded did not perform a useful function. All we
are saying is that all those committees which have been set up-there is a multitude of them-over the years have to expect that their need for exist-
ence will be assessed. This does not mean for one moment, of course, that new committees will not
be brought into existence if a very real need is seen for their existence. We are saying that there is no
guarantee of future existence if that existence is not necessary and if it is not seen to be essential
for the performance of the duties assigned to the
committees or for the performance of efficient government. I think this approach can only be
supported by the Opposition. What we are about is to make sure that the people of Australia are
not unduly burdened through the income taxes, or
any other taxes, they are required to pay simply because a committee has been in existence for
some years.

Finally, the honourable member for Bonython

(Dr Blewett), who is in the chamber tonight, has

been saying for a while that I said something in

October of last year about access to hospitals. He

did not say-I do not think this does him the

credit which a person of his stated intellectual

background should seek-that the report of the

Jamison Committee, which was still meeting at

that time, on efficiency in the administration of

hospitals was not available to the Government.

When I made the statement to which the honour-

able member referred I made it in all good faith. I

stand by that statement. Obviously, when the re-

port of the Jamison Committee of Inquiry was

available ment had

to the Government the opportunity of

arnevdieWtheIngGoitvearnnd-

assessing the position a new situation arose. To try

to ascribe unworthy motives to me in relation to

that matter does not reflect badly on me; it

reflects rather badly on the honourable member.

Question resolved in the affirmative.

The matter of committees has been raised tonight. I do not make any apologies at all for
reviewing the activities of all committees which
come within my portfolio. It is a stated and obvious fact that the Government intends to keep its
expenditure in this area, as in all other areas, to an
absolute minimum consistent with the needs of the community, and to apply a continuing moni-
toring approach to the committees which are still
in existence. We seek to bring about a situation in

Consideration of Report of Estimates CommitteeC
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The question before the House is:
That the following proposed expenditure be agreed to:
Department of the Capital Territory Proposed expenditure, $99,255,000

2250 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Department of Science and Technology Proposed expenditure, $408,171,000
Department of Home Affairs and Enyironment Proposed expenditure, $139,411,000
Department of Communications Proposed expenditure, $286,576,000

than two feet. In fact, because of the root of a tree, the graders used to make a bit of a detour. The nugget was underneath that root, and was not discovered until three gentlemen decided one day to go out with their geiger counters. When testing them, they got a reaction. With a bit of digging out
popped this nugget of 2561 oz.

Department of Administratiye Senices
Proposed expenditure, $430,349,000
Attorney-General's Department
Proposed expenditure, $125,039,000
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (10.37)-1 will address my remarks to the estimates for the Department of Home Affairs and Environment. I suggest that more of the funding for that Department should be spent on some of the great heritage of this country. The Department spends $139m, but very little is put aside to guarantee to future Australians the preservation of some of our greatest assets and treasures..For the last I ~O years Australia has been the biggest producer m the world of gold nuggets, but the number of nuggets still in this country is absolutely nil. The last nugget found of any importance was the Hand of Faith nugget. However, at present the fam~us Hand of Faith nugget is the only large AustralIan nugget in the world which has survived the smelting furnace. The Hand of Faith nugget, whic.h was found at Kingower in Victoria, is today on display at the Gold Nugget Casino in Las Vegas in the United States. This nugget was sold to overseas interests for $USlm. Today it is insured for $US3m.
Checking with the Bureau of Mineral Resources, I found that the largest nugget in its collection of gold nuggets is a one-ounce New Guinea nugget. The largest Australian nugget is a five-pennyweight nugget. In Victoria $Im has been spent on building a gold museum at Ballarat, and the largest nugget there weighs 22 ounces. I present in the Parliament this evening a nugget that was discovered very recently in Victoria, and I will put it on the desk so that all members in the House can see that it resembles the map of Australia. It is a very important find. The nugget weighs 256t oz, which makes it the second largest nugget discovered in this country since 1908. It would be one of the largest nuggets in the world. It should be in a museum if this country can see its way Clear to make sure that this nugget stays in this country. Its approximate value is $200,000. I urge this Government, on behalf of the people of Australia, to see that this nugget stays here.
It was discovered on the side of the road just six inches down. For many years the local grader drivers had been driving past it, missing it by less

Many nuggets have been discovered but none of them survive in this country. The reason that I brought this nugget into this Parliament tonight is to emphasise that these things do not come ve~y easily. They are very rare. I urge those W?o are m a position to make decisions to see that thiS nu~~t does not leave Australia. It would be a shame If It had to go to Las Vegas like the last decent nugget that was found in this country in order for people to see it. We want to keep the nugget here in Australia. Three gentlemen were involved in discovering this nugget. One was keen to see that the money was collected. We would not blame anybody who was rather poor to w.ant to.h~ve a sha~e of the funds as quickly as possible. Slttmg on thiS desk at the moment is a nugget worth three nice homes. The other two gentlemen are fairly keen to see that the nugget does not get melted down. They have made arrangements to take the other gentleman's share over to. see that t~e nugget .stays in Australia. The nugget IS here. It IS AustralIan. I believe that it should stay Australian. I urge everyone to support that approach.
Debate interrupted.
PRIVILEGE
Mr SPEAKER-Earlier this evening the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) raised as a matter of privilege a photograph of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and radiotelevision commentator Ken Begg which appeared as an advertisement for Ch~nnel 7 national news. This photograph was publIshed on page 18 off the Australian Financial ~eview of 13 October 1981. I have had an opportumty to examine the advertisement. In my view the advertisement does not come under any head of privilege, nor does it come within the recognised categories of contempt. A prima facie case of breach of privilege has, therefore, not been established. I say t? the honourable member for Prospect that, even If a prima facie case of breach of privilege did exist, the matter could not have been entitled to be given precedence over other business as the m~t ter had not been raised at the earliest opportumty as required by Standing Order 96.
Dr Klugman-Could I speak to this by leave or some other method?

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATlYES 2251

Mr SPEAKER-I have given a ruling on the matter.
Dr Klugman-I think, Mr Speaker, you have misinterpreted what I put to the House. What I put was that this was a question of privilege because the Prime Minister assured us this afternoon that he was not involved in this advertisement. Therefore, it is a person impersonating the Prime Minister who appears in this particular advertisement. Therefore, a question of privilege does aris-e. The, Prime Minister, just before dinner~lhat is. -why it is the 'earliest opportunity ......assu.red us that he had been approached nn,trnumber of occasions to participate in advertisements but chad refused on all occasions.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is arguing an issue that does not relate to privilege.
APPROP~IATlON BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Consideration of'Report of Estimates CommitteeC
Debate resumed.
Mr IAN CAMERON (Maranoa) (10.45)-1 address my comments to the estimates oUhe Department .of Communications. Before doing so I must say-that'tdonot have any gold nuggets to present. (~snhatmaybe the nugget displayed by the honoutablem6lTiber for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) go to the Breakfast Creek mob in Queensland because I think the honourable member for Griffith (Mr Humphreys) and his crew need the money more than the National Party does in Queensland. If honourable members are really looking for something to do with that nugget they could melt' it down and spend it on telephones in Maranoa. That is one of the subjects on which I wish to addres~ the Parliament tonight.
The Government' is allocating a tremendous amount of money towards satellite communications. An-atlloU'nt of $52,000 is being allocated to the satellite receiving antenna experimental program. Of the outlay of $4.28m, quite a deal is going to my electorate. Some is being speiU on Taroom, Wandoan and Injune. Texas and other places are listed for connection to the remote area television service. I commend the Government for the efforts that it. has made in this regard. Of course, we are alI'hoping that the satellite, will be launched on time. An enormous amount is to be spent on that project. It is hoped that those people who do not get radio and television services will be able to do so. It. is hoped also that with the work the Department orCommunications will be doing we Will get the costs of an aerial down to something that we can all afford to pay; that is,

between $500 and $1,000. Of course, it is hoped also that when the new satellite goes up it will be of much greater power-in the range of 50 amps compared to the present five-amp power. This will give us much greater coverage and much better reception.
I move to the allocation to radio. I made it quite clear to the Estimates Committee that the Department had overlooked some of the areas needing a radio station, particularly Charleville. I continue to make a plea to those concerned in the Department and the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) to look at allocating some funds to Charleville. It is still a fact of life that today in some areas of Australia one still cannot hear the radio. I think that is an indictment of the way in which some of the funds are being spent. We are pushing ahead with new types of video transmission, et cetera, and still there are people who cannot get radio reception. I think this is
something that we have to look at very closely.
Some of my constituents have complained bitterly that they co\lld not receive test cricket. It is important to remember that the Government is spending $2m to purchase the rights to televise test cricket in the coming 12 months. The other item of interest that I note is that we are spending $21m on symphony orchestras in Australia in the coming financial year. We are to spend $100m on television, $50m on radio and $20m on orchestras. I think it is important, when we sit down to lis~en to good music, to remember that it is costing us a great deal of money.
I turn my attention to the telephone system operated by Telecom Australia. I must congratulate the Minister. He has managed to get the acting general manager, Mr Pollock, to come to the House tomorrow night to meet with those of us who are interested in some of the problems involved with Telecom. The main criticism I have concerns the cost of telephone connections. Most people who live in Australia do not realise what it is costing some of those who live outside the 16kilometre circle to have a subscriber trunk dialling phone conn'ected. This is not a new service; it iS,an old service that is being converted. It is a fact-I have figures here that I received from the Department today-that 5,793,000 people are subscribers to Telecom. Of those, 61,000 people still operate from manual exchanges. There are only 8,000 of the five million outside the circle. So it means that five million people in Australia have had an STD phone connected at no cost and that 8,000 people who live in the more isolated areas of Australia are being asked to contribute to the capital cost of a connection. I argue that that is grossly unjust.

2252 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Mr Leo McLeay-What have you done about Yarrabah?
Mr IAN CAMERON-I am trying to do a lot about getting phones to people throughout the isolated areas of Australia. I believed that they should be entitled to get them for the same price as those who live in the metropolitan areas of Australia.
Mr Leo McLeay-They should do that.
Mr IAN CAMERON-I agree with the honourable member. Honourable members opposite should give me some support.
Mr Scott-We will, but do not destroy Telecom.
Mr IAN CAMERON-I am not destroying Telecom. I think Telecom is a grand organisation. I have no complaint about the services it gives. The only complaint that I have-it is probably a machinery complaint-is that we are being asked to pay too much for converting our phones. We have been asked already to contribute to these private lines and private telephones, and Telecom now wants to charge us $320 a kiliometre. It is a fact of life that in some areas it is costing people on average up to $20,000, and it can cost up to $60,000 to have a phone connected. I ask honourable members on both sides of the House whether that is just. There is nothing just about that. I believe and hope that Telecom and the Minister will look at this problem. I hope that tomorrow night, after we have had discussions with Mr Pollock and he has reported to his commissioners, some changes can be made in that regard.
I have said that the cost of having a telephone installed is very high for many people. It is important that we work to have this situation rectified. We have to give full marks to Telecom. It is developing the digital radio concentrator which will allow people to be connected over much longer hauls of up to 200 kilometres. But again Telecom is looking to charge us at the same rate of $320 a kilometre to have a digital radio phone connected. We have approximately 1,000 spots on the domestic satellite so that isolated people can be connected. I am not too sure whether they will be charged per kilometre for use of that satellite. It is an awful long way from here to the satellite and back. That is something that Telecom will have to consider. Presently Telecom is charging $320 a kilom6tre, so we would be looking at an amount of a few million dollars to connect a phone to Birdsville. I hope that Telecom will.1ook at this problem and that, at least within the next financial year, it will be sorted out.

Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (10.54)-1 want to comment on a matter which arises under the estimates for the Department of Home Affairs and Environment. The matter was raised by my colleague, the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) a short time ago. In fact, the matter is difficult to forget. I refer, of course, to the presentation to the House, in words only, I might add, of a gold nugget of 256+ ounces which was found recently at Wedderburn. It may seem slightly humourous, of course, because we do not have these things happen every day in this House. But the nugget really does conjure up in our minds many colourful and romatic images of our history and the glory of the golden triangle in which it was found. Of course, I refer to central Victoria which has one of the most romantic golden histories of this country. I feel that it would be a great shame if that nugget were lost, simply melted down or sold on the international market or into private
hands.
This is something which I guess we will not see very often from now on because there must be a diminishing number of such beautiful pieces of nature left. It would be a great tragedy if this nugget were not deposited in an appropriate place. I hope that the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) is listening to this speech and sees fit to give this matter very serious consideration because this matter concerns our national heritage in the same way that the beautiful South West Tasmania does. I think a most appropriate place for this nugget to be kept would be in the very fine and unique gold museum at Ballarat. If honourable members have never seen this museum I exhort them to come to Ballarat and have a look at it. It is situated over the road from Sovereign Hill in Ballarat which is a very fine tourist resort. I suggest that this museum has all of the appropriate security features. It has a very fine collection of gold.
Mr Barry Jones-Magnificently presented,
too.
Mr MILDREN-It is magnificently presented, as the honourable member for Lalor said. It is a world-class museum. I do not think anybody who has been there would suggest that I am exaggerating whatsoever. The largest nugget in that mu-
seum is one of 22 ounces. I guess that is nothing to sneeze at but the nugget about which I am speaking represents one of the more imaginative parts of our golden history. Over 1,100 nuggets larger than this one have been found in Victoria but this will be the largest nugget extant in Victoria and, in fact, in Australia. Surely it would be a great tragedy and a great indictment of our sense of national pride if the Parliament of this nation

Requestsfor detailed information

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2253

were to allow to pass by this great opportunity to have one of these nuggets kept in perpetuity. So I exhort the Government in one of its more altruistic frames of mind-
Mr Humphreys-The Minister is there.
Mr MILDREN-Yes, I exhort the Minister to make every effort to ensure that this nugget is retained in Australia and that it is placed in an appropriate place such as the magnificent gold museum at Ballarat, which is in the heartland of the most romantic part of Australia's golden history.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hodgman) adjourned.
House adjourned at 10.59 p.m.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 20 October 1981, pursuant to statute:
Australian Capital Territory Supreme Court Act-Rules of Court-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 2'16.
Lands Acquisition Act-Lands acquired forPipeline purposes, Cootamundra, New South Wales. Telecommunications purposes, Gladstone, Tasmania. Statements (2) of lands acquired by agreement authorized
under sub-section 7 (I). Trade Commissioners Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules
1981, No. 295.
REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library
Dr Blewett to ask Mr Speaker:
(I) Who made the decision to acquire a telefacsimile machine for communication between the Parliamentary Library's Parliament House and former Hotel Kurrajong locations.
(2) What was the cost of this machine.
(3) Was the decision to buy the machine based on proposals to relocate (a) all or (b) part of the Legislative Research Service at the former Hotel Kurrajong; if not, on what was it based.
(4) Where are the 2 terminals for the machine located in Parliament House and the former Hotel Kurrajong.
(5) Who is responsible for the actual operation of the machine at each end.
(6) What is the estimated (a) number of sheets which will be transmitted each year and (b) annual operating cost, inclusive of materials, maintenance and staff time.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
Mr John Brown to ask Mr Speaker:

(l) Is it a fact that (a) 104 full-time staff ceased duty in the Parliamentary Library over the 3-year period 1975-77 and (b) the corresponding figure for the years 1978-80 was 148; if so, does this represent an increase of 42%.
(2) On what date did Mr Harold Gibson' Weir (a) commence duty as a 2nd Division Officer of the Parliamentary Libraryand (b) become Parliamentary Librarian.
(3) Does the increase in separations since 1978 pose a serious problem for the Library in terms of maintenance of efficiency and morale.
(4) What reasons are there for the accelerated separation rate.
(5) What action (a) has been taken and (b) is planned to reduce the separation rate to a more tolerable level.

Department of the Parliamentary Library
Mrs Child to ask Mr Speaker:
(I) Was finance provided in the 1981-82 Budget for the acquisition of an additional word-processing unit for the Parliamentary Library.
" (2) Who made the decision to acquire this unit and what is itscosl.
(3) Which (a) section and (b) officers of the Library will be using this unit.
(4) What studies have been carried out to ensure the (a) cost-efficiency of the unit for its purpose and (b) safety of the unit for the operators.
(5) Who carried out these studies and when were they carried out.
(6) Have the persons intended to operate the'unit been (a) advised of this intention, (b) consulted as to (i) the practicality of the unit's use in the intended area and (ii) the unit's sal'ety; if not, why not.

Department of the Parliamentary Library
Dr Everingham to ask Mr Speaker:
When will he provide answers to the Requests for Detailed Information made by me on 5 June 1981 and by the honourable Members for La Trobe on 2 June 1981 and Lalor on I and 28 April 1981, relating to the Parliamentary Library.

Parliamentary Departments

Mr Kerin to ask Mr Speaker:

(l) Who instituted the practice of including i'n answers to Requests for Detailed Information relating to the administration of the Parliamentary Departments the amount of time taken to prepare the answer.

(2) Is the intent of this practice to discourage the asking of these questions; if not, what is the reason for (his practice.

(3) Will he issue an instruction that the practice is (0 cease;

if not, why not.

'

(4) Is it the right of all Members to ask Requests for

Detailed Information without reservation or exception; if not,

why not.

.

2254 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Department of Primary Industry: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 464)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the International Year of Disabled Persons. what special arrangements has his Department made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by his Department; if so, what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in his Department.
Mr Nixon-I refer the honourable member to the reply to Question No. 458 given by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, which appeared on page 3564 of the weekly Hansard of 10 June 1981.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 476)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the International Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has his Department made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by his Department; ifso, what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in his Department.
Mr' Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 458 given by Mr Fife as Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal Affairs, which appeared at pages 3564-3566 of the weekly Hansard of 10June 1981.
I shall shortly be releasing a Press release on IYDP initiatives undertaken by the Department and I shall send a copy to the honourable member.
North West Cape: DSCS Terminals
(Question No. 492)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of his Press statement (70/78 of 16 May 1978) that the US Defence Satellite Communication System (DSCS) station ground terminal, designated AN/TSC-54, was to be replaced by a new terminal, designated AN/MSC-6I, will he (a) give the designations of all the

DSCS terminals ever installed at North West Cape, the dates of installation, and if terminals have been withdrawn, the
dates of withdrawal and (b) designate the specific satellite systems of which the terminals at North West Cape are and/or were a part (eg. lOSCS, Transit, DSCS II, FLTSATCOM,
etc.).

(2) What is the current schedule for completion of the installation of the new AN /MSC-61 DSCS terminal.

(3) Is the AN/TSC-54 DSCS terminal at North West Cape
to be phased out when the AN/MSC-61 terminal becomes operational.

(4) What is the current schedule for the installation of the AN/FSC-78 DSCS terminal at Watsonia, Victoria.

(5) Was a new set of radio frequencies for a DSCS terminal at Woomera,SA, registered with the International Telecommunications Union in Geneva in 1978; if so, will a third antenna/radome be installed at Nurrungar.

(6) Has his attention been drawn to a testimony before the

United States of America House of Representatives Com-

mittee on Appropriations, during hearings on military con-

struction appropriations for 1980, to the effect that a contract

was awarded in 1979 for $US242,OOO to construct an addition

to the Satellite Communications System, Woomera Air

Station, SA.

.

(7) If so, (a) was this contract awarded to USA or Australian companies, (b) what opportunities to bid for this con-
tract were given to Australian companies and (c) does this contract relate to the construction of a new defence satellite
ground~erminal at Nurrungar.

(8) Is there a DSCS terminal at the Joint Defence Space Research Facility, Pine Gap, NT; ifso, what is the designation
of this terminal and when was it installed.

(9) Has his attention been drawn to a speech by USA
Major-General William R. Yost, Director of Space Systems and Command, Control and Communication, presented to a
meeting of the US Air Force Association at Dunedin, Florida, on 28 February 1980, in which he stated that a DSCS Phase I,
satellite is still operational and is used periodically, when within view, by Australia.

(10) If so, (a) what is the full formal designation of this sat-
ellite and what are its orbital parameters, (b) is this satellite used by Australia for Australian defence communications and (c) where in Australia is the ground station that tracks and
communicates with this satellite.

(II) Does Australia use parts of the DSCS system other than the satellite referred to in part (9) for Australian defence
communications; ifso, to what extent.

(12) Is it a fact that Australian use of the DSCS system for
defence communications could be increased to the point where Australian defence organisations would not need to use the impending Australian domestic communications satellite.

(13) Is he able to state whether it is general practice for the US Congress and private bodies such as the US Air Force As-
sociation to be informed of operational details and developments with respect to the DSCS system before Members of the Australian Parliament and the Australian public.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) and (b) The only DSCS terminals to have been in-
stalled at North West Cape are two AN/TSC-54 terminals. The first of these was installed in 1967 and was removed from

Answers to Questions

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2255

the Station in 1974. The second terminal was installed in 1977 and commenced operating in 1978. This terminal is planned to be replaced by an ANjGSC-39V( I) terminal (formerly designated ANjMSC-61).
The only other satellite terminal installed at the Station is an ANjSSR-I receive-only terminal. This receives Heet broadcast information from the FLTSATCOM system.
(2) The installation of the ANjGSC 39V (I) terminal is scheduled to be completed in August 1982.
(2) Yes.
(4) The terminal itself has been installed, and testing of it is due to begin in June 1981.
(5) Yes, but this did not involve the installation of a third antennajradome at Nurrungar.
(6) Yes.
(7) (a) (b) and (c) The contract for construction associated with the installation of certain equipment at the Joint Defence Space Communications Station at Nurrungar, was awarded to Jennings Industries Ltd, an Australian company, in May 1979. Tenders were advertised by the Department of Housing and Construction. The equipment was not a defence satellite ground terminal.
(8) There are two DSCS terminals at the Joint Defence Space Research Facility. An SCT-35 terminal was installed in 1973 and an SCT-8 terminal in 1980.
(9) Yes.
(10) (a) (b) and (c) The DSCS I satellite referred to is designated satellite 93-26. The satellite occupies a subsynchronous, near equatorial orbit at an altitude of approximately 33,800 kilometres. Australia made use of the satellite for experimental, but not for operational, purposes between 1976 and 1978. The ground station at Salisbury, South Australia operated by the Advance Engineering Laboratory of the Defence Science and Technology Organisation was used to communicate with the satellite.
(II) No, although since April 1980 Australia has conducted experiments using a DSCS II satellite for research and development purposes. For the sake of completeness, I would add that the satellite terminal referred to in part (4) above wi II access the DSCS [[ system.
(12) Plans for Australian defence use of the DSCS II system provide for such use to be complementary to planned Australian use of the domestic communications satellite.
(13) As the DSCS system is a US system it is natural that operational details and developments with respect to the system should be made publicly available when the US so desires. I refer the honourable member to the Annual Reports of the Weapons Research Establishment for the years 1973-77 and the Advanced Engineering Laboratory for 1978-79 which contain information on the experiments conducted by the Advanced Engineering Laboratory's Satellite Communications Experimental Facility.
Superannuation Liability of Statutory Authorities.under the Minister for Primary
Industry
(Question No. 1316)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What statutory authorities under the Minister's aegis have liabilities to the Commonwealth by way of employer contributions for superannunation which have not been paid or have not yet been determined.
(2) If these contributions have not been paid, what are the amounts involved and how and when is payment to be made.

(3) If the contributions have not yet been determined, when is the liability expected to be assessed and how is payment expected to be made.
Mr Nixon-I refer the honourable member to the reply to Question 1320 given by the Minister representing the Minister for Finance which appeared in the Hansard of 10 September 1981, pages 1265 to 1266.
Overseas Travel: Department ofImmigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1457)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 18 officers travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) The cost of this travel was $67,830.
It should be noted that these figures relate only to shortterm missions from Australia in accordance with the approved overseas visits program plus travel to Papua New Guinea (one officer) and New Zealand (three officers). The cost for travel of 2 officers in the latter category was mainly met by a grant from the Australia New Zealand Foundation. The numbers and cost do not include movements associated with overseas postings or movements between overseas posts by officers based overseas.
Alleged Fraud in Telecom, Brisbane Branch
(Question No. 2451)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
Has his attention been drawn to an article in the Brisbane Sunday Mail Septimus Column of 31 May 198 J concerning an alleged fraud in the Brisbane branch of Telecom and investigations which are expected to lead to criminal charges; if so, is there any substance in the allegations and are senior executives of Telecom involved.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Following information received in February 1981, investi: gations were undertaken by Telecom into alleged discrepancies in the handling of case advances in a unit of Telecom in Brisbane.
As a result of those investigations, 17 officers were charged with offences under (he Telecommunications Act 1975 and By-taws under that Act. Twelve of the officers charged have resigned and five have lodged appeals.
The officers concerned occupied positions ranging from Clerical Assistant, Grade I, to Executive Officer (Class 7) within the Telcommunications Commission.
Non-government Schools
(Question No. 2511)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:

2256 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) Which non-government schools have received payments from the Commonwealth Government in each year since 1975-76.
(2) What religious or other affiliation does each school have.
(3) Which of the schools have been new schools.
(4) What was the number of students enrolled each year in each case.
(5) What was the total number of staff (a) teaching and (b) non-teaching personnel each year in each case.
(6) What proportion of the Commonwealth payments in each case were used each year for (a) recurrent purposes on (i) teaching staff, (ii) non-teaching staff and (iii) other recurrent resources and (b) capital purposes for (i) new classrooms, (ii) new science facilities, (iii) new libraries, (iv) new playing fields, (v) new swimming pools, (vi) new gymnasiums, (vii) other new sporting facilities, (viii) alterations or additions to existing teaching facilities and (ix) alterations and additions to non-teaching facilities.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Funds for non-government schools' made available under programs administered by the Schools Commission for the years 1975 to 1979 are set out in the reports which were tabled in the House of Representatives on the dates listed below:

Act/Year

Date tabled

States Grants (Schools) Act 1972-1974-75 Report
States Grants (Schools) Act 1973-1975 Report . . . .
States Grants (Schools) Act 1973-1976 Report . . .
States Grants (Schools) Act 1972-1975-76 Report
States Grants (Schools) Act 1972-1976-77 Report
States Grants (Schools) Act 1976
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Actl976 . . . . . . .
States Grants (Schools) Act 1972-1977-78 Report
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act.l977 . . . . . . . . .
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1978 .

25 May 1976 I December 1976 6 September 1977 2 November 1977 23 February 1978 23 February 1978 24 November 1978 21 August 1979 20 November 1979 26 November 1978

The Report relating to payments to schools in 1980 is expected to be tabled during the Budget 1981 Sittings of this House. The Report for 1981 will not be tabled until next year.
(2), (3) and (4) This information is not readily available.
(5) Non-government schools provide personnel information to the Commonwealth Schools Commission under an agreement that it will not be provided to any other person or orgimisation on an individual school basis. It is not possible, therefore, to provide details of teaching or non-teaching staff for individual non-government schools.
(6) (a) The accountability requirements in relation to Commonwealth Government recurrent grants ensure that the funds are used in the provision of recurrent resources. States Grants (Schools Assistance) Acts do not require nongovernment schools and systems to provide details of the subcategories of recurrent expenditure to which recurrent grants are applied. The information requested by the honourable

member in respect of Commonwealth payments for recurrent purposes is therefore not available.
(6) (b) Commonwealth grants for building and equipment projects in non-government schools are determined in each case on the basis of the need of the school concerned for financial assistance with a project assessment as having educational priority. Accordingly, a project is generally financed from a variety of sources such as Commonwealth contribution, school contribution, and school borrowings. Individual projects are commonly undertaken to provide a range of school facilities such as general classrooms, specialist learning areas, student and staff amenities and administration facilities and it is not possible to specify, from the final project cost, the expenditure on each element. However, certain data concerning the provision of facilities for new enrolments and existing enrolments, and the occurrences of particular types of facilities in projects supported by the Commonwealth, is given in the Report for the Triennium 19.82-84 (Chapter 12) by the Commonwealth Schools Commission, which I tabled in this House on 26 March 1981 and I direct the honourable member's attention to that Report.
Working Holiday-makers: Reciprocal Agreements
(Question No. 2636)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) What visas are issued for working holiday-makers in Australia.
(2) With what countries does AustraJia have reciprocal agreements regarding working holiday-makers.
(3) For how long are the visas issued to working holidaymakers (a) valid and (b) renewable.
(4) How many persons were admitted to Australia on working holidays each since 1978 and during the period I January to 9 June 1981 and from what countries were they admitted.
(5) How many working holiday-makers (a) applied for and (b) were granted permanent residency in Australia during the same period and from what countries did each come.
(6) Is it possible to change a visitor visa to a working holiday-maker's visa; if so, how many persons from each country have changed their visas in this way.
(7) Before granting permanent resident status to these persons, are they required to meet normal immigration requirements.
(8) How many Australian citizens were overseas and in what countries were they as working holiday-makers during the same period.
(9) What are the main occupational categories that working holiday-makers in Australia occupied in the period men: tioned in part (4).
(10) Was the money earned by working holiday-makers deposited in Australia or was it taken out of the country.
(II) If it was taken out of Australia, what sum was taken during the same period.
(12) What is the age limit for working holiday-makers.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I )Temporary residence visa.
(2) Australia has reciprocal formal agreements with only Japan and the Netherlands. Since 1975 young persons from

Answers to Questions

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2257

the United Kingdom, Ireland and Canada have been permitted to enter Australia for working holidays and young Australians have enjoyed the opportunity to undertake a working holiday in those countries without formal reciprocal agreements being concluded.
(3) (a) For the period of the visit up to 12 months. (b) For up to 12 months.
(4) See Table A
(5) Although statistics of persons holding temporary resident visas who were granted permanent residence are available, it is not possible to identify working holiday makers separately.
(6) No.
(7) Yes.
(8) The granting of visas to Australian citizens is a function of overseas representatives of other Governments in Australia.
Some Governments are able to specifically identify the number of persons accepted as working holiday-makers but this is not universal. For example the United Kingdom Home Office advises that working holiday makers are the majority amongst those described in official statistics as 'others given leave to enter for twelve months'.
Visa issue figures to Australian working holiday makers supplied by the representatives of other Governments including the approximate figures supplied by the UK are:

Country visited

1981
(Jan.1978 1979 1980 May)

United Kingdom Canada Japan Netherlands

11,300 8,600 9,600

na

850

908

862

458

103

15

Total

12,150 9,508 10,462

na-not yet available. (9)-( II) Not known.
(12) 18-25 years but in special circumstances under 30 years.
Table A APPRIVALS FOR WORKING HOLIDAY

Country of citizenship

1978

1979

1980

1981
(Jan.June)

UK and Ireland Canada Netherlands Japan Other

4234 1269
37

5974 1781
38

4070 1056
122 316 -21

Total

*3,910 5,540 7,793 5,585

* Not recorded by individual countries of citizenship.
Note: Includes re-entry cases.

Immigration
(Question No. 2640)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:

(I) How many persons selected under NUMAS had relatives in Australia in the categories of (a) spouse, (b) child, (c)
parent, (d) fiance, (e) sibling, (0 grandchild, (g) grand-
parent, (h) cousin, (j) uncle/aunt, (k) nephew/niece, (I) other relative and (m) friend or associate, for each year since 1979 and during the period I January to 9 June 1981 and from . what countries was each selected.
(2) How many refugees allowed into Australia had relatives in the same categories as those referred to in part (I) since 1979 and from what countries did these refugees arrive for the same period.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The statistics requested have been prepared from a special computer run. The inFormation is very extensive and would require a great deal of retyping and space to be incorporated in Hansard. To avoid this I am providing the honourable member with a copy of the 'computer printout.
Defence Network
(Question No. 2685)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) Has his allention been drawn to a report in the Australian of 9 June 1981, that a 'smart' defence network is planned to provide automatic launching of early-warning missiles and counter-missile interception within 10 minutes of a Soviet missile launch against the United States of America.
(2) If so, does the system provide For distinguishing decoy missiles from real threats, and possible use of a global positioning satellite system.
(3) Can he say whether this development will increase the temptation to the United Sta,tes to use a preemptive strike if gravely threatened and increase the priority for counterallack by the Soviet Union on communications facilities in Australia.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. The system to which the article appears to refer is the Survivable Optical Forward Acquisition System (SOFAS), which is at present being studied by the US Department of Defense. It is not a planned program at this stage.
(2) The ability qf SOFAS to distinguish decoys from real missiles is the subject of studies and experiments being conducted by the US Ballistic Missile Defense organization. The US does not anticipate that SOFAS will use the NAVSTAR Global Positioning System.
(3) The system would, if deployed, be a defensive early warning system and would support US strategic retaliatory rather than first strike capabilities.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs: Language Needs of Departmental Personnel
(Question No. 2727)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Immi~ gration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Has any survey been made of the language needs of his Department's personnel who are working overseas or in Australia with non-native Englis.h speakers.
(2) What preference is given in his Department's recruitment policy to persons with skills in languages other than English.

2258 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Yes. The needs of personnel working overseas in nonEnglish speaking countries were the subject of a detailed
internal review in 1977. More recently, these needs were the subject of an inter-departmental committee review co-
ordinated by the Department of Foreign Affairs in 1980 to which this Department contributed. A survey is currently
underway of the language capabilities of departmental officers.

(2) A number of people are recruited to the Department for specialist positions by virtue of the language proficiency required for particular positions e.g. Bi-lingual Information Instructors, Telephone Interpreters and Translators.

More generally, the Department ensures that vacancies
advertised in the Commonwealth Gazette and internally indicate that a second language is desirable whenever it is appropriate to do so.

Proficiency in a foreign language is a factor taken into account in the selection of officers for overseas service. Officers who lack appropriate language skills are given
language training prior to their departure in accordance with language priorities and the available funds.

An opportunity to continue language training is available on arrival at many overseas posts.

Opportunities for officers in Australia to upgrade their
or language skills are available under normal Public Service ar-
rangements. Where communication with residents Australia is required in a language other than in English the Department makes use of:

officers who are native speakers of the language

officers who are in receipt of the Language Proficiency

Allowance

.

officers' employed by the Telephone Interpreter Service of the Department.

Disabled Persons: Sales Tax Exemptions

(Question No. 2744)

Mr Beazley asked the Minister, representing

the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on

19 August 1981:

'

(I) Is it a fact that disabled persons currently receive a sales tax exemption on the purchase of new cars.

(i).Has the Government given consideration to the possi-
bility of providing assistance in some form for the modification of cars owned by disabled persons; if so, will the Government provide this assistance.

(3) Is it a fact that only 29 bonuses payable to sheltered workshops to encourage placement of disabled persons in the outside workforce have been paid.

(4) What action has been undertaken by the Government
to'encourage Sheltered workshops to participate in the bonus scheme,

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) Yes, provided they meet the conditions of the Sales Tax
(Exemptions and Classifications) Act. This Act authorises
exemption from sales tax on the purchase of a new motor vehicle (and spare parts) for use in the transportation to and
from gainful employment of a person who has lost the use of one or both legs to such an extent that he or she is unable to use public transport. tv!y Department's responsibility under

the legislation is confined to determining medical eligibility for

the concession,

'

(2) My Department already makes provision for modifying cars for use by disabled people who are accepted for rehabilitation assistance through the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service. In 1980-81, the Service provided 104 driving aids for its disabled clients at a total cost of $12,069, '

(3) 29 training fees each of $500 were paid to sheltered workshops in the financial year 1980-81. cJ I training fees
have been paid since the introduction of the scheme in 1970.

(4) One of the conditions of Commonwealth assistance to sheltered workshops is that the workshop management must follow a positive policy of encouraging disabled employees to graduate to outside employment, wherever possible,

Electoral Division of La Trobe: Post Offices
(Question No. 2745)
Mr Milton asked the Ministe,r for,Communications, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) How many post offices are provided for the use of the residents of the Electoral Division of La Trobe,
(2) How many of these are unofficial post offices,
(3) Will he give an undertaking that postal services in this Electoral Division will not be further reduced by the reduction of any existing post offices to unofficial status,
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 27
(2) 22
(3) Australia Post is obliged under the Postal Services Act to continually review its network of post offices (official and non-official) to ensure that the facilities and services provided best meet the reasonable needs of the community, having regard to economy and efficiency, Under this program, areas may be identified where new post offices are necessary while other post offices may be identi fied for closure, where the level of business transacted is not sufficient to justify retention, It is Australia Post's objective, in the latter circumstances, to ensure that reasonable alternative arrangements are made for communities affected by the withdrawal of a post office.

Social Welfare
(Question No. 2769)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) What is the position of social security beneficiaries and pensioners who make a gift of income producing savings or other sources of income to their sons, daughters and other persons, thereby depriving themselves of extra income for the purpose of obtaining fringe benefits.
(2) What is the position of a social security pensioner or beneficiary who (a) receives a gift of $100 in a raffle or (b) wins money at the races, or in some other game of chance, and receives winnings, on a relatively regular basis,
(3) What is the minimum sum of extra income which must be reported to the Department of Social Security,
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Answers to Questions

20 October 1981 REPRESENTATlVES 2259

(I) Under the existing provisions of the Social Services Act, where a pensioner directly or indirectly deprives himself of income in order to qualify For a pension or a higher rate of pension, the Director-General may deem the amount forgone to be income for pension purposes. As announced in the Budget Speech, the Government intends to strengthen these provisions and to expand their scope.
Under the proposed provisions, iF a pensioner were to reduce his income in order to qualiFy for a pension, a higher rate ,of pension, fringe benefits or assistance under the new health care arrangements through classification as a person with low income, an appropriate amount of income may be deemed to be received and taken into account for income test purposes.
(2) In general, money received in the circumstances described would not be treated as income for pension purposes; however, where the person was a professional punter or gambier, For examplea bookmaker, his winnings would be taken into account.
(3) In the case of unemployment and sickness benefit a beneficiary is required to notify the Department immediately upon receipt of income at a weekly rate higher than the weekly rate last notified.
A person in receipt of supplementary assistance is required to notify the Department within 14 days if, in any period of two consecutive weeks, his average weeky rate of income is higher than the weekly rate last notified by him.
For pension and supporting parent's benefit purposes, a person is required to notify the Department within 14 days if, in any 8 consecutive weeks, his average weekly rate of income (including that of his spouse), exceeds $20 a week ($34.50 a week if married) and is higher than the rate last specified by him.
Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Industrial Relations
(Question No. 2849)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and'(c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Acting Prime Minister to Question No. 2839 (Hansard, 22 September 1981, pages 1647-1648).
Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 2859)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 26 August t981:

(I) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called For Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) & (2) I refer the honourable member to the answer to question number 2839 provided by the Prime Minister, Hansard page 1647,22 September 1981.
The Prices Justification Tribunal was abolished as a result of the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space
(Question No. 2884)
Mr Peacock asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
, Is Australia continuing to give consideration to becoming a party to the Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space; iF so, what stage have the deliberations reached; iF not, why not.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Australia is continuing to give consideration to becoming a party to the Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space. Consultations among the interested Australian authorities are being held to this end. It is intended that the Department of Science and Technology should be the Department with operational responsibility For Australian activities under the Convention.
Telecom Australia: Apprentices
(Question No. 2887)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Communi- .cations, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
(I) Has any State branch of Telecom Australia advised him during 1981 that they had vacancies for 16 apprentices in the diesel fitters and mechanics field; iFso, in which branch.
(2) Has Telecom since been instructed that these vacancies should not be advertised For 1982; iF so, For what reason.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) No. I am advised however that Telecom policy this financial year is to no longer take on apprentices if t~~ artisan skills but to engage all apprentices with the higher level of telecommunication related skills. During the current financial year 126 additionai apprentices will be employed bringing the total number of apprentices employed by Telecom to 1726.


