House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 124, 1981 Thursday, 27 August 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 843

Thursday, 27 August 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the NHS and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles, Mrs Child, Mr Duffy, Mr Hawke, Mr Holding, Dr Jenkins, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Kent, Mr Milton, Dr Theophanous and Mr Willis.
Petitions received.
Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child, Mrs Darling, Dr Everingham, Mr Mountford and Mr Wallis..
Petitions received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits

for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howe, Mr Les Johnson and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament Assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. Because of an anomaly in tax rates a single income familypays nearly $IOa week more tax than a dual income family earniflg the same total amount.
2. Family allowances established in 1976 have not been increased since then, yet over the same period living costs have increased by nearly 60 per cent.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that:
The Parliament should act-
I. To restore the lost value of family allowances and to index them for future price rises.
2. To increase the spouce rebates from $830 to $1,342 per year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman and Mr Shipton.
Petitions received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament Assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a matter or urgency:
I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health -system and cuts to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and suffering in our community by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Shipton and Mr Street.
Petitions received.

844 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Petitions

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament Assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. The proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. The proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a "poor risk" (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. In regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. The proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.
5. The proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid I980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or for any category of students.
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students.
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced. (iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary
Assistance. (v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are
rationalised be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(I) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-c1assified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-c1assification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.

(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Institute of Early Childhood Development
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Represehtatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the Federal Government should reconsider the proposal to merge the Institute of Early Childhood Development with another tertiary institution.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Institute of Early Childhood Development be allowed to continue operating as an independent and autonomous institution providing specialised skills and unique training applicable to the development of children aged 0-6 years.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That retired low and middle income superannuants are disadvantaged by:
(a) inflation (b) double taxation (c) low means test for the aged pension.
(2) That the age pension means test has not been increased since September 1972.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will increase the means test for all pensions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Health Care Services: Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we strongly condemn any action taken by the Federal Government which will lead to the destruction of the Free Hospital and Medical Services of the State of Queensland.
And your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Parliament reject the proposed health cost sharing arrangements between the Commonwealth and the State governments and guarantee the maintenance of the present scheme whereby all Queenslanders who wish to avail themselves of these services may do so.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.

Petitions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 845

Petition received.
Sales Tax
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the pressure of cheap imports, the high cost of new homes and the effects of the credit squeeze are seriously weakening consumer demand for furniture.
That an increase in sales tax for furniture and mattresses would be a complete disaster for the furniture industry causing widespread bankruptcy and unemployment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will not proceed with an increase on sales tax for furniture and mattresses.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That serious concern has been generated in the migrant community following the Government's endorsement of decisions of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government Functions to:
Restrict the role of the Commonwealth in Adult Migrant and Refugee Education Program to the arrangement and co-ordination only of such programs and relinquish responsibility for the conduct of individual programs,
Terminate some and rationalise other information services provided by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,
Terminate forthwith the migrant assisted passage scheme,
Transfer the translation/interpreting services to private agencies or withdrawn altogether,
Reduce hours of operation of the telephone interpreting service,
Discontinue production of the national groups directory, Reduce overseas based staff associated with the recruitment and selection of persons for permanent settlement in Australia, which will result in greater delays in the processing of immigration applications.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government respect the needs of Australia's migrants and accordingly rescind these decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Department of Social Security
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That concern has been generated by the Government's decision to cut back expenditure in the Department ofSQcial Security as outlined in the report of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government Functions, ie, by reducing the rate of expansion of regional offices of the Department of Social Security, confining social work activity to that relating to departmental functions, scaling down the Social Welfare Division of the Department.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Post Office Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government's decision to provide brochures and information on government programs at post offices around Australia highlights further the Government's excessive use of public money for its own propaganda machine;
That the listing of this decision by the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government functions under the heading "Post Offices as agents for Government activities" strongly implies the use of Postal Officers as Government Servants, not Public Servants.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will not abuse its authority in this way and will reverse this decision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That womens refuges have provided on a 24 hour a day basis, emergency accommodation, child care, financial aid, moral support, legal advice and guidance in dealing with government departments for over 13,000 women and children in the past .year, at a cost to the National Government substantially less than $4 million which is half the cost of holding the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Australia later this year.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will not proceed with its stated intention to withdraw from funding women's refuges and pass this responsibility to ill-equipped and sometimes unsympathetic state Governments and will increase Federal funding levels for women's refuges.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Legal Aid
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliamem assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That serious concern has been generated in the Australian community following the announcement of the government's decision to :
Attempt to transfer responsibility for legal aid, presently providc;d by the Australia Legal Aid Office, to the States of New South Wales, Tasmania and the Government of the Northern Territory.

846 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Petitions

Abandon the new buildings for the Institute of Criminology and apply pressure to State Governments to contribute six-sevenths of all costs of the institute.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the government will rescind these regressive decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Aus'- tralian Heritage Commission and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the Island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently approved sand mining on Moreton Island against the advice of conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Federal Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products mined from Moreton Island.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Postal Services

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of
Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That concern has been generated in the Australian com-
munity following the announcement of the Government's decisions to:

Not proceed with the establishment of a broadcasting in-

formation office.

Abolish the Australia Post courier service to reduce,com-

petition with private companies.

Maintain a postal express service for postal times only

Use private contractors for mail cartage.

Pave the way for delivery of mail by private companies

by examining Australia Post's powers with the staled view

to their reduction or elimination.

"

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Govern-
ment will rescind these regressive and provocative decisions.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Darling.

Petition received.

Family Day Care Centres
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned express our concern over the sale of the Belconnen Mall and its likely detrimental effects on the provision of community facilities imd community services in Belconnen.

In particular we seek assurances that the Occasional Care Centre and other services of the Belconnen Community Service including Family Day Care will be able to continue operating from the Mall and continue to receive the same real level of assistance and support in the future.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that this petition be considered.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFry.
Petition received.

Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That' funding in the area of childrens services, which has been reduced by almost 40% in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And Further, that annual budget allocations in the area of childrens services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
A[ld your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free.
Petition received.

Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be abl~ to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other business expenses.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman.
Petition received.

Health Care Services

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully 'requests that the Federal Government ensures that:

(a) The Federal Government honours its 1975 election promise to maintain Medibank-a free, universal health in-
surancescheme, and institute methods of improving hospital and health services for the Australian people.

(b) The Comrnunity Health Program remains a Federal Government responsibility, with increased funding and
expansion of services.

(c) The means-testing and the re-introduction of charges at
public hospitals will severely disadvantage low and middle income groups, and should be abandoned.

(d) Every effort be made by the Federal Government to ensure that the health care needs and demands of the Australian community are met.

Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable

Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the

Parliament assembled will give earnest consideration to this

mos't vital matter.

'

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by MrHowe.

Petition received.

Petitions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 847

Automotive Industry: Tariff Protection
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia being employed in the automotive products industry respectful\y showeth:
I. That the automotive products industry is vital to the livelihood and wel\ being of many thousands of Australian workers and their families.
2. That if imported automotive products are al\owed to flow freely into the Australian market it wi\l deprive over I00,000 work~rs in the industry of their work opportunities.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound wi\l ever pray.
by Mr Howe.
Petition received.
Natio~al Roads Construction Program
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectful\y showeth that your petitioners believe that:
The decision to subject the National Roads Construction program to the tendering system wi\l:
(a) Threaten the jobs of 790 workers employed in 17 main road depots in New South Wales;
(b) impair the day labour system and undermine the capacity of Departments of Main Roads to train staff and test road construction concepts;
(c) have a disruptive effect on the employment opportlJnities available in small communities;
(d) reduce the flexibility of the Department of Main Roads to handle emergencies caused by flood or fires;
(e) ultimately increase the cost of road construction at taxpayers' expense.
YOur petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government withdraw this disruptive proposal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound wi\l ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectful\y showeth that:
(a) Present income tax laws are unfair to single income families.
(b) All marriages should be recognized as partnerships by allowing partners to divide their joint income for tax purposes.
(c) The family, which is the natural and fundamental group unit of society, should be an economic unit in tax laws.
(d) Children are Australia's future and theirindividual care by a parent at home should not be discouraged by extra tax.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament wi\l-
Reform income tax laws to al\ow the joint income of husband and wife to be equally divided between them for taxation purposes.
And your petitioners a'in duty bound wi\l ever pray.

by Sir Phillip Lynch.
Petition received.
Medibank
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectful\y showeth:
That many Australians wi\l be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especial\y the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programmes wi\l be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives wi\l take al\ steps necessary to reintroduce Medibank.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the Federal Government's decision to abolish the Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS). There is no other agency to give the support and care which the participants of the Community Youth Support Scheme require. Transitional Education schemes are suitable for only a smal\ number of the unemployed.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament allocate the necessary funds to enable the continuation of the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
South-west Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament Assembled: This humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectful\y showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro-electric developments in South-West Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern.
Your petitioners therefore humbly cal\ upon the Federal Parliament not to al\ocate funds or al\ow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the South-West of Tasmania but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. This is a national issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resulting from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.

848 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Petitions

Rights of Disabled
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in'the Parliament Assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The failure of the Federal Government to seek information from the census re disabled people-i.e. partial. or total disability-to enable for adequate planning of, and for, types of services needed by disabled people to be undertaken.
2. The failure of the Federal Government to lead the way in employment of disabled people by employing a greater number of such people within the Commonwealth Public Service-note the small number currently employed within the Service.
3. The wastage of the Federal Government funds perpetuating large, bureaucratic institutions and organisations where there are often few disabled people on their boards and little emphasis is placed on consumer participation in decision making.
4. The failure of the Federal Government to encourage independence of disabled people, or to develop 'normalised' support systems-attendant care.
5. The failure of the Federal Government to provide 'noninstitutionalised' specialised accommodation for those people who would not be able to benefit from, or cope with attendant care.
6. Failure by the Federal Government to alter, or create a 'disability' allowance means test free for all disabled peoplethis would assist with necessary equipment and mobility costs.
7. Failure to provide a national compensation scheme thus saving time and enabling people to be automatically covered in the event of a disability.
8. Failure by the Federal Government to abolish tariffs on all equipment available to the disabled-e.g., Optacon.
9. Mismanagement of FederaII.Y.D.P. Funds-e.g., nonreceipt by some States of funds through unresolved negotiations.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that immediate action be taken to remedy the above stated and that the Federal Government recognise that disabled people are citizens who should have equal rights.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Pornographic Publications
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament Assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we the undersigned, having great concern at the way in which children are now being used in the production of pornography, call upon the Government to introduce immediate legislation:
I. To prevent the sexual exploitation of children by way of photography for commercial purposes;
2. To penalise parents/guardians who knowingly allow their children to be used in the production of such pornographic or obscene material depicting children;
3. To make specifically illegal the importation, publication, distribution and sale of such pornographic childabuse material in any form whatsoever such as magazines, novels, papers or films;

4. To take immediate police action to confiscate and de- : stroy all child pornography in Australia and urgent ap' propriate legal action against all those involved or profiting from this sordid exploitation of children.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will protect all children and immediately prohibit pornographic child-abuse materials, publications or films.
And yourpetitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sinclair.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Pafliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth our gravest concern about the detrimental effects of the abolition of the Engineering School at Deakin University. We respectfully showeth that:
(I) The Engineering School at the Gordon Institute of Technology and now at Deakin University has been serving the Geelong region and Australia for the past 60 years. It would be the waste of a great service to the Australian public.
(2) The phasing out of Deakin University Engineering by not enrolling students in 1982 will greatly disadvantage students and lecturers via unemployment and curriculum difficulties.
(3) Geelong, being the largest industrial centre in Victoria outside Melbourne, will be disadvantaged industrially through the lack oflocally trained engineers.
(4) Geelong students will have to put up with the inconvenience of travelling to other Victorian Education Centres for studies, as well as the expense of such a move.
(5) The Geelong community and small industries will be disadvantaged through the Deakin University research and consulting engineers (D.U.R.A.C.) not being able to function.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you reverse the decision to abolish the Engineering School at Deakin University immediately for Australia's and Geelong's sake.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Street.
Petition received.
Aboriginal Community College
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of the Community of South Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That despite Ministerial and Departmental assurances, decisions regarding the future of the Aboriginal Community College are being made without consultation with the Aboriginal community;
2. That the Minister's decision has the effect of either closing the College or placing it under the control of the Department of Further Education, a decision which goes against the expressed wishes of both the College and the wider Aboriginal community;
3. That the effect of such a move will be to remove effective control over the College out of the hands of the Aboriginal community and into the hands of a non-Aboriginal bureaucracy;
4. That the Minister has failed to recognize the real achievements of the College in the past nine years in spite of the handicaps of uncertain funding and. poor facilities and has

Petitions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 849

failed to take cognisance of the high regard which Aboriginal people have for their College;
5. That such a decision goes against the recommendations of the team who evaluated the College in 1980;
6. Moreover, that such a decision belies the expressed policy of the Australian Government, of self-management for Aboriginal people.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will:
(I) Consult fully with both the College community and the wider Aboriginal community before reaching any decision on the future of the College.
(2) Follow the expressed wishes of the Aboriginal community when making such a decision.
(3) Ensure that control over the College remains in the hands of the Aboriginal community.
(4) Make the policy of self'management for Aboriginal people a reality.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.

Tertiary Education

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.

The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Dundas respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for post-graduate re-
searchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Edu-
cation, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimen,tal effect on cultural, scientific and tech-
nical research and development within the Australian
community.

Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Govern-

ment will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for

post-graduate study.

'

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Ruddock.

Petition received.

FOREIGN COMPANIES: ADVERTISING
Notice of Motion
Mr HYDE (Moore)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House asserts that while foreign companies such as General Motors are welcome to seek profit in Australia they are not welcome to publish blatantly dishonest advertisements seek.ing to influence Australia's democratic process in favour of less competitive and more favoured positions for themselves.

FOOD PURITY STANDARDS: SALMONELLA POISONING
Notice of Motion
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House(I) notes with alarm that 350 cases of salmonella poison-
ing have been reported in Australia over, the last month, including most regrettably the death of a seven-year-old child;

(2) condemns the failure of the Government to implement the recommendations of the National Health and Medical Research Council for a national code of food purity standards with legislative power to demand recall of dangerous products, and
(3) demands that the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs use his undoubted powers under section 62 of the Trade Practices Act to implement legislation immediately to minimise any similar outbreaks of such disease.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
SALES TAX: SEAT BELTS AND OTHER CAR SAFETY DEVICES
Dr KLUGMAN-My question is directed to the Minister for Transport. I ask him, when answering it, to use the knowledge that he gained when he was Minister for Health. How can a responsible government impose a 17+ per cent sales tax on seat belts and, other car safety devices for children and adults, but not increase excise duty on alcoholic beverages and tobacco products?
Mr HOWARD-The question clearly relates to revenue matters in the' last Budget. The honourable gentleman completely neglects to acknowledge the undoubted fact that already in this country extremely high levels of excise duty are imposed on alcohol and tobacco. His question implies that in some way, as a result of the Budget, the items that he mentioned are more heavily taxed than are beer or cigarettes. That is a palpable nonsense. The level of taxation through the excise on those items is already extremely heavy. Whenever there is a broadening of the taxation base, it is inevitable that taxation will apply to items in respect of which in isolation a case can be made for no taxation at all to be applied. Many components which make up the safety features of a motor vehicle are already subject to the general rate of taxation which has now been increased from 15 per cent to 17t per cent. In that respect the analogy with the seat belts is entirely relevant.
HOUSING COMMISSION OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Mr COLEMAN-Has the attention of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs been drawn to a report in the Sydney Morning Herald on 24 August 1981 which states that Vietnamese and Aborigines will not be permittedd to be tenants of proposed Housing Commission homes in the Menai area of New South Wales and that tenancies will be reserved for 'decent white Anglo"Saxon Australians'? Will the Minister refer this matter to the Commissioner for Community Relations, Mr Grassby, for appropriate action?

850 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr Leo McLeay-I take a point of order. Surely the honourable member would have read the retraction the Sydney Morning Herald had to print the day after it printed that rather slanderous article.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. Mr MACPHEE-I was alarmed when the honourable member for Wentworth brought my attention to that item. I was no less alarmed by the so-called retraction because Mr Keane, the Labor member concerned, stated that, while he had said those words, he did not expect the media to take him seriously. He said that the remarks were meant to be ironical. I do not believe that any other member of parliament, State of Federal, has chosen to make light of a matter which recently has been the subject of some criticism from what. one might call an uninformed right wing fringe in Australia. It does not help when a member of parliament, even in an ironical fashion, makes such remarks. It is not surprising that the Sydney Morning Herald reported the matter in the way it did. I do not doubt that the Commissioner for Community Relations has looked into the matter. He certainly never hesitates to look into other utterances. Whether the remarks were made ironically or not, it is a matter of concern that they were made at all by a member of parliament. We all know how greatly enriched our society has been by the diverse flow of migration. I hope that in future other members will take an educative role-Mr Les Johnson-I raise a point of order. As the member for the area concerned, it is impossible for me to suffer this hypocrisy because the Liberal Party was organising against Housing Commission homes-Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member will resume his seat. There is no point of order. Mr Les Johnson-Because it thought that the Aboriginal people-Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Hughes. Mr Les Johnson-Would be brought into that area. Mr SPEAKER-I name the honourable member for Hughes. Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-Mr Speaker, I move:
That the honourable member ror Hughes be suspended rrom the service or the House.
Mr SPEAKER-The question is that the motion be agreed to.

Mr Lionel Bowen-Let me make some comments in the interests of harmony in the House. This is a most contentious matter. Mr Speaker, whilst you are entitled to say that the honourable member did not pay attention to your request, the matter raised presents some difficulty in his area. It is well known that the public interest in that area has been against any Housing Commission development. I ask that you give the honourable member a chance to withdraw on the basis of the circumstances which are associated with what you regard as some reflection on your authority.
Mr SPEAKER-It is not a reflection on my authority; it is a reflection on the dignity of the House when a member continues to speak when I ask him to resume his seat. The honourable member for Hughes has an opportunity to use the forms of the House to make any statement he .wishes to make in accordance with the forms of the House. He rose in his place and then continued to speak without the call, masquerading his remarks as a point of order.
Mr Lionel Bowen-Without cavilling about the matter, the honourable member for Hughes is the Opposition Whip, a man who abides by the forms of this House. This matter has been raised because of the other political events happening in New South Wales. It has very little to do with what we would normally discuss in this House concerning Federal authority. In the circumstances, Mr Speaker, I think that unless we can get an intelligent appraisal of the underlying political situation--
Mr Baume-Isn't Grassby a Federal authority?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Macarthur will remain silent.
Mr Lionel Bowen-lam talking about matters in this House. Mr Speaker, the Opposition seeks your leniency and requests that the matter of the honourable member being named and removed from the House not be proceeded with.
Mr SPEAKER-The reason I named the honourable gentleman was that I asked him to resume his seat. I warned him. Despite that warning, he continued. I had no hesitation then in naming him. If the honourable gentleman wishes to indicate to me that he will comply with the forms of the House and apologise to the House,-not to me-I will withdraw the naming of the honourable gentleman. .
Question put:
That the honourable member ror Hughes be suspended rrom the service or the House.
The House divided.

Questions Without Notice

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 851

(MrSpeaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

65

Noes

48

Majority

17

AYES
Adermann, A. E. AQthOQY. J. D. Baume, M. E. Bimey. R.J. Bourchier.J. W. Bradfield. J. M. Braithwaite. R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Drummond, P. H. Edwards,R R. Falconer. P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. Giles, G. O'H. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W.

Jull,D.F. KaUer,R.C. Killen, D.J. Lloyd, B. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller) Mclean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Miller, P.e. Moorc,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. PorterI J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. SinclairI I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street,A.A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C. W. Viner, R.I. While, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES

Armitage, J. L.
Beazley, K. e. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G.
Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J.
Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling. E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy.M.J. Free,R.V.
Fry.K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howc,B.L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford,C. J. Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R.

Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Kealing,P.J.
Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les
Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scou, J. L. Theophanous, A. C.
Uren, T.
Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.
Young,M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for
Hughes is suspended from the service of. the House for 24 hours.

The honourable member for Hughes thereupon withdrewfrom the chamber.

Mr SPEAKER-I call the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.
Mr MACPHEE-Mr Speaker, the point which I had reached--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr -SPEAKER-Order! I ask the House to come to order. The House will not proceed with its business until I felfl confident that the honourable member who has the call, in this case the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, can be heard. The Minister will draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr MACPHEE-Mr Speaker, the point I was making when the interruption occurred was simply that most members of parliament recognise the educative role they have when it comes to those people who do not have direct contact with migrants and who do not recognise the great and enriching contribution which migrants have mad~. I do not believe it is appropriate for the honourable member concerned, Mr Keane, as chairman of a committee on Aboriginal affairs and with migrants in his electorate, to make jokes on an occasion .such as this. I trust that the Commissioner for Community Relations will look into the matter. I trust that the New South Wales authorities will make it clear that Housing Commission accommodation will be available to all, regardless of their ethnic origin.
.AUSTRALIAN CONSUL-GENERAL IN LOS ANGELES
Mr ARMITAGE-My question is directed to the. Minister for Foreign Affairs. In view of the serious charges made in the South Australian Parliament on Tuesday concerning the financial and business affairs of the Australian Consul-General in Los Angeles, the former Liberal Minister, John McLeay, can the Minister assure the Parliament that Mr McLeay fully informed him of all his business affairs before the appointment was made? If he did not do so, will he ask the Consul General to step down until a corporate affairs inquiry is held, as Australia is already in enough trouble with its exports to America?
Mr STREET-I have no reason to believe that the .consul-General in Los Angeles should be asked to step down.
HEALTH FUNDING ARRANGEMENTS
Mr BAUME-I ask the Minister for Health whether changes in Federal health funding arrangements have been responsible for the cut in real terms in health spending in New South Wales as revealed in last night's State Budget.

852 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr MacKELLAR-I am grateful to the honourable gentleman for his question because it gives me the chance to point out to the House and to the people, particularly those in-New South Wales, that in facta great fraud is being attempted in New South Wales by the State Government. In fact, the amount of money available to the State Government in relation to health services could rise by as much as $51m this year. I point out to the House and the people of New South Wales that that money can be spent as the State Government wishes. It has complete flexibility and autonomy in relation to the spending of that extra health revenue. I am conscious of the attempted fraud in New South Wales because, as the honourable member for Macarthur has pointed out on other occasions, there does seem to be a discrepancy in the funding which is going to various hospitals in that State. In the attempt at rationalisation of hospital beds there does seem to be an emphasis, as I mentioned earlier, on picking on hospitals in non-Labor electorates at the expense of hospitals which in terms of priority of attention should have come first. I guess some aspects of this can be understood when one takes into consideration the fact that the New South Wales Premier appointed a special adviser on health matters over the head of his own Minister for Health.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I remind the Minister that he must remain relevant to the question. The question concerns Budget funds, not the appointment by the Premier of New South Wales of any officer.
Mr MacKELLAR-I acknowlege that point, Mr Speaker. The point I intended to make was that the appointment of the special adviser to the Premier's Department was in relation to the funds which were to be made available for health services in New South Wales. I can understand the New South Wales Minister for Health being'very upset about that appointment.
Mr Charles Jones-I raise a point of order. Mr Speaker, this morning you have suspended from the chamber the Opposition Whip for disregarding your order. I ask you to apply a similar measure to the Minister for Health. .
Mr SPEAKER-I have asked the Minister to remain relevant to the question. He is attempting to explain the relevance but I do not. see the relevance. I ask him to proceed with an answer to the question as asked.
Mr MacKELLAR-Let me sum up by saying that there is no substance in the statements by spokesmen for the New South Wales Government-whether they be attached to the

Premier's Department or the Health Commission of New South Wales-that the health funds have been reduced. In fact, additional resources are available to that State as a result of the new health arrangements put in place by the Commonwealth.
HEALTH FUNDING ARRANGEMENTS
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I wish to ask the Minister for Health a supplementary question arising from the answer just given. Is it a fact that his Government has altered the cost sharing arrangements in respect of health so that, whereas previously the Commonwealth was prepared to pay half the costs, on this occasion it has decided that New South Wales will have to accept a block grant? Is it not a fact that if the Commonwealth Government had honoured its commitments to New South Wales in accordance with previous arrangements New South Wales would have received $lOOm more in this financial year for health alone?
Mr MacKELLAR-The specific answer is that the Commonwealth's contributions are not being made available in block grants. They are part of the recurrent tax sharing arrangements. They are being specified for the health area but they are part of the general tax sharing arrangements. As I have pointed out to the House on a number of occasions, the basis for the funding is last year's expenditure, escalated by 10 per cent, minus a proportion of the increased revenue which will become available to the States resulting from the imposition of charges agreed to and put in place by the New South Wales Government.
DONATIONS TO LIBERAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA
Mr HYDE-I refer the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs to reports headlined 'P.M. warned no donations if tariffs cut'. Can he assure the House that in no way will the Government's decisions be influenced by such threats?
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! This morning the House is subject to considerable noise. I ask honourable members on Opposition benches to ce.ase their constant interjections.
Mr MOORE-I am not aware of the article and I did not read it this morning. I do not think any Government Minister sets out to read articles relating to donations to the party when making a decision on Government policy. I am quite sure that that is the case.
Mr Young-Rubbish!

Questions Without Notice

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 853

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat. This morning the noise is intolerable to the Parliament. I ask honourable members to maintain their dignity and thereby contribute to the dignity of the House. It is not necessary for loud noise to follow a statement of the kind the Minister has just made.
Mr MOORE-I assure the House and particularly the honourable member for Moore that decisions made by the Government in relation to tariff items will be made in the national interest. The Government will not be dictated to by various interest groups.
Mr Hayden-What about the Bowen report?
Mr Young-Show us your receipt book.
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the Leader of the Opposition and members on the Opposition benches that I do not propose to proceed with Question Time if it is constantly interrupted by loud noise.
Mr MOORE-In conclusion, I think it is worthwhile pointing out that people support the Liberal and National Country parties because they represent private enterprise and stand very strongly against the socialists.
NUCLEAR WEAPONS: ISRAEL
Mr HOWE-Is the Minister for Foreign Affairs aware of a report in the Jerusalem Post of 19 to 25 July this year to the effect that the United Nations Secretary General, Dr Waldheim, is expected to release soon a report on a study by an expert panel which concludes that Israel can make nuclear weapons? Is he aware that the report apparently concludes that Israel may already have enough weapons-grade material to make several bombs comparable with the one dropped on Nagasaki in 1945 and that the Dimona reactor alone could have produced enough weaponsgrade plutonium for 10 to 15 weapons? Is he aware that Israel has refused to ratify the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and has refused to allow international inspection of its facilities, including inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency? In view of the. extraordinarily grave implications these circumstances create for the Middle East and, indeed, for international stability, can the Foreign Minister state whether the Government has undertaken or will undertake initiatives aimed at encouraging Israel to ratify the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and allow appropriate international agency inspection of its nuclear facilities?
Mr STREET-I am not aware of the particular report to which the honourable gentleman has referred but, as is well known, Australia is a

strong supporter of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and urges all countries to ratify it and observe its provisions. I agree that the spread of nuclear weapons, whether to Israel or any other country in the region, has grave implications for the future of peace in the Middle East. Australia would certainly urge all countries in the area to become signatories to the NPT.
SALES TAX
Mr IAN CAMERON-I ask the Treasurer why he and his Department have held until I January 1982 the levelling of the 2t per cent sales tax on those items that have not previously been taxed, yet imposed on the night of 18 August an increase to 17t per cent on grain trucks, some mining vehicles, aircraft for private use and oils and greases which were not taxed previously, without any notice to people engaged in the purchase of these items. I ask whether he will allow that section which is asked to pay the 17t per cent sales tax to wait until 1 January 1982 before it is levied.
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Treasurer.
Mr Ian Cameron-Mr Speaker, I also extend an invitation to honourable members of the Labor Opposition to attend the Birdsville races to allow them to cool down.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Maranoa will resume his seat.
Mr HOWARD-As I think I have explained to the House on a couple of occasions, three categories of sales tax changes arise out of the Budget. The first category of sales tax changes involves an increase of 2t per cent in the three previous rates, the second batch of changes involves the removal of a series of anomalies and inconsistencies in the application of the sales tax law and the third category involves a broadening of the sales tax base to bring to sales tax for the first time a wide range of items. All these matters will be the subject of debate in this House later today. I simply say to the honourable gentleman that I have had some research carried out by the Australian Taxation Office as to the practice in these areas. I can assure him and the House that on every previous occasion-I refer in particular to 1967 and 1968 when a significant number of anomaly changes of a similar kind to the ones to which the honourable gentleman refers were undertaken-those changes were imposed with effect from the night of the announcement. It has been the long-standing practice when increases in rates occur for those increases to date from the time the increase is announced. That has been the invariable practice with incre~es in excise. It has been the invariable practice with variations in the

854 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Questions Without'Notice

rate of sales tax. Equally, if we are changing the sales tax law to bring to taxation for the first time items which are similar in character to other items that are subject to sales tax, it is not unreasonable that they also operate from the date of announcement.
In respect of the particular example to which the honourable gentleman referred, people who are at present not paying taxation on trucks used for the particular purposes, as I think the honourable gentleman will acknowledge, enjoy an advantage over people who have to pay the 17t per cent and have always had to pay it since tax has applied to those trucks which are used for other purposes. It is because of that inconsistency, that advantage-that privilege perhaps-that the Government decided to make the change. The methodology adopted has been the methodology adopted by successive governments and successive Treasurers of both political persuasions in announcing and implementing sales taxes and indirect tax changes.
TAX AVOIDANCE
Mr MOUNTFORD-I draw the Treasurer's attention to an advertisement which has appeared in recent issues of the Australian Financial Review and in which Mr Peter Clyne invites readers to purchase six tape cassettes at a cost of $150: Such cassettes explain to people how they can dodge new laws on tax avoidance, how not to pay tax until 1995, how to cheat legally, et cetera. I ask the Treasurer whether he will approve of the Commissioner of Taxation acquiring a set of the cassettes so as to learn more of the ineffectiveness of the Government's tax avoidance measures and then to be in a better position to advise the Government on effective counter-measures. Alternatively, will the Treasurer agree to the commissioning of a taxation consultant to advise the Commissioner of Taxation as to the best means of ensuring that future legislation is effective so that it places an equal obligation on all Australians to pay a fair share of tax?
Mr HOWARD-I do not believe the Commissioner of Taxation needs either my authority or my encouragement to obtain a copy of those tapes or, indeed, otherwise find out what advice Mr Clyne and others are giving in this area. I will make two other comments. Firstly, the Government has already-I think it is important that this is said in response to the honourable gentleman's question-sought the advice of people beyond the Australian Taxation Office in drafting tax avoidance legislation. In fact, the new section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act was the result of the

combined efforts of the Taxation Office, the Commonwealth Atttorney-General's Department, two extremely competent and highly regarded private legal counsel who are expert in taxation matters as well as the Government's own taxation advisory committee which is chaired by the managing partner of one of the mostrep~table accounting firms in Australia and includes a number of lawyers and accountants who. are highly regarded throughout Australia for their technical competence in the taxation area.
I am very pleased to say to the honourable member for Banks that in every respect his suggestion about the Commissioner of Taxation engaging people in the private sector who are expert in these matters has already been anticipated and taken up. I believe that the new taxation laws will be effective. That is a view which is shared very widely throughout legal and accounting circles. I believe the new section 260 or Part IVA will be effective. I share totally the view of the honourable member for Banks that it is desirable and in the interests of tax equity that the section be effective. That is why the Government went to such extraordinary pains to work out an effective section and why we consulted and engaged a wide variety of views, not just views within the Australian Taxation Office.
NATIONAL AUSTRALIA DAY COMMITTEE
Mr HODGES-My question is directed to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment. Is it a fact that former world champion runner Herb Elliott faces dismissal by the Government from his job as chairman of the National Australia Day Comrriittee as was widely reported in the Press this week? Is there any truth in the report that Mr Elliott's dismissal is connected with the selection of Professor Manning Clark as Australian of the Year and that Professor Clark was regarded by Liberal conservatives-as an unsuitable choice? Is it a fact that the National Australia Day Committee does not even choose the Australian of the Year, nor does it have a representative ort the panel which makes that selection? Has not the Government shown its confidence in Mr Elliott by recently reappointing him as a commissioner of the Australian Broadcasting Commission?
Mr WILSON-I have seen the recent Press reports alleging that Herb Elliott was to be sacked as chairman of the National Australia Day Committee. The reports to which the honourable member refers are thoroughly mischievous, they are without foundation, there is no truth in them and I refute them utterly. The National Australia Day Committee was established some two years

Questions Without Notice

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 855

ago. Herb Elliott, who is a distinguished and great Australian, was appointed as its first chairman. He has served the Committee with distinction and his work on the Committee and the work of the Committee have encouraged a greater awareness about Australia's national day. The National Australia Day Committee comeS under my ministerial responsibility. As a result, I have been in regular communication with Herb-Elliott.. Some time ago Herb Elliott drew to my attention the fact that he had recently been appointed as general manager of a sports store in Melbourne and that as a result of his new responsibilities he would not be able, following the expiration of his present appointment, to continue as chairman of the National Australia Day Committee. I was very disappointed to receive this information, but I accepted the situation. The Government has been most appreciative of the leadership that Herb Elliott has shown, and it is thoroughly mischievous of people to put about rumours to try to denigrate people such as Herb Elliott who have served their country well in many ways. I want to put on record the appreciation of the Government for the work Herb Elliott has done on that Committee.
Mr John Brown-Mr Speaker, I raise a point . of order. I wonder whether the Minister will table
this written reply to this question without notice.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. I ask the honourable Minister to draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr WILSON-I make two points in conclusion. The first point is that the Australian-of the Year is not selected by the National Australia Day Committee. That person is selected by a group of independent Australians representing a wide cross section of the community. Secondly, I say that the Government has demonstrated its confidence in Herb Elliott. He was recently appointed, as the member for Petrie mentioned in his question,as a member of the Australian Broadcasting Commission.
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
Mr HAYDEN-Has the Acting Prime Minister's attention been drawn to reports that the Western Australian Government has given approval for the operation of segregated hotel bars to separate Aboriginal drinkers from white drinkers? Will the Acting Prime Minister have this report immediately investigated? In doing so, will he bear in mind that, if it is correct, segregation of this kind would be in serious breach of the Racial Discrimination Act 1975 and the Human Rights Commission Act 1981, both of this Parliament? If he does find these reports to be

correct, will he take prompt action to terminate any such intended action, odious as it is on racial grounds, by the Western Australian Government and certainly before the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne?
Mr ANTHONY-I have no knowledge at all of what the Leader of the Opposition has mentioned. If he provides me with information I will look at it to see what action needs to be taken.
Mr Hayden-Here it is; I give you a copy.
Mr ANTHONY-Is this all you have-a newspaper report?
Mr Hayden-Well, it is from the Murdoch Press, your bible.
COMMUNITY YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEME
Mr FALCONER-Is the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs aware of suggestions by youth organisations in Victoria, reported in this morning's Press, that the decision to terminate the Community Youth Support Scheme should be deferred until next May? This would be to allow an evaluation of all existing job training and support programs to take place. Will the Minister seriously consider this suggestion? Is the Minister also aware of a proposal by the Victorian State Minister responsible for employment and youth matters, Mr Dixon, for the creation of a youth employment support scheme? Will the Minister examine this proposal to see whether it can be supported by the Commonwealth?
Mr N. A. BROWN-I have seen the two suggestions to which the honourable member refers. I certainly will examine the suggestion made by the Victorian Minister to see whether it comes within the ambit of the Government's already declared position with regard to the assets of Community Youth Support Scheme projects, that is to say, that the Government would be prepared to donate those assets to local youth organisations which are approved for that purpose.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr N. A. BROWN-Mr Speaker, it is interesting to hear this performance--
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will proceed with the answer.
Mr N. A. BROWN-Yes, I will proceed with it, Mr Speaker, and say this: The decision having been made, it has been appropriate to put machinery in place to bring to the notice of both project officers and participants in the CYSS projects the wide range of activities which are available for the project officers and the participants to take part in. Consequently, machinery has already been put

856 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

in place for all, CYSS projects to be visited by officers of my Department,for interviews to be given to participants and to project officers so that there is no doubt whatsoever in the minds of all those people as towhat our schemes are and how those people can take part in them. Furthermore, as a result of the visits to the CYSS projects and as a result of the discussions which will take place with the project officers and with the participants, those officers of my Department will report back to me on what the local needs are, what the local facilities are and how, if it is at all possible, the programs can be given a more extensive and wider application.
COMMUNITY YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEME
Mr HAWKE-l direct my question to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs. Firstly, has the Minister authorised the issuance tqis day of the publication Youth Affairs Newsletter of August 1981, No. IS? Secondly, I ask the MiQister whether he agrees with the following statement contained at page 8 of this publication of his Department under the heading 'CYSS groups provide valuable experience for young people':
Young people in three Community Youth Support Schemes in Victoria are working their way towards full time arid rewarding employment.
The schemes, in Echuca, Corio and Sherbrooke are giving young people valuable experience in a wide range of I\ctivities. For some of them the job search has been a demoralising experience but now they can find the support, plus job preparation lInd training from the Commonwealth Government sponsored CYSS projects.
I ask the Minister whether he also agrees with the following statement:
This diverse range of pre-employment programs for young unempl\>yed people indicates the value of the project, which has the support oflocal service clubs and the community.
Government supporters interjecting-
Mr HAWKE-Thirdly-I understand how disappointed Government supporters are at this question~does the Minister, having authorised this publication endorsing the value of the Community Youth Support Scheme projects--
Mr N. A-.Brown-What is the question?
IVIr HAWKE-Jt is coming. I am just waiting for the Minister to listen: Does the Minister, having issued this publication, agree that the decision of the Government contained in the Budget to abolish the CYSS projects represents the height of, hypocrisy on the part df the' Government of which he is a member?

Mr N. A. .BROWN-The honourable member for Wills thinks that he has made some great discovery. However, if he had been in the Parliament last night-he was not but he should have been-he would have heard me pointing positively on my own initiative to the fact that the publication was there and pointing on my own initiative to the fact that the Government has always maintained that there were some good CYSS projects. We have gone out of our way to make that point clear. The honourable member thinks he has made some great discovery whereas, in fact, the matter was raised on my own initiative. The difference between the Australian Labor Party and ourselves on this issue is that we have maintained that there have been some good CYSS projects but that across the board we can do much better for young unemployed people in this country through our training schemes and work experience programs. In contrast to that the Labor Party has done nothing but pour scorn on CYSS since the day it was born. The former spokesman for the Labor Party on this subject described it as tokenism. He described it as recycling.
Mr Hawke-I raise a point of order. The Minister's answer should be relevant to the question. I asked specific questions about the authorisation of the publication and further specific questions. The Minister~s answer is not relevant to the questions. Mr Speaker, there should be consistency in your rulings in this chamber.
Mr SPEAKER-The essential part of the point of order of the honourable member for Wills is that he claims that the Minister is not answering the question he asked., The honourable member is not entitled' to demand a particular answer. All he can rcrquire is that the answer be relevant. My judgment is that what the Minister has said so far is relevant to the question.
Mt N. A- .BROWN-Despite the attempts of the members of the Labor Party to parade themselves as great defenders of CYSS--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will answer the question and not engage in irrelevancies, such as contrasting the Government and the L~bor Party.
Mr N. A-.BROWN-Yes. It was described, as I said, as recycling young people. I ask-this is relevant to the question-what project officers and local committees think when they know that the Labor Party described their functions as being a recycling of young people.
Mr Hawke-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. What sort of double standards are you allowing in your ruling?

Quesiions Without Notice

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 857

Honourable members interjecting~
Mr Hawke~ You are allowing him to get away with murder.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Wills will remain silent.

Mr N. A.BROWN-I accept your ruling and conclude my answer Mr Speaker.
Mr Hawke-I raise a point of order, Mr Chairman. That is the third time--
Government members interjecting-

Honourable members interjecting-

Mr Hawke-Mr Speaker, 1 apologise for

Mr SPEAKER-When the House comes to order we will proceed.
Mr N. A. BROWN-I will conclude by making two points. The first is--

having demoted you. That is the third occasion on which the Minister has defied your ruling and has gone on and contradicted the ruling that you have given. The Opposition Whip has been suspended because he contravened, in your judgment, your

Dr Theophanous-I raise a point of order, Mr ruling once. The Minister has done it three times.

Speaker. The Minister has cast a very bad reflecThere is a double standard in this House.

tion which amounts to a lie in regard to the re~ lationship between Labor Party members and CYSS. I ask that he withdraw that. Most Labor Party members are actually chairmen or are involved in their CYSS programs and have supported those programs.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Bourke will resume his s.eat. I remind the honourable member for Wills that in asking the question he concluded by asking the Minister whether the action taken by the Government amounted to hypocrisy. I allowed the question to go. But he must understand that if he includes in his question an allegation of the kind, then it must be expected that a Minister, in answering, will defend the Government against the allegation. I have so ruled. 1 indicate to the Minister that he has

Mr Anthony-I, move that further questions--
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat. The honourable member for Wills made an allegation which I do not appreciate. I will not proceed with it' because my judgments will. be on the record in Hansard. The honourable member' for Hughes was suspended because he refused to obey the ruling of the Chair. He heard me. What must be understood is that on occasions when I aska Minister to resume his seat, he cannot hear above the noise which is being made in the chamber.
Dr Klugman-Mr Speaker, 1 take a point of order. 1 draw your attention to General Business Notice No. 24 standing in my name which reads:

delivered a defence. It will be judged on its merits by the House or by anybody who hears it. I now
ask him to deal with the question asked and to remain relevant to the specific points in the question. He may answer the question or he may not. But it is a matter for relevancy.

That this House is of the opinion that the words hypocrisy and h)ipocritical, defined in the Concise Oxford Dictionary as simulation of virtue or goodness, are not unparliamentary.
Mr Speaker do 1 take it from what has happened . this morning that you have accepted my notice of
motion?

MrN. A. BROWN-The publication which the honourable member referred to and which 1 raised in the .House last night, was, of course,' a publication authorised by my Department.. It makes the point that we have made consistently, that is, that there were some good CYSS projects. Across the board we can, and are, doing much

Mr SPEAKER-You cannot assume that. The way in which the honourable member for Wills phrased his question was not an allegation against a person; it was an allegation of hypocrisy by the Government in the broader sense. The Minister was about to use the word 'hyprocrisy' in a more direct Sense and 1stopped him 'from doing so.

better for young people through our training Mr Milton-Mr Speaker, ,I take a point of

programs. When we put in place the machinery order. The Minister was asked to withdraw cerwhich 1 outlined this morning, all CYSS particitain stateme~ts which he had made about Labor

pants and all project officers will be informed of members. The statement he made last .night re-

our programs and will be invited and encouraged ferred to the Sherbrooke Community Youth Sup-

to take part in them. May I say in conclusion, Mr port Scheme group. That is in my electorate of La

Speaker. I ask you to let me say it in view of the Trobe.. I have very good relationships with the

attack that has been made by the honourable people in that group and 1 consider that the MIn-

member on me and on the Government-that ister's remarks are directed against me personally.

there is hypocrisy on the part of the Labor, I ask, Mr Speaker, that you ask the Minister to

Party--

withdraw those remarks.

Mr SPEAKER-No, I will not permit the Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for honourable gentleman to proceed on that matter. La Trobe feels that the remarks were directed

858 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

against him and feels offended by them. I ask the Minister to withdraw.
Mr N. A. Brown-I withdraw my remarks against the honourable member for La Trobe for the simple point that I said that Sherbrooke was one of the projects--
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will withdraw unqualifiedly.
Mr N. A. Brown-Yes, I withdraw.
DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE: ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON NOTICE
Mr HAYDEN-I have a question for you, Mr Speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-Is the Leader of the Opposition directing a question to me?
Mr Anthony-Question Time has concluded.
Mr HAYDEN-No. I would have put the question on .notice had there been provision for a question to the Speaker to be put on notice.
Mr SPEAKER-I see. The honourable gentleman is asking for detailed information about one of the parliamentary departments?
Mr HAYDEN-No, I am asking you whether you will investigate what would appear to be an infringement of the right to information of honourable members of this Parliament.
Mr SPEAKER-I give the Leader 'of the Opposition indulgence to proceed.
Mr HAYDEN-I ask you, Mr Speaker, whether you will investigate an instruction which apparently has been issued by a member of the personal staff of the Minister for Industry and Commerce to that Minister's Department that officers of the Minister's Department miJst cut down on the amount of information provided in answers to questions on notice. I ask you to do so because it seems to me that it is an invitation to a serious infringement of the right to information of honpurable members and a cynical abuse of the procedures of the Parliament. I ask you to investigate the circumstances in which the instruction was issued and to report on them to this House. Will you also consult the Minister, advise him of the impropriety of such an order and suggest that it be countermanded immediately?
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the Leader of the Opposition that I will not investigate the matter. The reason for that is that the Speaker has no control whatsoever in relation to the content that a Minister chooses to put into an answer, except to ensure that it is parliamentary and it is relevant. The question that the Leader of the Opposition

directs to me ought more properly be directed to the Minister himself. The Minister will have to answer for the instruction, if such an instruction exists, and be judged by the House on the answer.
Mr HAYDEN-Mr Speaker, I seek your advice again. Could I have the matter considered by you in terms of a breach of privilege of the Parliament? It does seem to be a serious encroachment on the rights of members of the Parliament to information. The circumstances in which the instruction has been issued, I am assured, are clearly fabricated to indicate to members of the Department that they should try to conceal information which should be made freely available to members of this Parliament. In those circumstances .there seems to be a breach of privilege. I ask you, Mr Speaker, to consider that.
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the Leader of the Opposition that the practice in relation to matters of privilege which are raised is for me to receive information from the member raising the point of privilege and to' consider the matter to see whether there is a prima facie breach of privilege. On what the honourable gentleman has so far said I could not reach the conclusion that there is a prima facie breach of privilege. However, it may be that the honourable gentleman possesses other information. I invite him, if he possesses such information, to put it before me in the House. I will then consider the matter as a breach of privilege.
Mr HAYDEN-I do not have any more information than that. My source is quite reliable. However, it would seem that it is within your authority to require the provision of the details of the instruction which has been issued. In the circumstances in which the matter is raised and because of the seriousness with which members of this Parliament regard it, I would have thought th~t there would be some concern instead of hilarity about this issue on the Government side. It seeks to erode the standing of this institution even further. Mr Speaker, I think you should exercise your authority.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is under a misapprehension. I do not have the power to investigate the matter in the sense that he seeks. I must first make a decision on the material before me as to whether there is a prima facie breach of privilege. If there is such a prima facie breach of privilege the matter will go to the House of Representatives Committee of Privileges and then that Committee may call for papers or witnesses. At this point I do not have enough material to find a prima facie breach of privilege.

Personal Explanation

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 859

PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Barker has indicated tome that he wishes to make a personal explanation.
Mr PORTER (Barker)-I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman wishes to proceed with a personal explanation he may do so.
Mr PORTER-I refer to a report on page 32 of yesterday's Advertiser headed 'Sack Rodda over prawn control, ALP demands'.Th~ article ~eports a debate in the South Australian Parliament where the Australian Labor Party Opposition moved a motion of no confidence in the State Minister of Fisheries, such motion being defeated on the floor of the House. In the course of the debate, as reported in the Advertiser, .improper motives were attributed to me. The subject of the motion involved a move'earlier this year by the Gulf of St Vincent prawn fishermen to force a closure of the neighbouring Investigator Strait prawn fishery. This move was based on the belief that the financial returns to the Gulf prawn fishermen would increase if the Investigator Strait prawn fishermen were thrown out of their own area.
The Gulf fishery is a State fishery whilst the Investigator Strait fishery is under Commo~wealth control and is fished by some of my constituents. For many reasons I believed it was unfair to force a closure of the Investigator Strait fishery, th~reby directly affecting the livelihood of fishermen in my area without any action being taken by the Gulf fishermen. During the debate in the South Australian parliament, Mr Keneally, an ALP State member, is reported to have alleged that my action was not based on a concern for my constituents but rather because a member of the Kangaroo Island community had made contributions to the Liberal Party of Australia. Such a suggestion is utterly false. I have no idea who from Kangaroo Island contributed to Liberal party funds. In fact, I conscientiously avoid having anything to do with the handling of party funds. The action I took on behalf of the island fishermen and their community was because I believed they were being unfairly treated, and the allegations <:>f this poor little Keneally man are totally wIthout foundation.
AUSTRALIAN TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Australian

Telecommunications Commission's service and business outlook for 1981-82.
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF OUTLAYS: DEPARTMENTAL ESTIMATES 1981-82
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-I have pleasure in presenting for the information of honourable members a document entitled 'Functional Classification of Outlays-Departmental Estimates 1981-82'. The document is designed to supplement the information on Budget ~utlays presented in Budget Statement No.3, whIch ~c companied the Budget Speech. It sh,?ws ~ach mmisterial portfolio's contribution to the estImates of total Budget outlays in 1981-82, and classifies that contribution in terms of the individual functions, sub-functions and expenditure blocks used to described outlays in Statement No.3. It also gives similar information for 1980-81. I tr.ust t~e document will assist honourable members In theIr examination of departmental estimates.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE: SPECIAL FLIGHTS
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-For the information of honourable members, I present details of special flights ?f the Royal Australian Air Force for the penod 1 January to 30 June 1981. Copies of this report are available from the Table Office.
STUDENT ASSISTANCE REVIEW TRIBUNALS
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-Pursuant to section 51 of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975, I present the report of the Administrative Review Council on student assistance review tribunals.
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF ABORIGINAL STUDIES
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report of .the Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies to the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Senator Peter Baume) on the social impact of uranium mining on the Aborigines of the Northern Territory-for the period I October 1981 to 31 March 1981-together with the text of a statement by the Mi~ister for Aboriginal Affairs relating to the report.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (11.l3) -In speaking very quickly to the motion and the

860 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Institute ofAboriginal Studies

accompanying statement of the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Senator Peter Baume). I would like to draw the attention of the House to the importance of the Government having in the East AlIigator Rivers region a monitoring team which is capable of working with Aboriginal communities and making ongoing reports and assessments, not merely to the Minister but also to the House, as to the impact of uranium mining and mining generally in that region on Aboriginal communities. The Minister's statement indicates a number of points on which he felt the report showed some very positive achievements. I had the benefit of being in this region for some three and a half weeks during the recess. I would like to pay a tribute to the people involved for and on behalf of the Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies for the work they are doing in the field. I was able to observe at first hand their relationship with the Aboriginal community and with the mining community. I believe they are fulfilling a very important job, under often very difficult and isolated circumstances, for Aboriginal residents in that area.
There are a number of aspects, however, which I believe the report does not cover at this stage and which ought to be drawn to the attention of the House. Firstly, there is genuine concern amongst traditional Aboriginal owners and affected Aboriginal communities at the increasing pressure which is being placed on those communities by the various meetings being called in respect of the Pancontinental Mining Ltd project and the Koongarra project. Some Aboriginal leaders spend more time at meetings than the average parliamentarian. I think this is producing many problems for them and is placing them under considerable stress.
If one looks at the recommendations of the Fox .report one sees that Fox was adamant that if mining were to continue in this region it ought to take place slowly and in a way which minimised disruption to the lives of traditional Aboriginal communities. If we look at the intensity at which these negotiations are proceeding, we will see clearly that the actual recommendations of the Fox report and the spirit of that report are not being honoured. I believe the Government and the Minister have a responsibility to see that, in considering the alternatives that are being put to them, the Aboriginal community in the east AlIigator Rivers region has an opportunity to consider these matters in a traditional Aboriginal way and that it is not jammed, as it is at the moment, into making decisions.
Fox found also that traditional owners, if they had their choice, would choose to have no

uranium mining at all, but he pointed out that they felt genuinely that they would be unable to prevent it. My observations in the region confirm that view. I think it is still their view. It is a matter of concern to me that the Minister says-I believe genuinely-that traditional owners do have an alternative, they do have a right to say that they will have no mining at all in the region. That is not the position as it is taking place on the ground. The negotiations that have taken place and the advice that has been given to traditional owners has been given in such a way that they do not believe, and they are not being told, that one of their very real options is a no mining option. I believe that if the Minister seeks the views of those who are living in the community and perhaps seeks a further interim report from the team from the Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies he would find that the statements that I have made would be confirmed.
Grave problems are confronting Aboriginal communities for the future. Some of those problems have been highlighted by this report. There have been a number of developments in recent times, the most recent one being the leak at the Nabarlek mine which must give concern to the Government. Often all sorts of promises are made by mining companies, but when it comes to fulfiIling those promises they are unable to do so. I think the report also notes, in fairness to Nabarlek, that certainly its promise to restrict the sale and supply of alcohol in the region has been honoured. From my observation that is very much the case. I believe that Nabarlek in this regard has made all attempts that could be made in order not to impinge upon the traditional life style of Aboriginal communities in the region.
One other matter that is worthy of comment is that the report highlights again that, although mining has taken place, very few employment opportunities are being offered to-Aboriginal communities; That does not mean that the mining companies are not concerned to make those opportunities available; it is just that the nature of the work opportunities that are available cannot always be filled satisfactorily by Aboriginal people. However, it is interesting to note, as the Minister notes, that very real progress has been made by the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service in its employment of Aboriginals. That is a very positive feature. I believe that Service and its Director are to be commended for the way in which they have involved Aboriginals, particularly younger Aboriginals, in training schemes which are giving them a very useful and positive role and satisfactory employment within their locality.

Institute ofAboriginal Studies

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 861

I believe one aspect of that ought to be drawn to the attention of the Government as a matter of some seriousness. This Government entered into contractural relations with the traditional owners when the. K~adu National Park was established. The Di_wL" of the National Parks and Wildlife Service ~gned leases for and on behalf of the Commonwealth of Australia under which the Commonwealth undertook very substantial obligations. Not the least of those obligations-this is a matter of law-was that the Commonwealth would not employ anyone from the Northern Territory Service without the approval of the Northern Land Council and traditional owners.
The razor gang has recommended the handing over of the administration of the park to the Northern Territory Administration. That decision was taken in isolation. It was taken without any reference at all to the Northern Land Council or to the traditional owners. The Public Service Board is now endeavouring to implement those recommedations. The net effect of that is simply this: If the Public Service Board is allowed to proceed in that way it will mean that the Commonwealth is not honouring its contractual obligations under the lease and the undertakings that have been made and signed as a legal agreement by the Director of the National Parks and Wildlife Service are not being honoured. I think it is very important that when a senior public servant enters into legal arrangements with any group in the community the Commonwealth stand behind both the spirit and the letter of those agreements.
What is now occurring is that the Director of National Parks, having been made party to legally binding leases and the terms of those leases, is now being obliged, by Public Service Board decisions to evade obligations which were undertaken clearly and willingly for and on behalf of the Commonwealth. Such action is bad enough if it occurs in.a normal commercial relationship but it is even worse when it occurs when we are dealing with traditional Aboriginal land owners. They are entitled to believe that the Government, its public servants and the Minister will honour contracts and leases which have been freely entered into for and on behalf of the Commonwealth. I thank the House for its courtesy.
Debate (on motion by Dr Edwards) adjourned.
NATIONAL CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-For the information of honourable members. I present the second report of the National Consultative Council on social welfare from July 1979 to September 1980. This report

was released to honourable members during the autun\n recess.
REMUNERATION TRIBUNAL
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Remuneration Tribunal Act 1973, I present the Remuneration Tribunal 1981 Review. This Review was released to honourable members during the winter recess.
NORFOLK ISLAND AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.
SPECIAL ADJOURNMENT
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That the House, at its rising, adjourn until Tuesday, 8 September 1981, at 1.45 p.m., unless Mr Speaker fixes an alternative day or hour of meeting.
INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION
Report
Dr EDWARDS (Berowra)-by leave-I present the report of the Australian Delegation to the Inter-Parliamentary Union Conferences in 1980.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Dr EDWARDS-I seek leave to make a short statement in connection with the report.
Leave granted.
Dr EDWARDS-The Inter-Parliamentary Union dates back to 1889. It is an international organisation based on national groups established in the 'parliaments' of the member countries, of which in October 1980 there were some eightynine. The headquarters of the InterParliamentary Union are in Geneva. The membership includes most countries of the West and, wait for it, the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc, Japan, the Third World, and newly-emergent countries. The aims of the Union are the promotion of personal contact between members of all parliaments, the advancement of the work of international peace and co-operation and the strengthening of parliamentary institutions. Perhaps the best shorthand description of the InterParliamentary Union is that it is the parliamentary counterpart of the United Nations. The United Nations is the world-wide organisation of governments and commands resources and world attention accordingly. The Inter-Parliamentary Union is the world-wide organisation of parliaments and parliamentarians and while less well known is a significant world body which should

862 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Institute ofAboriginal Studies

receive the interest and support of all honourable members of this Parliament.
Mr Speaker, some people would dismiss the Inter-Parliamentary Union ,as largely a talk-fest. In fact, the Union is widely regarded as a significant forum for the exchange of views in a number of areas and particularly for the exchange of views and some meeting of minds on the central matter of East-West relations-that is, relations between the super-powers and the central issues of the strategic balance, arms control and dIsarmament negotiations. As one instance, it is a matter of record that the Inter-Parliamentary Union made a notable contribution, springing from a resolution of the 59th Conference in Paris in September 1971, to the formulation and acceptance by governments of the Helsinki Agreements to facilitate the rapprochement and cooperation between European countries with different political and economic systems. Many of the Inter-Parliamentary Union suggestions were included in the Helsinki Final Act which was adopted in 1975. The Inter-Parliamentary Union has been active in its implementation since then.
I stress that sort of achievement as a positive restilt springing from the wide and divergent memberships of this Inter-Parliamentary, so-called, Union. As I put it in my Foreword to the report, this is the counterpoise so to speak, to the difficulties for many of us in approaching this organisation from a Western standpoint where there is a measure of unreality and incongruity about an organisation of 'parliaments' which, as I have said, includes most of the countries of the Eastern Bloc. Indeed, it includes just about all of them with the sort of competition that has been going on in recent years to recruit new members ~o the organisation supportive of their particular ideological standpoint. With the new admissions at the Manila spring meeting this year the membership is now over 90 countries. There is something unreal or incongruous from a Western standpoint about an organisation of 'parliaments' which includes all the countries of the Eastern Bloc as well as other states where there is no multi-party parliamentary democracy as we know it. Perhaps about 30 countries would have a democratically elected parliament and government, as we know it.
lt is still-indeed, all the more so-important for Australia to participate in providing general support for the Western presence since the Soviet Union exploits the organisation to the full as an instrument of foreign policy and for the dissemination of its propaganda. I further state in my foreword that the Inter-Parliamentary Union is also a context for the furtherance of the so-called North-South dialogue, Third World issues. I say

'so called' because the 'North' means the West and Japan and not the also relatively rich Soviet Union and its allies. In this context Australia as a rich but commodity exporting country, and thus having interests in common with both developed and developing countries, has a key role to play. I take this opportunity of identifying myself with and supporting unreservedly the initiatives of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcom Fraser) and the Government in the North-South context.
I add only this comment, Mr Speaker: The interrelationship of East-West and North-South issues is starkly brought out when the two are debated together, as at the 1980 InterParliamentary Union meetings., The massive spending on arms stands in stark, sombre and dramatic contrast to the want and poverty of more than two-thirds of the world's population. The United Nations, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and, more recently and authoritatively, the Brandt Commission and other authorities join in urging a massive increase in assistance to developing countries on humanitarian grounds, yes,. but of course and equally compelling, because it is in our long term political and economic self interest.
As well as the consideration of such major world issues, the Inter-Parliamentary Union also makes a continuing contribution in more specific areas. The most important of these is its work in pursuit of the human rights of parliamentarians, and I particularly commend to members that part of the report dealing with that issue, at page 78 of this present printing.
I report to the Parliament that at the East Berlin meeting last September, I was honoured, and the then and previous Australian delegations and Australia were honoured, by my election to the lOman Executive Committee of. the InterParliamentary Union. I also became Chairman of the 'Ten-plus' group within the Union-that is, the 'west European and other' group, which effectively is the Western caucus within the IPU-for the 1Z month period to the next conference in Havana. In that capacity I was gratified, with your. support and concurrence, Mr Speaker, to extend an invitation to the representatives of the 'Ten-plus' countries to hold their meeting here in Canberra last April prior to this year's IPU spring meeting in Manila. The occasion was counted as a considerable success-with the effect, among others, that the 'Ten-plus' co-ordinated effectively and managed to secure the election of all its candidates for committee positions, including taking one position from the Eastern bloc.

Institute ofAboriginal Studies

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 863

I express my thanks to all members of the delegation for their work and support, and in particular the deputy leader, the honourable Charles Jones, the member for Newcastle. Notwithstanding our difference of political persuasion I venture to say that we made a pretty good team, and over the three years of our leadership of the Australian IPU delegation ably assisted--
Mr Les McMahon-That is the end of Charlie.
Dr EDWARDS-Ably assisted by the various members of the delegations from time to time We made the Australian presence strongly felt.
Mr SPEAKER-I think the honourable member for Newcastle insists on a withdrawal.
Dr EDWARDS-Mr Speaker, I refuse. I hope you do not put it to the test. I particularly appreciated his support and advice in the matter of my election to the Executive and also the conduct of my duties as chairman of the lO-plus because that involved a great deal of head counting and tactical election know-how of which he has considerable experience, gained, I would say, in a rather rougher context than the IPU. On behalf of all members of the delegation, I also express our appreciation for the very high standard of advice and assistance received from Miss Sue Boyd, the adviser to the delegation, and Mr H. C. Nicholls, the secretary. Miss Boyd is about to leave the job with the IPU delegation to take up a posting in New York. We wish her well and every success in that role.
I conclude by saying that I thank the Parliament for the privilege of serving as leader of the Inter-Parliamentary Union delegation during the thirty-first Parliament. My term as leader expired at the election last October and I wish my successor, my colleague the honourable Ian Robinson, an equally rewarding term of office as he takes over for the term of the present Parliament.
Mr CHARLES JONES (Newcastle)-by leave-At this point I congratulate the leader of the delegation, the honourable member for Berowra (Dr Edwards) on his election as the Australian representative on the executive on the Inter-Parliamentary Union. It is a position which I believe the country, not the person, holds; at the same time the honourable member for Berowra did a good job as the leader of the delegation in the conduct of affairs of the IPU over the last three years. I believe it bears out the point that I have been making, both in the Parliament when reports have been dealt with and in the executive of the IPU, that there has to be some form of continuity of representation, at the IPU, both from the Government and from the Opposition, it

should not just be a hit and miss arrangement. We should do what a lot of other countries are doing: They have almost permanent delegates there who establish credibility to represent their countries. The honourable member for Berowra has very rightly drawn attention to the fact that the IPU is the second largest international organisation of its type and, as far as parliamentary representation is concerned, it is the largest organisation of its type. Representatives from different countries meet, talk, debate, argue and put forward different points of view concerning the issues confronting the world today.
No longer do the delegates regard the meetings as a jaunt. If they go they should go prepared and should put forward a certain point of view. The Australian delegation is probably unique in the sense that the honourable member for Berowra and other members from the Government represent their party and we represent the Opposition in this place and we put forward our point of view on certain issues. There is nothing more positive than the case of the resolutions regarding East Timor which I moved expressing my point of view and the point of view of the party of which I ,am a member. As a result of putting that point of view-it may sound a little strange-the decolonisation bloc put me on the drafting committee. I believe I was instrumental in stirring up the Portuguese delegation to the point of openly and positively supporting the argument for the right of independence and self determination of the people of East Timor. The Government had a contrary point of view. This is what astounded the delegates. I spoke and put forward a positive point of view for the decolonisation and the right of self determination. The representative of the Government then put the Government's point of view. This is what they could not understand. I think one of the things that is lacking from the IPU is the right of members of one delegation to put forward contrary points of view. It is interesting to note that the United Nations is still putting pressure on Indonesia togrant the right of self determination to the people of Timor. That is in line with the point of view that I have beim putting. I also note in the delegation's report to the United Nations on the Western Sahara Polisario Front that this is a matter in regard to which the leader of the delegation and I put forward different points of view. I draw the attention of the honourable member for Berowra to the fact that his Government is now supporting the Polisario Front in its right to self determination in the Western Sahara dispute.

864 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Institute ofAboriginal Studies

This conference enables members of the same delegation attending the meeting to express differing points of view. I think it should be continued. I
would hate like hell ever to think that this Parliament would restrict the right of an individual to put a certain point of view at the conference. I found the conferences most interesting. It afforded members the opportunity to talk to other people and hear other points of view, For example, the Irish delegation used to present a point of view on the situation in Northern Ireland and the British delegation used to defend what had been going on.
This type of matter is raised from time to time as a side issue. I asked that a matter about Socialist International be included in the report; I note that it was not. My party is a member of SocialistInternational, which used to have at every conference a dinner or a luncheon at which prominent members of Socialist International would be in attendance and in which a welcome would be extended, particularly by the home State, to all the visiting delegates. It is interesting to note the situation in the German Democratic Republic, as it calls itself, when permission was sought-I was one of the delegates who sought permission-to hold a meeting of Socialist International in the Parliament building in East Berlin in which the
conference was being held. In all the other countries in which we had met these meetings had been allowed. Permission was refused on this occasion..
In straight-out defiance of this refusal we met. Admittedly this meeting had to take place in a public place-in a tea room that was normally available to members. We let it be. known loud and clear what we were going to do. We met there and talked about things concerning the various democratic socialist countries and unanimously carried a resolution condemning the actions of the South Korean Government in its persecution of Kim Dae Jung, the socialist Opposition leader in that country. These sorts of things go on when delegates are permitted to attend conferences such as the IPU and to mix with parliamentarians from other places. This gets results, as was shown,jn the case of Singapore and the persecution of people who claimed to be members of Parliament.
I support the contents of the report and again congratulate the leader of the delegation for his election to the executive. As he said, it was a team effort to achieve that. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for permitting the delegation to extend an invitation to the body known as the nine-plus~it is now the 1O-plus-to hold its pre-spring meeting in Australia. Even though we have internal differences of opinion on minor matters, we.are in fairly close agreement on the overall issues. It is

important for a body such as the IO-plus to continue to meet. The delegates who attend such meetings have a job to do in the preparation and planning of such meetings. We know what happened on one occasion when the meeting did not take place. Quite frankly, we were a rabble until such time as the nine-plus got together and started to talk about tactics to counter the Russian bloc, which is the only way to describe it. The Russians certainly dominate it. Whatever they want is what the others fall in line with. I thank you, .Mr Speaker, on behalf of the delegation, for extending the invitation to the meeting in Canberra. Admittedly, the previous delegation of which I was a member extended the invitation, but at least the meeting was held here this year.
DIAMOND MARKETING POLICY
Discussion of MaUer of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letterfrom the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Fraser Government's railure to develop a diamond marketing policy ror Australia, particularly with respect to the Ashton Joint Venture.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
, More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (11.44)-One would have hoped that, with the proposing Of such a serious topic, the Government would have had the decency to have it answered by a minister, notably the Oeputy Prime Minister and Minister -for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony). I appreciate that he is Acting Prime Minister at the moment, but that should not deter him from meeting his responsibilities in the House and answering on a matter like this. Whenever such a matter was. proposed by the right honourable gentleman when in Opposition he was always answered by the Minister for Minerals and Energy, Mr Connor. The discourtesy which is shown tq the Opposition by the Government in this J-Iouse is really beyond the pale when matters of ministerial accountability are in question. I will not stay for the reply of the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey) becauseI just do not regard any contribution he may make as being a serious representation of Government policy. I am at least in the position of being able to put the view of the Opposition.

Diamond Marketing Policy

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 865

f Australia has the potential of becoming the largest diamond producer in the world. The Ashton Joint Venture at Argyle will be the first in what may be a number of world ranking diamond projects. There are 50 other known kimberlite :pipes in the same region of Western Australia. Ashton will be a significant new source ofdiamond supply in the world market. As such its size and potential is threatening to other world producers, such as South Africa, Zaire and the Soviet Union. The Oppenheimer group, which controls the diamond syndicate companies of De Beers and Anglo American, is particularly concerned at the emergence of a large low cost producer outside its sphere of influence. De Beers controls over 50 per cent of the world diamond trade and, until recently, controlled almost 80 per cent.
With Australia's newest mineral industry emerging as a potent world force almost at bIrth, the question must be asked: What is the Australian Government doing to develop a diamond marketing strategy? The simple answer. is nothing. What is even more obvious is that the Acting Prime Minister cannot even come intothe House and offer some explanation as to the Government's policy. The negligence of this Government in not involving itself in the marketing options of a new industry of this significance defies explanation. The Acting Prime Minister told the Parliament yesterday that he was not familiar with contractual terms currently being discussed between-the Ashton joint venturers and De Beers and went on to say, in an answer to my colleague the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi), that the Government would leave it to the joint venture companies to maximise their. returns through their own corporate strategies. He added as a rider that cognisance should be taken of national inter~t considerations.
What is obvious is that the Government has left this most significantdiscovery at Argylean.d the marketing of its produce to the whim of individual companies and the caprice of the De Beers Central Selling Organisation, known as theCSO. One would have thought that the Commonwealth Government would seek to maximise the national wealth from diamonds in the same way as South Africa has with De Beers. But the Fraser Government has not even taken the trouble to gather vital information on the nature of the AK l' diamond pipe and the true market value of the diamonds therein. No survey of the pipe has-been done by either the Western Australian Government or the Commonwealth Government. The Commonwealth Bureau of Mineral Resources, Geology and Geophysics apparently lacks the wherewithal to evaluate the deposit.

Without an adequate information base on the deposit, and the world diamond market, the Commonwealth would be at a complete loss to resist a joint venture contractual marketing proposal, let alone propose some arrangement perceived to be more advantageous to Australia. The Ashton project is expected to come on stream in 1985 and contractual arrangements are now being considered. The De Beers Central Selling Organisation is believed to have offered a long term low price contract to the Ashton joint venturers which is to be concluded by October or November of this year. Such' a contract hastily concluded in a government policy vacuum could have serious long. term implications for the industry and shackle it to South Africa before it has had any opportunity to grow independently. The CSO looms large in any diamond marketing strategy for Australia. An intelligent, well-informed de.- cision has to be made as to whether Australia should commit a substantial proportion of Ashton production to the CSO. Recently the world's largest producer, Zaire, has broken its marketing link with the CSO, as has Angola. The Soviet Union is also moving some of its diamond produce outside the CSO orbit.
At a time when the CSO is declining as a world diamond force, should Australia's fledgling diamond industry be enmeshed in its operations? That is per.tinent. There is no doubt that the CSO offers stability, outlets and guaranteed prices if Australia joins the CSO, but it makes it very much stronger at a time when its own diamond reserves are-declining. Such a decision would virtually commit Ashton's future to De Beers policy. This would be an imprudent course for Australia, though it may be possible to make an arrangement with the CSO which preserves Australian autonomy. The alternative is to take the Zaire course, but this would involve the establishment of a formidable Australian marketing force in the world, and one which would need to be established with expedition. An independent Australian marketing effort has access, competition and time frame problems which may inhibit Australian diamond development. No doubt De Beers would counter such a move with stiff competition designed to bring Australia quickly to its knees. This would be difficult given the low cost nature of our deposits when compared with the high and escalating costs of the African deposits.
The linkage question with the CSO is a fundamental decision which has to be made. The Acting Prime Minister made it obvious yesterday that .neither he nor the Government have even considered this question let alone arrived at any determination. Associated with the CSO decision is

866 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Diamond Marketing Policy

the matter of a domestic cutting and polishing industry. The real profits in diamonds are in the processing rather than the mining.
There is no reason why Australia with an abundant indigenous source of diamond should not become one of the major cutting and polishing centres in the world. Australia is forever seeking processing opportunities related to minerals. Diamonds would provide a perfect opportunity. It would be a tragedy for Australia to emerge as a significant force in raw diamond supply and see the real profits of its produce taken offshore with foreign processing. It takes three to five years to trai~ a gem cutter. Within a relatively short space of tIme Australia could have a significant processing industry. Does anyone seriously contend that the Fraser Government has .considered this matter let alone arrived at a policy approach. Like everything else this will be left to market forces, even when the market in this case is manipulated by a monopoly.
~hat I have said so far relating to marketing polIcy presumes that everything is above board and that it would be a matter for decision by the joint venturers and the Commonwealth Government. Well everything in the Ashton project is far from above board. De Beers already have important links with the project. For a start Ashton Mining, which has 38.2 per cent of the project, is dominated by the Malaysian Government and De Beers. The Malaysian Government is itself vulnerable to De Beer policy by virtue of the fact that the CSO has established a large processing facility in Malaysia. There is no possible way that Ashton Mining will respond to anything other than De Beer policy. To reinforce the Opposition's contention that the Fraser Government is negligent in respect of the development issues surrounding Ashton, the Government granted Ashton Mining naturalising status in February. That is, the Government has given this company the status of Australian so that in future it may enjoy all the privileges of a majority-owned Australian company. The effective control aspect was completely ignored. This decision by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) was a travesty of the spirit and intent of the naturalising policy.
Currently 14,000 small Australian shareholders hold 40 per cent of the Ashton stock. Even with another II per cent of Ashton's shareholding in Australian hands how could the Government possibly believe that 14,000 small Australian shareholders could arrive at a boardroom policy which would predominate over that of De Beers and the Malaysian Government sitting at the board with a determined strategy and 49 per cent of the stock. What is the majority 2 per cent of the

equity ~orth in terms of control when 14,000 AustralIan shareholders are unable to formulate and exercise a policy at board level? If the 51 per cent were in the hands of say, the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd or CSR Ltd with a specific policy then it would be a different matter. But as things stand the Treasurer's decision to grant De Beers and Malaysian Mining naturalising status is a disgrace. How could anyone seriously expect these two interests to respond to the Australian national interest.
The little manoeuvre by Ashton Mining, with the Treasurer's compliance, allows a 60 per cent foreign-owned company to be regarded as 51 per cent Australian. This then allows the project to proceed with what is deemed to be the mandatory 51 per cent Australian equity. So much for Ashton Mining.
The dominant corporate force in the project is Conzinc Riotinto of Australia with a 56.8 per cent interest. It will also manage the project. CRA is a naturalising company which has, to date, met the spirit and the letter of its obligations to the Commonwealth Government in respect of its naturalising status, which includes an all Australian board. CRA is currently 58 per cent owned by Riotinto Zinc Corporation Ltd. It has been alleged that Oppenheimer interests have the largest holding of RTZ stock and as such would have a substantial influence over RTZ and in turn CRA. I have no doubt that the CRA board is motivated by the best interests of its shareholders and Australia. These interests may at times, though, be mutually exclusive. RTZ is still the major CRA shareholder. Nevertheless, one may reasonably expect that the spirit of the RTZ naturalising agreement with the Commonwealth Government will be complied with. One aspect of these agreements was the appointment of an all Australian board. The purpose and intent of having an all Australian board was that when a possible conflict of interest arose, the national sentiments of the Australians would take precedence over the majority RTZ shareholder interest. The Opposition would like to be assured that this position would obtain in relation to the Ashton project. It should also be understood that without naturalising status for CRA, the project on a second count, would fail to comply with the mandatory 51 per cent Australian equity requirement.
Another important element in the corp~rate arrangements of the project is the 5 per cent interest held by Northern Mining Corporation. This is an all Australian company without any De Beers connection. Northern has played a role beyond its small minority interest and has been in dispute

Diamond Marketing Policy

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIYES 867

with CRA and Ashton Mining over project develin his own paddock. He certainly went a little bet-

opment policy and the value and extent of the deter on this subject than he did when he copied the

posit. Northern is currently being taken over by speech made by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr

an Alan Bond company, Endeavour Resources Hayden) on the Budget. He seems to believe that

Ltd. Bond may wish to retain this strategic 1 am incompetent to carry out this task. 1 am

interest which, at this point, is the only all Ausmuch more confident, having heard the honour-

tralian window into the project. The current able m,ember's speech, of my ability to answer this

management of Northern wants its share of the matter which was, basically, a history of the ven-

production in kind so that it may sell or process its ture. Furthermore, if the honourable gentleman

own diamonds. This would probably annoy decided to contact the Western Australian

Ashton and CRA and would not please De Beers. Government which, is his typically centralised

If Bond takes over Northern this policy could manner he chooses to ignore, 1 am sure he could

change. What is important is Bond's real interest get all the answers to the very few questions that

in Northern. It may be to take a place in he raised.

Australia's first diamond project. It is conceivable though that Endeavour is attempting to Warehouse Northern equity for an eventual sale to CRA or a De Beers interest at a profit. A statement of Endeavour's intentions would be a welcome clearing of the air in this regard. Again, one would not expect the Government to be slightly interested. 1 dollbt whether it has even considered it.

As may be likely to happen on other occasions, the Opposition in this situation has brought this matter up too soon and has not gone very far into the issue. That is possibly some evidence of the vacuum in the Opposition's objective policy. It has had to rush round and scramble up this particular issue, suggesting that the Federal Government is not, at present, taking an interest in or having a policy on this matter. Yet, the honour-

The Commonwealth Government is in a posable member for Blaxland was at pains to point

ition to exercise substantial influence over the out the limits to the Federal Government's power

future course of diamond development policy not in this area. The Federal Government has limited

only through the foreign investment regulations powers. The honourable member for Blaxland

but also through its trade powers. While a heavy knows it and we know it. We know also who has

handed approach to export questions would be in the powers at this moment. The State of Western

appropriate when viewed against the complex Australia has the powers at this moment and it

background of diamond marketing, it would be also has an Act of Parliament which allows it to

appropriate though for the Commonwealth to use have considerable influence on the results of this

its powers judiciously in respect to marketing venture, as it has in many other ventures. I am not

questions. What is disturbing is that diamonds are sure where the information that the honourable

not subject to Commonwealth export controls. member for Blaxland presented came from, but of

Diamonds were removed from the schedule of course, most of us have read almost exactly the

minerals covered by the controls by specific legissame things in the newspapers. In fact, I thought

lation in 1976. As things stand the joint venturers the newspapers showed more concern than he did.

have no need even to consult the Commonwealth' Government on matters associated withtl:le project other than foreign investment considerations which have already been approved. Given the likely impact of the venture on Australia, the significance of the deposit's wealth and the industry's potential for the nation, the Commonwealth must be in a position to play an active role in the

A simple solution to his personal concern
would have been to do what I did this morning, at extremely short notice, and that was to talk to the Minister for Resources Development in Western Australia, Mr Peter Jones. One of the first things he chose to tell me was that he was there last Friday--

scrutiny of pricing and marketing arrangements. Diamonds must again be subject to export con-

Mr Jacobi-Big deal.

trols. This would at least be a first step by the Mr TUCKEY-Yes, but it gives him some bet-

Government in seeking to rectify what has been a ter idea of what is going on than someone who has

negligent disregard for the national interest in its run to the Parliamentary Library to get a bit of in-

failure to formulate and monitor a diamond deformation in order to raise this so-called matter of

velopment policy.

public importance when we might have been deal-

Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (11.59)-1 was interested to hear the speech made by the honour-

ing with some legislation of interest to the general community.

able member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) on the Mr Jacobi-Read the history and you will

matter of public importance. It is better to see him understand it.

868 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Diamond Marketing Policy

Mr TUCKEY-If you listen to me you might learn something from that point.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! I ask honourable members not to interject. The honourable member for O'Connor will address himself to the matter before the House.
Mr TUCKEY-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I received information from the Western Australian Minister for Resources Development, and I might add that he was quite happy for me to quote him. It is a pity that the honourable member for Blaxland does not want to listen to it; he is just walking out of the chamber. He thought that he should get it from a Federal Minister who is currently not involved in the issue at the level of negotiation which is normally the case in Australia under our Federal system. As I have said before, we well and truly know his attitude to the States' having to do anything at all. The State Minister told me that negotiations for an agreement are proceeding with the companies involved. He hopes that they will be completed by the end of the year-which differs from what the honourable member for Blaxland told us. He told us that our whole birth right would be signed away in October. Can honourable members imagine De Beers or any other international company bothering to commit itself-let us remember that these agreements are two-sided-before having any rights to mine under the Western Australian mining Act? The Minister told me that those negotiations will be completed and he told me something else which every honourable member in this chamber knows, that is, that the right to mine will be the subject of an Act of the State Parliament. So, the first opportunity that we, the Australians--
Mr Jacobi-You can rely on the Tories.
Mr TUCKEY-Yes, we know you do not like State governments. We know you would sack them all.That is okay. Get your colleague from Western Australia to tell the people of Western Australia that Labor would prefer to do without their State Parliament.
Mr Jacobi-I look after the national interests.
Mr TUCKEY-I am just telling you that the public interest will be served--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will address the Chair.
Mr TUCKEY-Well, Mr Deputy Speaker, I will tell you that the public interest will be. served in the Western Australian Parliament and the Act will be debated there. But the State Minister also assures me that the basis of the negotiations at this stage is to include an arrangement that will lead to

processing within Australia. The Western Australian Minister is doing that; and we, the Commonwealth, know that he is doing so. So why do we need to be told that we do not have a policy? The Minister went on to say that processing can mean just the mere sorting and grading of the stones, apparently a reasonably labour intensive activity; but of course, it could mean the cutting and polishing of the stones as referred to by the honourable member for Blaxland. The Minister also said that it is the intention of the Western Australian Government to see that these functions are also included. The Minister does not mind talking about De Beers. He recognises that the companies which are very immature in the area of diamond mining are talking to De Beers. He knows that De Beers is the central selling organisation. He knows that De Beers is actually based in London, but we have been told that it is all going to be tied to South Africa. However, we know of De Beers' connections in South Africa. The Minister said:
The State Government policy is to attempt to have the advantages without the disadvantages.
I understand from what he told me that this' means that the State Government sees the impossibility of going out into the open world market without the advice of somebody who knows a lot more than we do, recognising that there are pass-on advantages to Australia in processing. If the Opposition is of the opinion that the Western Australian Government does not at all times attempt to maximise the return from its raw materials, it does not see the things that are happening. In fact, it is interesting to note that although that State Government is interested in alumina smelting, not too many members of the Opposition have much support for it. Fortunately, the diamond industry does not have some of the other requirements and problems of alumina smelting. The Western Australian Government is determined to include in its agreement the fact that there will be moves to maximise the returns to Australians.
Furthermore, the Western Australian Government, recognising its shortfall of knowledgesomething the Opposition never seems to be disturbed about in its case-sent an officer to South Africa. He was sent not only to discover how things were done there, but also to discover how South Africa deals with its diamond processors and its diamond producers. Opposition members can laugh. I had a sign here the other day to hold up so that they would know when to laugh. But they ought to learn to laugh properly because their laugh is practised. Opposition members doubt what the Western Australian Government

Diamond Marketing Policy

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 869

has done but have they discovered any of these things? No. Their spokesman has given us a little story about diamond mining, one which has been in the Press for the last fortnight. There was . nothing in the speech of the honourable member for Blaxland that could not have been written in five lines. The Western Australian Government has done this sort of thing and it has had an internal report which it is considering in the light of the negotiations it is having. The Minister is also of the opinion that a massive furphy is being distributed about a lot of the circumstances which is not related to the welfare of Australians.
It is one of the normal practices in a sharemarket battle for a lot of statements to be made. At this time, insufficient credibility can be attached to those statements. It is not unusual in this place to find members of the Opposition complaining bitterly about company directors and others overstating the possibilities of their particular venture-they would have them hung if they possibly could-but because there is a degree of conservatism among the partners, members of the Opposition feel that there is something wrong because it suits them to on this occasion. The State Minister told me that he is keeping the Commonwealth informed and that, in his view, the Commonwealth has quite properly left the negotiations to the States at this time. I agree with him entirely. That is why there are no massive announcements coming out of this Parliament at this time on where we are heading. It is a State issue at this time. It is being handled by a very competent Minister in Peter Jones.
Let us look at some of the other issues. I have mentioned the role of the Commonwealth, in particular in regard to foreign investment. We had quite an interesting comment from the honourable member for Blaxland in that regard when he mentioned a lot of problems relating to the Ashton group. He said that that group owns 38.2 per cent of the joint venture and that Conzinc Riotinto of Australia-a company of which he apparently approves, because he said some nice things about it and its all-Australian board-has 56.8 per cent and is listed as the manager of the venture. In other words, at present a fully Australian board is the manager of the venture. What is so wrong about that? Let us consider diamonds anyway as we know all about them. We have control of export if we choose to use it. The honourable member for Blaxland has told us that we have no such control. At present we are not in the business of exporting diamonds. When the agreement which the Western Australian Government is negotiating, quite correctly and at the proper time, is reached what action this Government

should take will be a lot clearer to it. We are all well and truly aware of how little time it would take us to reinstitute the necessary export control. It is ridiculous to say that what we do not need now is a failure to the Australian public.
I now refer to the De Beers organisation. There is an old statement about diamonds being a girl's best friend. If it were not for De Beers they would not be worth very much. It is no secret that the world has an over-supply of diamonds. They could be dug out at a more rapid rate. It has been pointed out that the Russians choose to sell diamonds through a scheme which must be completely anathema to their politics. They do so because they know that, if they do not, the price will fall because of over-supply. It is interesting to note what the De Beers organisation said in its 1980 report to its shareholders. I do not think it was trying to fool the Opposition. the report stated:
In the middle of 1980 the boom conditions experienced during the late 1970's came to an end. Since the end of 1980 the market in cutting centres has further weakened and it has become necessary for the CSO in accordance with established policy to reduce the offerings to the market substantially in order to maintain stability. Stocks of rough diamonds in the trade are not excessive but in the view of the large stocks of polished diamonds the CSO as I have mentioned has undertaken its traditional function of reducing the quantity of goods offered to its customers in order to assist the market to recover its balance.
Let us remember that De Beers is a selling cartel. This country knows a fair bit about buying cartels. Where might we be if CRA and other companies did not go to the big man first? Let me stress that there is no agreement. There will be no agreement. The first agreement will be with Western Australia. I am sure that our Minister and his Department know what is going on and that we will have the necessary controls when we need them. If the Opposition has some criticism, it should come up with a solution. That was completely absent in the words of the honourable member for Blaxland. God save us if he is the man who one day is in charge as he seems to think that all one has to do to be able to run a government is criticise.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (12.14)-1 was going to reply in some detail to the comments of the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey) on this matter, but the utter silliness of the bulk of his speech defies reply. Suffice to say that, as a Western Australian member of parliament, I h~; observed discussion in the Western Australian: "''''. Press and the-Western Australian Parliament over the last six months. What has been absolutely evident throughout that discussion is that the Western Australian Government has demonstrated its complete incompetence to defend the interest of

870 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Diamond Marketing Policy

the Western Australian people, let alone the Australian people, in matters related to mining. The Grants Commission report has revealed that persistently there has been a pattern in Western Australian royalties payments way below what the Western Australian Government could reasonably be expected to obtain on behalf of its people. The honourable member for O'Connor now expects us to accept the bona fides of the Western Australian Minister for Mines who has perpetrated the bulk of this situation. The honourable member for O'Connor says: 'Do not worry. He has it all under control. He has visited the project. He therefore knows all about it and there are no problems. He sent a man to discuss with De Beers the problem of marketing. Therefore, he knows all about it.'
What sort of laughable institution does the honourable member for O'Connor think this is when he brings in this sort of nonsense as a serious argument? We must not be too surprised at this. The Minister for Trade and Recources (Mr Anthony) would not debate this matter because he is in ignorance of it. The honourable member for O'Connor is in ignornace of it as well. How can he possibly expect the Western Australian Government to be responsible for or to have any substantial influence on the marketing arrangements of this product when it goes overseas? It is properly a Commonwealth responsibility and it was exercised under the Whitlam Labor Government in consultation with the States. No consultation is being carried out in this case because the Commonwealth has abnegated its responsibility. It did so again yesterday when the Minister replied to a question by the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi).
The Government's failure to defend the national interest on mining ventures of major importance to the economic future of this country stands once more exposed. Its failure is based on a deliberate determination to remain in ignorance of the national interest. In this case the Government has on its hands probably the richest single diamond mine in the world, a project which has been under evaluation for some years now, the dimensions of which have been to a considerable degree known in mining circles. Yet when the honourable member for Hawker asked a pertinent question yesterday on marketing arrangements and their impact on the national interest the Minister was obliged to reveal ignorance and a determination that he would not investigate or interfere with the venturers' claims and marketing arrangements, despite what the honourable member for O'Connor might think of some future action on his part.

If one wanted to devise a sample case which justified everything the Labor Party has said about the requirements of effective minerals policy one could not go past this one. In the first instance the public revelation of the value of the Ashton Joint Venturer's Lake Argyle project has come as a result of the leaking of a document produced for the junior partner in the group, Northern Mining, which is the only part of the project wholly Australian owned. Judging by the article by Jan Roberts which appeared in the Age and which was repeated in the Daily News of yesterday, the commentaries of a number of Northern Mining employees reveal an effort. by the company to defend our rights to a share of the world market commensurate with the significance of the project, to a price which ensures a return to the Australian community and to participate in the profitable secondary processing of the mineral-in this case through diamond cutting. The company does not argue its case because of big-heartedness but because it has a clear economic interest. Its circumstances indicate clearly that national capital and multinational capital are likely to have very differing interests in marketing arrangements. This is because multinational capital's interest in an enterprise is likely to be associated, as it is in this case, with a vertically integrated international operation with profit opportunities at all stages of the processing and marketing of the mineral. National capital, however, will not have such access and will therefore seek, firstly, the best possible price at the extractive stage and, secondly, processing opportunities locally and a say in international marketing arrangements. It has none of that automatically.
That is why Opposition members have said over and over again in this place that significant Australian components should be a feature of every resources project in this country. Yet at every stage this Government has thwarted the operation of the policy guidelines established during the Whitlam Government until they have come through in this case with totally ridiculous naturalisation methods that were amply dealt with by the member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) and commented upon pathetically by the honourable member for O'Connor. This Government has deliberately placed itself on the question of diamond marketing and mining in a position where it can be of no assistance to Northern Mining. It did this firstly in October 1976 by removing diamonds from the operation of export control arrangements established during our time. It did it secondly by permitting a situation in which the Bureau of Mineral Resources has no resources for or

Diamond Marketing Policy

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 871

rights to an independent survey of the value of the field.
There is a pathetic little piece in the Jan Roberts article which relates the comments of a spokesman from the BMR pointing out that his Bureau was limited to newspaper reports and to whatever companies chose to tell it. The Australian public and the Australian Public Service, as a direct result of the anti-national policies of this Government are compelled to scrabble about like theives in the night for information on the national interest. This is not to say that Northern Mining's reluctance to be involved with the central selling organisation is necessarily the best policy. The honourable member for Blaxland did not suggest it was. With a project so new and with that organisation's capacity to damage hold-outs, co-operation might be the most useful means of defending our national interest. But it is the terms of co-operation which are important. Obviously Australia's bargaining power is very great. In the Age today it was pointed out that production costs at Argyle will be about $6 a carat versus De Beers' South African average of $32 a carat. Argyle kimberlite pipe one-AKI-has a capacity to yield, again on estimates which are constantly being valued upwards, around 25 million carats a year, 20 times as high as the average Southern African mine and three times higher than last year's South African production. This colossal competitive advantage is being frittered away by the failures of this Government which cannot define, let alone defend, the national interest.
If Northern Mining were assisted by the Government or if it were itself involved, certain features of the bargaining process would obviously have emerged. Firstly, there. would have been an official counter to the efforts of other partners in the project to downgrade the value of the field. These partners have pointed out that in gemstone quality Ashton is somewhat lower than its South African equivalents. While the percentages are lower th!ln the South African percentage at the quality end, the volumes of production at Argyle will be so huge as to render this irrelevant. In case, near gemstone quality is what is available in most jewellery stores, and around 40 per cent of the amount which would be produced from the field would be of that quality.
Secondly, there would be an insistence that the development of the field would be accompanied by a cutting industry in Australia. There is no reason why Perth should not be the centre for a cutting operation for the whole of Australia. We now face the ludicrous possibility, if we do not have that cutting industry, that we will have to

continue to import the $54m-worth of cut diamonds we currently import despite the fact that these diamonds will now originate from Australia. The cut diamonds which come back into Australia will be many times the value of the raw product which goes out. Northern Mining, according to the article, would receiveonly $600,000 for the 60,000 carats of gems needed to supply the Australian market. The Central Selling Organisation would then be able to sell the stones back for $54m to the Australian trade. Thirdly, if the Government took an interest in bargaining with CSO or in establishing its own Australiansupported marketing operation, the project would now be offered a price for the product which is not 80 per cent below its real value, which, according to independent valuation, the CSO offer is. Fourthly, if the Government took an interest in bargaining we would be in a better position to beat down the monstrous commission which the CSO now insists upon.
The Government's position continues to leave the Australian population in ignorance of the possibilities of the venture. The Government's position continues to deny the possibility that the Australian population is going to benefit significantly from this project. The Government is worthy of considerable criticism on this matter. It is sigriificant that it has sought not to answer this criticism in the House itself, but to put up two of its most junior members to do so. That is a disgrace and a discourtesy which was never shown the present Government when it was in Opposition by our side of the House and it is a discourtesy which we would not show it, were we to be in office again. But it would not be bringing forward matters of public importance on this subject because it would be shamed by the effectiveness of our capacity to defend the national interest with regard to this matter and would prefer to maintain silence in much the same way as the Minister has maintained silence on this matter in the House today.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr FISHER (Mallee) (12.24)-As the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) said in this House yesterday, we acknowledge one fact which the Opposition has brought forward; that is, the Argyle discovery is a m~jor one by world standards and has a very large production potential. However, I emphasise, in talking about the future marketing of diamonds, that no decision has yet been made by the Ashton Joint Venture even to proceed with commercial production. But it is considered that production at the rate of some 25

872 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Diamond Marketing Policy

million carats a year will. certainly make it the world's largest source of natural diamonds. Most of the production, of course, is expected to be of industrial quality, but with a significant proportion of higher value gem diamonds.
I think I should provide to the House some of

a take-over position and it is completely understandable that it would be defending itself. Northern Mining is a small company and there is a history of differences of opinion between the various partners in this joint venture. Of course, this is
comIhon with a resource of this magnitude. For example, Northern Mining itself has estimated

the history of this joint venture. In 1977 a large group of kimberlite pipes was defined at Allendale in the Kimberley region of Western
Australia. A sampling plant was commissioned in

the deposit at some 160 million tonnes and this estimate is no' doubt based on its own intelligence and on an intelligent analysis. However, CRA Ltd estimates the known-I emphasise 'known'-

August 1978 and this began scout sampling of all deposits as being in the order of 100 million

the pipes that had been discovered at that time. Further. work was carried out in 1979 and, of course, is continuing. In September 1979 the Argyle project was discovered south of Lake

tonnes. This indicates a difference of opinion on valuation of the stones and the size of the resource
body.

Argyle in the west Kimberleys. A kimberlite pipe It is therefore necessary, I believe, to make the

was located and a series of alluvial diamond deHouse aware of the responsible attitude that these

posits was delineated, extending downstream joint venture partners have taken in reporting the

from the pipe along the course of Smoke Creek. progress and the extension of this deposit. Dis-

The diamond pipe we are talking about is some 45 cussions were held with the Melbourne Stock

hectares -in surface area. Diamonds have been Exchange on the principles of reporting and these

recovered in stream gravels along Smoke Creek were agreed to by both parties. Details of progress

up to 30 kilometres from the pipe. Evaluation of in this deposit are released every quarter. The

the Smoke Creek alluvial deposits resumed folreporting of the details has not been embellished

lowing the wet season in February 1980. Howand this conservative approach is obviously being

ever, work on this pipe did not resume again until criticised by the Opposition today. In a project

last September when the Western Australian such as this, accuracy is important. Every honour-

Government gave its approval to the Ashton Joint able member should agree that this is essential,

Venture for work to proceed on all of its tenparticularly with such a glamorous and

ements accompanying the Argyle project.

flamboyant resource. I doubt whether any of the

The future development of the Argyle Joint Venture will consist of spending some $35m in re-
gional exploration in the Kimberley region and in the evaluation of all diamond prospects in this area. Exploration, therefore, is still continuing. Also, evaluation of the pipe will require the drilling program to continue in order to further geological and metallurgical data. Engineering studies have commenced to make recommendations on the method of sampling the Argyle project, including the provision of plant, equipment and ancillary services. Of course, sociological and environmental studies are also.under way.

resource or exploration projects in this country have every-supplied such detailed information to the public. It is also typical that CRA's chairman, who is one of Australia's most respected businessmen, has clearly indicated a responsible role in Australian'resource development. This nation is fortunate that the project is destined to be one the world's largest diamond projects. But we have to recognise that it is in the embryo stage. It is still operating under an exploration licence from the .Western Australian Government and another permit will be needed even to commence. In fact, an article in yesterday's Australian Financial Review indicated the facts which were given to

I think this background is very important because this matter of public importance has come

this House by the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey). The article states:

forward this morning asa result of articles by journalists in the Age, in the Sydney Morning He-

The Western Australian Government is seeking a commitment from the Ashton joint venture that a diamond polishing

rald and in other newspapers throughout and culling industry will eventually be established in the

Australia. The Opposition has based all of its arState.

guments on leaked documents and newspaper reports. It is nothing more than a desire to batter the resources industry and its development in this country. The Parliament should clearly under-

That is exactly opposite to the views put forward by the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley). The article-continues:

stand the circumstnces surrounding the leaked However, it recognised that this was not practicable in the documents. All honourable members are aware short term, according to the Minister for Resource Develop-

that Northern Mining Corporation is presently in ment, Mr Peter Jones.

Diamond Marketing Policy

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 873

He said the negotiations for an agreement between the joint venture and the State Government over the Argyle diamond deposit were expected to be completed by the end of the year.
These would cover royalties, infrastructure, processing and timing of the operation.
Mr Jones confirmed that the task of proving the extent of the diamond deposit would take some time and that the product would not move into a higher stage of production for a couple of years.
Much has been said today by the Opposition about the influence of the De Beers company's international operaticn in this project. I think we should, for a moment, look at the .criticism that the joint venture party is going into a market operation with De Beers and that De Beers is extending its influence on the joint venture. I believe this shows a distorted insight, both by the reporter who wrote the article and the Opposition, into the world marketing situation of diamonds. This is a damaging allegation and is so typical of many that come from the other side in relation to our resource projects. Again, it is based on hearsay and leaked documents.
Surely it is natural that a company which mines diamonds and which is endeavouring to form marketing operations for diamonds in Australia wiiI talk to De Beers, the world's largest diamond selling organisation. But it is also talking to many of the other companies involved. The honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) attempted to mislead this House by stating that De Beers has a very major shareholding in the joint venture. My understanding is that De Beers has less than a 3 per cent holding in this venture, and this can hardly be termed a substantial holding. It is also a fact that the joint venture partners have spoken with not only De Beers but also General Electric-a major world producer of synthetic and industrial diamonds. The partners have also looked at the Zale Corporation, which is the world's largest marketer of diamonds through its chain of retail stores.
From the Government's point of view I emphasise that iUs not necessary at this time to develop a marketing policy. But the Government does have a clear policy in relation to minerals. Our policy is to ensure that there is a reasonable return for exports and that the development of projects takes place in the national interest. Therefore this matter of public importance raised today by the Opposition is an exercise in futility. It displays an ignorance of this particular venture, and I believe it should be totally disregarded by this Parliament. The process of evaluating a resource is a

long exercise and the marketing aspects particularly as they relate to diamonds will involve discussions with hundreds of companies throughout the world.
This Government will look carefully at whether a diamond marketing policy will include further processing, such as sorting and cutting, on the basis of its economic viability. The question of deciding the best form of marketing to adopt in these circumstances is clearly complicated and difficult. It is essentially a decision to be made on the basis of the commercial judgments of the companies conerned. They are aware of the Government's desire that Australia should obtain the appropriate benefit from mining projects of this kind and that processing and upgrading should take place in Australia where this is feasible.
Mr KEATING (Blaxland)-I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-I call the honourable member for Blaxland.
Mr KEATING-The honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher) just said that I misled the House in respect of De Beers interest in Ashton mining. I did not. I made it quite clear that De Beers and Malasian Mining have control of the company which has control of 38 per cent of the Ashton project. I reiterate the remarks that I made at the beginning of my speech. I think it is a disgrace that a Minister will not answer--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-'--- Order! The honourable member is now out of order. He will resume his seat. The discussion is concluded.
NEW PARLIAMENTHOUSE
Message received from the Senate acquainting the House that it has agreed to the following resolution:
That, in accordance with the provisions of section 8 of the Parliament House Construction Authority Act 1979, the Senate declares the construction and fitting'ouf of the building that is to cons~itute Parliament House, together with-
(a) the construction, on the site of Parliament House, of access roads, parking' areas and other facilities to be provided on that site in connection with Parliament House; and
(b) the landscaping of that site, to be a declared stage in the construction of Parliament Hol1se for the purposes of that section,
UPGRADING OF AIRPORT FACILITIES FOR WIDE-BODY AIRCRAFT
Reference of Work: Public Works Committee Act,
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (12.36)-1 m.ove:

874 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Upgrading ofAirport Facilities

That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: Upgrading of airport facilities for the introduction of domestic wide-body aircraft.
This proposal is for aircraft works associated with the introduction of wide-body jet aircraft by the domestic airlines and the consequential redeployment of elements of the existing fleet. In addition to these works, the airlines will be providing infrastructure works of their own at many airports. The works to be provided by the Commonwealth will include, where necessary, alteration and expansion of terminal facilities, strengthening and extension of runway, taxiway and apron pavements, and associated engineering works. The airports at which the works will be carried out include Adelaide, Coolangatta, Hobart, Melbourne, Perth and Sydney. The estimated cost of the proposed works is $23.3m at August 1981 prices. I table plans of the proposed works.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (12.37)-The Opposition welcomes the Government's decision to refer these matters to the Joint Standing Committee on Public Works. According to tradition and the experiences of the Committee they will be given a thorough investigation. As the member for Adelaide I am particularly pleased to note that Adelaide is included among the airports which will be investigated. I hope a great number of submissions will come from all interested parties so that the Public Works Committee can thoroughly investigate the matters referred to it.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
COMMONWEALTH SCHOOLS COMMISSION
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)-For the information ofhonourable members. I present a report of the Commonwealth Schools Commission together with a minority statement which responds to guidelines which I announced on 4 June 1981.
NEW AIR TRAFFIC SERVI(,:ES CENTRE AND CONTROL TOWER, PERTH AIRPORT
Reference of Work: Public Works Committee Act.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (12.38)-I move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public
Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be
referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: Construction of new air traffic services centre and control tower at Perth Airport, Western Australia.

This proposal is for the provision of buildings for operational units which provide air traffic control and in-flight information services to aviation. The new accommodation will allow improved operating and technical facilities needed at Perth Airport to maintain aviation safety standards at existing and forecast traffic levels. The works will comprise an air traffic services operations building, a control tower, a technical maintenance centre, a radio equipment building and a services building. The estimated cost of the proposed works is $3.6m at July 1981 prices. I table plans of the proposed works.
Ques.tion resolved in the affirmative.
CONSTRUCTION OF WORKING, LIVING AND AREA FACILITIES, WATSONIA, VICTORIA
Reference of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (12.39)-1 m~ve:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: Construction of working, living and area facilities at Watsonia, Victoria.
This proposal is to construct new accommodation for 126 Signals Squadron which is currently in makeshift quarters; to. improve other overcrowded facilities which support all units based at Watsonia: and to provide facilities for training Navy and Army musicians. The training of Army musicians is presently carried out at Balcombe. Provision is being made for such training at Watsonia because its continued location at Balcombe will become uneconomic when the Army Apprentice School moves from Balcombe to Bonegilla early in 1983.
The works will comprise: Working facilities for 126 Signals Squadron; refurbishment of two accommodation blocks; extensions to the dental care; extensions to a kitchen and dining room; working facilites for the School of Music including renovation of an existing building; and provision of fitness training facilites including gymnasium extensions and sporting facilities. The e.stimated cost of the proposed work is $5m at August 19~ 1 prices. I table plans of the proposed works.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (12.41)-The O~po sition welcomes the extensions which are to be made to the facilities at Watsonia but would draw attention to the urgent need for the government to re-examine all its defence facilities and especially defence housing programs. These

Construction ofFacilities, Watsonia

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 875

programs have been set back by inquiries and deferments which took place last year when virtually no funds were expended. Whilst there is a substantial increase this year in funds for defence housing, they will not meet the expenditure patterns which would be required in order to deal with what are serious backlogs in defence housing. For instance, I hope that the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) has under consideration the problems which still exist in Darwin in respect of damage done to Air force housing arising from Cyclone Tracey. That housing has been subject to only temporary repairs, which causes serious inconvenience to residents, especially during the wet season in Darwin, which is particularly hard on unsuited or improperly maintained accommodation.
Other problems have grown in the area of defence facilities and defence housing. They arise out of the rapidly escalating cost of housing and the differential in costs in housing among the various cities, and the high proportion of transfers that are involved, especially among senior officers. ,I make the point that to transfer from Melbourne to Canberra to Sydney, or from Sydney to Canberra to Sydney or to some other part of Australia over a period of about 6 years can add to the costs for a serviceman who is almost forced to buy housing because of the lack of suitable rental accommodation, especially for officers. There is very little consideration of the location and type of accommodation provided and the social difficulties which can accrue in these areas. It is a matter of serious concern.
The Government has been dithering for a couple of years in the defence housing area. I hope that the mention of this project and other projects in the Budget papers will at least mean a return to some type of planning for defence housing. I draw the Minister's attention to the very serious problems which exist for persons who have to move between areas where there is a wide differentiation in housing costs. They are placed in a position where their only real option is to purchase homes in the hope that they will be able to meet the differential. For instance a transfer from Canberra or a non-metropolitan area to Sydney can cost a person requiring the same type of accommodation between $10,000 and $15,000. I think that is an unreasonable burden in relation to what quite often is a temporary location. While the serviceman may recover his costs on the sale of the premises, that is not a guaranteed position. The additional cost of rent, et cetera during the period, especially where young families are involved, can add considerable burdens to the family concerned.

Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (12.43)-in reply-I am grateful to the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) for bringing those points up. As he knows, this area is basically the responsibility of the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen). I will draw the honourable member's comments to the attention of the Minister and ask him to reply to the honourable member directly. I am most grateful to the-honourable member for bringing those points of view to our notice.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
SALES TAX (EXEMPTIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS) AMENDMENT
BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 18 August, on motion by MrMoore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill, the Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9) and the Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos lA to 9A) as they are associated measures? Separate questions will, of course, be put at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (12.45)-These sales tax Bills give effect to three sets of decisions relating to sales tax that were announced in the Budget. Those three sets of decisions were: Firstly, to raise by 2t per cent the rates of sales tax on items previously taxed; secondly, to eliminate various alleged anomalies and inconsistencies in relation to sales tax; and, thirdly, to apply sales tax at the rate of 2t per cent to a whole range of items which were previously exempt from such tax. I wish to deal in more detail with what is proposed in the legislation. The first of those three sets of decisions is to raise the rate of sales tax by 2t per cent. At present there are three sets of sales tax. Prior to the Budget announcement the rates were 2t per cent, 15 per cent and 27+ per cent.
The decision to raise by 2t per cent the existing rate of 2t per cent means, of course, that there will be a doubling of sales tax on items in that category. When we talk about a 2t per cent increase it should be born in mind that we are in effect talking of a doubling of the tax on all these items. The items involved in this category are

876 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill

everyday items such as furniture, crockery, glassware, cutlery, washing machines, vacuum cleaners, radiators, toasters, kettles, brooms, garbage cans, floor coverings, blinds, bedding, light fittings and candles. They are clearly items which are present in every household and which are important in people's daily expenditure patterns. Therefore an increase in the tax on those items is something which affects every person in the community. I think it is perhaps interesting to note also in this regard that, as everyone is aware, we have already had an increase in interest rates over the last year and a quarter. The cost of buying a home has increased because of that significant increase in interest rates.
This legislation in respect of the set of decisions applies sales tax to building materials, which increases the cost of building a home. The increase in sales tax on furniture and the other items I have just mentioned means that it costs far more to furnish a home, so home buyers are being hit in every possible way. The second rate of sales tax was pre-
viously 15 per cent. That is being raised to 1n per
cent-an increase of some 17 per cent in the amount of tax payable. That means that the cost of a car, which is the main item in this category will be significantly increased. In broad terms, apart from motor cars, the items that are covered by this category are: Commercial motor vehicles, soft drinks, stationery, potable spirits, boats and yachts. There are many other items but they are the main items listed.
The third category was previously taxed at 27t per cent. This increases to 30 per cent-a rise of 9 per cent in the amount of tax payable. The items affected here are jewellery, field glasses, fountain and ball point pens, watches, clocks-apart from alarm clocks-furs, hair oils, cosmetics, body creams, shaving goods, hair brushes and combs, cameras and films, radios, tape recorders, records and television sets. These items are all taxed at a high rate because at some time in the past they were regarded as luxuries. I find it difficult to conceive of shaving goods and combs and brushes as luxuries and many people would dispute today that a radio or television set was a luxury. Nevertheless they are taxed as such and the rate of tax now increases from 27t per cent to 30 per cent.
I refer now to the second category of decisions relating to the elimination of various alleged anomalies and inconsistencies. There are 34 of these items altogether, of which 29 represent increases in tax either by increasing the existing rates or by applying tax to previously exempt items. These increases are quite substantial. For instance, on television picture tubes the tax is increased from zero to 30 per cent, which will

mean a great increase in the cost of television sets. The tax on manufactured pet food, which I understand now also includes fresh pet foods, will go from zero to 17t per cent; the tax on car safety belts and windscreens will go from zero to 17-1: per cent; alarm clocks will go from 15 per cent to 30 per cent, household insecticides from zero to 17t per cent and so on. The tax increases are quite considerable and will have more than a minor impact on the expenditure patterns of people and on their living standards.
There are some reductions in bringing about the elimination of the so-called anomalies and inconsistencies. I should mention that there are some reductions in tax or eliminations of tax. They are mainly on items which are quite inconsequential, such as coffee whiteners and parts of movable toilet pans. In effect, we are looking at an array of increases under the disguise of eliminating anomalies. This considerably increases tax on a wide range of goods, some of which are particularly important. For example, I refer to the decision to tax colour television picture tubes which were previously exempt. It was the case that the tax on a television set applied to the whole of the set except for the tubes. The picture tube is a highly important part of a television set and the application of a 30 per cent tax instead of a zero tax to the tube means that the cost of a television set, as I understand it, will increase in the order of $80 or more. Altogether this so-called elimination of anomalies and inconsistencies will add $117m to tax revenue this year and $142m in a full year. In our view, the Government is achieving a broadening of the tax base under the guise of tidying up the legislation.
The third category of goods subject to tax covers those goods which were previously exempt but which are now being taxed at 2-1: per cent. All that was mentioned in the Budget was the broad categories of items which would be so taxable. The broad categories mentioned were clothing, footwear, drapery, soft furnishings, manchester, et cetera, building materials, books, magazines, newspapers, packaging and wrapping materials and tools and a range of other goods, not including food, medicine or wine. When we see what is being taxed we find that although. what was said indicates a fairly broad range of goods in fact, many items are now to be subject to tax which one would not,' on the face of it, think would be subject to tax under those headings. This will now be the case.
The legislation was brought in less than 48 hours ago by the Government to apply the tax to these previously exempt items. There was nothing in the second reading speech 01 the Treasurer (Mr

Sales Tax Amendment Bill

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 877

Howard) to throw any light on the matter I am about to raise but if one goes back to the legis- ~ation an? to the schedule of previously exempt Items whIch are now to have their exemption removed, one finds that these kinds of items are ?eing covered: Books including .leaflets, periodIcals, magazines and even printed music. It also includes maps and road and tourist maps. We also find that greaseproof paper, vegetable parchment paper and wax paper are to be taxed. Under the heading of 'building materials' all of the expected items are there-bricks, plaster, wallpaper and builders' hardware. The heading covers also nails and tacks, nuts and bolts, paints and all of the other normal building items. It also includes cooking stoves and ranges which were previously tax free but which will now be taxed at 2t per cent. It includes electrical fittings and accessories such as chandeliers and pendants-even light globes come under the heading of 'building materials'. These items are all taxable at 2t per cent. Included also are baths, shower screens, toilets and hot water services. It is a very broad interpretation of what comes under the heading of 'building materials'. We also find that paper bags, rubber. ba~ds and sticky tape are to be subject to tax, whIch IS really getting down to pretty minor items. Garden tools are also to be taxed.
Under the heading 'clothing' we find that not only all the obvious clothing is to be taxed, but also baby napkins and like items for babies. Also to be taxed are aprons, sanitary napkins and like items. It is a very broad interpretation of what is meant by 'clothing'. Without going through the list of thousands of items we find that we are facing a very substantial broadening of the tax base. It is not as though the Government is just simply extending the tax to a few additional categories. In effect, it is extending sales tax to all goods
ewxicnee.ptInfoerffethcrt,eethocsaet eagroe rtihees -ofnoloy d~oomdesdwichinicehaanrde
now to be free of sales tax.
The effect of these measures will be to raise altogether some $550m this year or $892m in a full year. This represents an increase in sales tax this year of 39 per cent and, therefore, a considerable increase in indirect taxation and in total tax revenue. As has been made absolutely clear by ~tatements outside this House, the Opposition is Implacably oppo&ed to these measures. It is opposed to them because they represent a repudiation of a pledge made only five months ago not to broaden the indirect tax base, they will have an adverse effect on the living standards of Australian families, they will affect the equity of the tax system in a quite regressive way and they will

most certainly add to the inflation rate. Therefore, the measures are totally the opposite to the Government's alleged policy of fighting inflation.
. In regard to the first of those reasons for opposmg these measures, I note that on 12 March this year the Treasurer announced that after reviewing the possibility of broadening the indirect tax base either by a value added tax, retail sales tax or by extending the wholesale sales tax, the Government had decided not to undertake any such measures. That was a clear and major statement from the Treasurer on 12 March in this House on taxation. A little over five months later the Government is, in fact, considerably broadening the indirect tax base. This is the complete opposite. of what it said at that time. If it was not approprIate five months ago to undertake this considerable broadening of the indirect tax base and to increase the incidence of indirect taxation generally, why is it now appropriate? We have been given no explanation for this at all.
All the Treasurer has been able to say is that he had something much more horrific in mind in cond~cting the investigation into broadening the indlfect tax base late last year and early this year. He wanted to raise indirect taxes-he made this clear in his statement on 12 March-by $3,OOOm. Now he says that because he is only raising them by a little under $l,OOOm the same arguments do not apply-that is, the arguments which he used in March of this year to say that the Government would not be going ahead with the idea of extending indirect taxation. The main reason he did not proceed last March was because of the inflati.onary impact; at least, that was the publicly gIven reason. There may be other reasons, but the reason he gave to this House was that to increase indirect taxes in the way he was proposing would have been too inflationary to bear. He estimated that a $3,OOOm increase in indirect taxes would increase the inflation rate by 6 per cent. Broadly speaking, he reached that calculation by saying that a $500m increase in indirect taxes increases the consumer price index directly and indirectly by one per cent.
Sitting suspended from 1 to 2 p.m.
Mr WILLIS -I seek leave to continue my remarks at a later hour this day.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.
REMUNERATION AND ALLOWANCES AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill-by leave~presented by Mr Newman, and read a first time.

878 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Remuneration Amendment Bill 1981

Second Reading
Mr NEWMA~ (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services) (2.1 )-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Earlier today I tabled the Remuneration Tribunal's 1981 Review which was presented to me on 18 June 1981. The Government has accepted the Tribunal's report on judges' remuneration and the following determinations: Allowances for members, Ministers and office-holders of the Parliament, and remuneration payable to holders of offices in the First Division of the Australian Public Service and holders of public offices. The Government accepts the merit in the Tribunal's decisions with regard to the increases in salaries for Ministers, members and office-holders in Parliament.
The decisions recognised the real decline in Parliamentary salaries that have already occurred in comparison with the wages earned by the average Australian. It is important to note that between March 1975 and December 1980 average weekly earnings rose by 84 per cent while the salaries of members of the Federal Parliament rose by 50 per cent. It should be remembered that members of parliament did not automatically receive the cost of living increases which flowed to most wage and salary earners as a result of national wage case decisions. It is also significant to look at the restraint that has already been exercised by the Government on its own Ministerial salaries in the interests of setting a national example.
Salary increases recommended for Ministers by an independent inquiry in 1971 were not implemented until 1973. Increases recommended by the Remuneration Tribunal in 1974 were not implemented. Increases in Ministerial salaries recommended in 1975, 1978 and 1979 were not implemented. In 1978 the Tribunal recommended that Ministers' salaries be increased by 4.9 per cent in line with national wage increases over the previous 12 months, but the Government did not accept this recommendation and no increases were given. In 1979 the Tribunal recommended increases of 9.1 per cent but the Government approved a rise of7.3 per cent.
Mr Deputy Speaker, the Government believes that the inflationary threats posed by excessive wage increases are so serious that an example of restraint must once again be set. Thus, as a lead to the rest of the community the Government has decided that the salary rise recommended by. th~ Remuneration Tribunal for all senators, members, office-holders and Ministers will not be taken at once, but spread over two years. I express

the hope that the community will take full note of this example being set by the Government and the Parliament.
The Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Bill gives effect to these views where action is required to implement or modify the Tribunal's decisions. Part II provides that members and office-holders of the Parliament will receive in 1981-82 salary or additional salary increases amounting to half those determined by the Tribunal. The rates which appear in the Bill reflect the total amounts which will be received in 1981-82. Part III deals with the salaries of Ministers and provides for the sum appropriated under the Ministers of State Act to be increased to provide for half the increases in the Tribunal's report. The Tribunal's report on the remuneration of judges is implemented by Part IV of the Act. Finally, Part V provides that the power of disallowances in the Remuneration Tribunals Act will not apply to the Tribunal's 1981 determinations, including those proposed to be modified by this Bill. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Lionel Bowen) adjourned.
SALES TAX (EXEMPTIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS) AMENDMENT BILL
1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (2.5)-Before the suspension of the sitting, I was making the point that the impact of these sales tax measures would be to add considerably to inflation, and that on the basis of the calculations giv~n by the Treasurer in his taxation statement on 12 March the impact would be in the order of 2 per cent. In that statement of 12 March, the Treasurer said thllt a one per cent increase in the consumer price index would occur for an increase in revenue from sales from indirect taxes of some $500m. I shall turn to his statement at that time. He said:
As a general rule, each additional $500m raised through indirect taxes results in direct and indirect additions to the consumer price index of almost 1 per cent. Furthermore, there are additional How-on consequences for the consumer price index through the wage system which are hard to quantify.
So he therefore was quoting at least one per cent, and maybe more. Now is he saying that the inflationary impact of sales tax rises of almost $1,OOOm-that is, about one-third of what he was talking about in March of-this year-would be only 0.75 per cent. Clearly, there is a great inconsistency between what he i~ saying now and what he was saying then. The only way that that can be explained at all, in my view, is that he is talking

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 879

about the impact of those sales tax measures on the consumer price index for 1981-82 as against 1980-81. Of course, for only half that year we had the impact of the measures whereby previously exempt items are to be taxed. It would seem to us that the real figure is in the order of two per cent,
and maybe even more with the flow-on introduced to wages, as he said. This, of course, is an extremely important point. These increases in sales tax will not be some minor factor; they will have a notable impact on the inflation rate.
What the Treasurer seems to be saying is that, although the inflation impact in March of this year was something which concerned him, inflation now does not concern him that much. One would ask: 'Has there been some great change in the level of inflation since March of this year?' Of course there has not. There has been a slight reduction in the CPI over that time, but the forecasts are for a notable increase at least in the next year. One reason for that notable increase is the measures now before the House. One must ask: 'Whatever happened to the so-called "inflation first" policy?' If the policy is to fight inflationthat is what the Government keeps saying is its policy-why is it introducing measures such as this one which clearly add directly to inflation? On the basis of the Treasurer's own figures, these measures will add approximately 2 per cent to the inflation rate. How is this possibly fighting inflation? What it is in fact is the continuance of a process which defies reason but which has been pursued by the Government during its time in office, that is, the process of fighting inflation by increasing prices. This is perhaps one of the more blatant examples of it, but there are many examples in the earlier Budgets of the Fraser Government.
We are concerned about the inflationary impact of these measures and the reason why we oppose them is important. We think it is absurd to be adding directly to the inflation rate in this way. It obviously not only will add to the inflation rate directly but also will feed the inflationary expectations about which the Treasurer says he is concerned, more than any other factor because it adds to the inflation rate. That in itself is a major cause of increased inflationary expectations, and certainly outweighs any reduction in inflationary expectations which may come from reducing the deficit by the increased revenue Which comes from measures such as this. I think the Government and the Treasurer are totally misled in believing that by undertaking measures like this they are acting in some anti-inflationary way. It is quite obvious, on the face of the measures, that they are inflationary, and by their impact on inflationary expectations they certainly add to the inflation

rate in the future. I also note what the Treasurer said in March of this year when he said that he would not broaden the incidence of indirect taxation. At that time he said quite unambiguously that any move to widen indirect taxes should be accompanied by reduced income tax. In his statement of 12 March 1981 he said:
Throughout its-consideration of this issue, the Government remained firmly of the view that if a shift towards greater emphasis on indirect taxation were to occur, it should be accompanied by a noticeable reduction in personal income tax.
Where are the reductions'in personal income tax? Despite this firm view of the Government in March of this year that any widening of the impact of indirect taxation should be accompanied by compensating reductions in income tax, we have the opposite. Instead of a firm pledge to reduce income tax, we now have a firm commitment to increase it, along with the increases in indirect taxation. Of course, there can be no denying that this Budget includes a substantial increase in the incIdence of income tax. Pay-as-youearn taxpayers will pay 22 per cent more tax this year, although the estimated increase in the wages bill is 1St per cent. That clearly spells out an increase in the incidence of income tax for wage and salary earners-the majority of income tax payers.
It is quite clear that this firm promise of March of this year that if at any future time there were to be some expansion of the incidence of indirect taxation it would be accompanied by reduced income tax has been totally broken. Indeed, not only has it been broken in the sense that there are no income tax cuts but also, in fact, there have been considerable income tax increases. That, of course, is a further reason for the Opposition strongly to oppose these measures. We also oppose them because what the Government is doing now clearly represents the not so thin edge of the wedge to a further expansion of indirect tax at some future. time. In particular, with the new category of 2t per cent-that is, the items which were previously exempt but which are now taxable at 2t per cent-it would be very easy to raise these rates to the 5 per cent level, doubtless claiming that this was necessary to eliminate an anomaly, as the Government has done in respect of other items in this year's Budget. It is highly likely, therefore, that this is just the first step towards an even further extension of the indirect taxation that the Treasurer and the Treasury clearly desire. I note in this regard that the previously exempt items now to be taxed were all suggested by the Treasury in Taxation Paper No. 5 of 1974 and, of course, were not adopted by the then Labor Government, but they are now being

880 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

adopted by t~is Government. It was also suggested then that the rates could be raised as another means of extending indirect taxation. That has also been done in this Budget. The Treasury also suggested in that paper that we could have a tax on services. That has not been done at this time. Clearly, this could 'be a future step in the process of increasing indirect taxes on which this Government now seems to have embarked.
Doubtless the Government will claim that this is not its intention. But the Opposition is not the only body which believes that the Government's intention is to go much further than it has to the present stage in extending the impact of indirect taxation. The morning after the Budget was delivered last week the Australian Financial Review had an editorial which spoke of the sales tax move as 'a major step towards a broadening of the tax base'. The editorial went on to state:
But of course the future of the new sales taxes is quite predictable. Over time they will creep up, while the much more noticeable income taxes will when electorally convenient, be reduced.
But the sales tax on a broader base is now a fait accompli. It will not be nearly as difficult once it is in operation to extend it to nearly all the categories of retailing.
Clearly, it is a wider perception than just that of the Opposition that this is the not so thin edge of the wedge for a much more significant extension of indirect taxation. As we made clear when the Treasurer made his statement in March of this year, we deplore any attempt to increase the incidence of indirect taxation. This is partly because of its inflationary impact, which I have spoken of, and because it undeniably increases the inequity of the tax system. Obviously, that inequity arises because of the way in which tax is levied. It applies in a way which has no regard for the capacity of individuals to pay. Instead of being a progressive tax, as income tax is, it is a regressive tax; that is, the tax applies at the same amount regardless of income and therefore bears more heavily as a proportion of income on those persons with lower incomes. It is regressive rather than progressive taxation, not only having no regard for the capacity of people to pay but also bearing on people in reverse of their capacity to pay. We oppose any extension of the incidence of indirect taxation. We have been consistent about that in the past with other indirect tax measures and similarly we oppose these measures because of what is involved in that regard.
In regard to the matter of the inequity of indirect taxation, I point to a couple of surveys which bear out what I am saying in this regard.

Firstly, the household expenditure survey of 1976 conducted by the Australian Bureau of Statistics-if one updates the tables contained in that survey-clearly shows that households on lower incomes spend a greater proportion of their incomes than do their higher income counterparts. Therefore, if one taxes most of their expenditure it will weigh more heavily on them than on higher paid persons. Households on lower and middle incomes spend a greater proportion of their incomes on housing, fuel and power, food, household equipment and operation, and medical care-areas which are hard hit by the Commonwealth Government's charges and indirect taxes and by State charges. These State charges are likely to be increased in forthcoming budgets.
In 1976 Mr Neil Warren of the University of New South Wales looked at the incidence of all federal indirect taxes on different income levels for households. This study showed a declining trend as income rises. These finding have been updated by the increase in average weekly earnings since that time. The results show that a household with an income around average weekly earnings-that is, about $320 a week-pays 10.2 per cent of that income in indirect taxes, compared to 7.1 per cent for a household with an income double average weekly earnings and 14.9 per cent for a household earning less than $4,000. What comes clearly from that analysis of the impact of indirect taxation on households with differing incomes is that for lower income households those indirect taxes weigh far more heavily. This is not simply a matter of assertion; it is a matter of detailed, empirical analysis by Mr Neil Warren of the University of New South Wales. I believe that in those circumstances there can be no denying whatever that a move towards more indirect taxation, as is involved in these measures, means a move to a more regressive tax system and that if the Government persists in this direction clearly it will be forcing the lower income section of the community to bear a greater and greater proportion of the total taxation burden.
We oppose these measures also because of their overall effect on family living standards. As we have said over the past week or so outside this House and, I think, inside it, the impact will be in the order of $4 a week for a family. That calculation conies simply from dividing the total annual tax revenue by the number of people in Australia, which gives a total tax levy per person of a little over $60 a year-that is, more than $1 a week. For a family of four that means an amount of about $4 a week. In fact, it comes to about $4.70. Because part of the sales tax burden will bear on mining companies and some other bodies

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 881

which will not be able to pass the cost on to consumers, we can just round that figure off to about $4. This is probably a very generous rounding-off. It would seem to us that there will be an increase of at least $4 a week for a family of four. I would like to know how the Treasurer gets a figure of about $1.50 to $2, which is the figure that he keeps using. It seems to us to be a figure which is totally unjustifiable on the basis of the amount of revenue which he says his tax will raise-almost $900m in a full year. That must mean a burden per head of population over $1 a week. Clearly, that will impinge on family living standards to a significant degree. It is not some minor element, as the Treasurer tries to make out.
Also, of course, in looking at that effect we are looking at the impact of the tax revenue. We are not there looking at the total impact on consumers which will more than likely be greater than the tax revenue because wholesalers will add the tax to their price. But the retailer will then place mark-ups on the price from the wholesaler which will include the wholesale increased tax. So the mark-up by the retailer to the consumer will mean that where there is a 2t per cent rise we will more than likely see an increase well above that. Those increases are likely to mean that for an increase of 2t per cent with a 20 per cent mark-up, one will see a 3 per cent effective tax rate. For a 50 per cent mark-up it will be 3.75 per cent rather than 2t per cent as the Treasurer suggests.
For all of the reasons I have given we are strongly and implacably opposed to these measures. In asserting that opposition we are being totally consistent with the view which we have taken in the past in respect of indirect taxation measures in general. Also we say that we have a right, as an opposition, to oppose tax measures. That is in no way inconsistent with the statement which we have made many times that we do not believe that the Opposition ought to block Supply. This is not blocking Supply. We are not suggesting a blockage of the Appropriation Bills and therefore putting the Government in jeopardy. All that we are saying is that there ought to be a blockage of these tax Bills because they are not in the best interest of this country. It is consistent with the fact that we have opposed various tax Bills in the past.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr GILES (Wakefield) (2.22)- The honourable member for GeJlibrand (Mr Willis) has given, as is usual, an objective and moderate summing-up of the economic situation revolving

around these sales tax Bills. I want to do as he has done and that is touch on the generalities before I speak on the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Bill, the Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos 1 to 9) and the Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos lA to 9A). I will do this very briefly. What intrigues me is the sort of credibility gap that is left once we have listened carefully to the speeches by the honourable member for Gellibrand or, indeed, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden).
The community knows and understands very well that the Opposition, in government, has a role of higher expenditure than the current Government, although it tries, from time to time, to reverse the argument. It does not take a lot of horse sense to know that, if one adds up the costs of many of the Australian Labor Party's bills, we need more revenue to finance them: Yet, what do we see? The Opposition has been against the razor gang reports by and large. It has been against the health package which the Government has brought down and which has been the biggest single saving on government expenditure of this Budget. It objects to the run down that this Government is pleased to have been able to take a part in by taking account of redundancy in trying to cut back on the number of civil servants that perform their functions for the community properly and well. Now it objects to the sales tax measures. So, there is an enormous credibility gap over what the Opposition will do under similar situations. I repeat that, in government, it would need more revenue than this Government to finance it schemes. Yet it objects to every cutback in government expenditure that the Fraser Government is bringing about to try to achieve a better balance on behalf of the consumers and the people of Australia. I think that point needs to be taken into account.
The honourable member for Gellibrand says he opposes these Bills. He looks on them as being regressive legislation. That is a simplistic argument and one that can be readily believed out in the consumer marketplace. This is not necessarily true at all. Really what these sales tax Bills do is to put a higher tax on people who spend up. Whether they come from one section of society or another they really are the losers. But there is another side to it. If one looks at the overall Budget strategy and sees that there is a downward thrust of some form of expenditure, particularly on luxuries, then, indeed, it does not even necessarily become highly inflationary. Certainly, there is a check on the bare direct figures in an indirect fashion.

882 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

It is my view-I have no doubt that it is the Government's view; I certainly support it-that by broadening the base of taxation in this sense we will relieve pressure on direct taxation measures that are currently running, as I remember the figure, at around 52 per cent-or a little less, I think-of total government receipts. I hope that the action, coupled with the Government's attempt to control this sort of extravagant expenditure, which in many instances it can be, will
make it possible to continue to increase its policy of cutting back on direct taxation, that is, on income tax as it affects ordinary people in the community. If it is able to do that, that will give tremendous encouragement to those people to get off whatever it is they sit on, and invent and per-
form jobs that one perceives, every now and again, people are doing within the atmosphere of the community generally. I can think of dozens of
jobs in the community, some of them owing their basis to the Community Youth Support Scheme, where people from that base have found imagin-
ative ways of earning themselves a living and frequently starting up their own small industries.
The Government hopes these policies will enable more people to do that-not less-and that more people will look after their own future identities
and future progress in life, and not find it necessary to depend on the Government for every implication of their daily lives.

I have noticed in a series of documents lately

the full six-year program put out by President

Reagan of the United States. Of course, it is a

document of considerable impact on the

American community. The mere fact that the

program adds to its impact over a period of two or

three years and continues to six years is obviously

a matter that must be carefully looked at by the

Government. I have noticed Press reports fearing

that there will be a burgeoning or a blow-out of

the United States of America deficit, given the

current changing circumstances of the state of its

economy. That mayor may not be correct. What

a foolish government it would be in Australia if it

did not take that sort of reform, as I see it, into

account and judge what is happening as a result of

it. I think that, contrary to the honourable

member for Gellibrand asking about taxation

cuts, the proper way for the Government to act

would be to see what would happen in relation to

those enormous tax cuts that President Reagan

has brought down and try to learn from the early

years of their implementation. No doubt what I

can say is that in the life of the Parliament I am

confident that-if the honourable member for

Gellibrand is patient-all will be revealed. I hope

it~

-

I hope that the lesson that the Government can learn from the American experiment will be such that it finds itself in a position of lower interest rates and lower inflation from which it can start from a proper base to bring about some of the reforms already in place in America. That is as it may be, but I do not detract from the fact that the sales taxBills which are before us now are obviously part of any reform of the taxation system from the point of view of where I sit. I think it is an important part. Later in my speech I will certainly touch on one or two anomalies as I see them, because there has never been a package of Bills as complicated as this. There are one or two matters that deserve study in the future. I will touch particularly on the anomalies clause.
Might I just get back to where I should have been in the first place and remind the House that the Bills can really be divided into three categories as has been stated by the Treasurer (Mr Howard). The first relates to the 2+ per cent increase on goods currently subject to sales tax. The second relates to an increase in scope or a broadening of the base of sales tax. The Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Bill is the anomalies Bill to which I intend to refer in a little more depth later. In these general remarks I ought to state how lucky my electorate, South Australia, and indeed other States, where the wine industry has a lesser impact that it does.in my own State, must feel now that wine has been put with foods and medicines in the items that will be exempt. I do not suppose that anyone who argued that there should be no tax on the wine industry would have any idea of the extent of that exemption and its value in relation to other goods. I think the wine industry would be very foolish if it did not absorb the lesson of that particular differentiation. The wine industry must be counted extraordinarily lucky indeed that in this Budget it has escaped the net of sales tax. I add that if there were an argument favouring the introduction of a tax on wine-I am sure the argument would be lost on many honourable members in this House-it would also have to be remembered that since the Whitlam Government brought down changes to the standard valuation under section 31 A of the Income Tax Assessment Act and introduced section 31B, the wine industry as such has been paying off the sum of, as I remember it, $22.5m. Whereas many people thought that after 6+ years that payment would have been complete, the fact is that many firms have not yet completed that payment and are paying company tax plus up to 10 per cent extra in tax. On that basis, those firms are the most highly taxed in Australia today. So

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 883

there is some justification for the wine industry escaping this tax. I suppose one could argue-I certainly did-that an awful shakeout in the industry is currently going on. It is a very vertically integrated industry insofar as the raw material producer has no other real outlet for his raw material. That shakeout is going on right throughout the various stages of the industry with no profitability of any consequence.
Mr Young-God you talk some nonsense.
Mr GILES-I know the way in which the honourable member for Port Adelaide argues, but in justice to him I will not repeat his argument.
Mr Young-I have given up drinking. That is how bad it was.
Mr GILES-I thought that the honourable member had been a teetotaller for most of his life. What I am saying is that there is no profitability throughout the various levels of the wine industry today. I suppose there must have been a persuasive argument that influenced the Governmentthat if firms are going broke under the present shakeout proceedings, why introduce a tax ort the industry thereby ensuring that the Government is blamed for something that is already occurring? Of course, the great love for quality wines of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Frase~) is renowned. I have no doubt that that in itself and statements he may have made from time to time have had an impact on this decision.
I return to what I was saying a while ago. The wine industry would be very stupid if it were not extraordinarily grateful for the position it is now in. It must be a tremendous relief to the industry considering the other commodities which currently come under the net of these sales tax Bills. I was also interested in that element of the speech of the honourable member for Gellibrand in which he questioned the consistency of the remarks made by the Treasurer earlier in the year in the autumn session. Let us be quite fair: We have before us a smallish Bill affecting revenue to the extent of about $800m. What the Treasurer was patently saying at that time was that the Government had no intention of moving into a total retail turnover tax-a tax on goods and services and a package which, it is well acknowledged, would have raised revenue amounting to more than $3,OOOm. Let us face it; there is really no compari" son between those two statements.
But what excites me much more is the fact that the Labor Opposition has said from time to time, and I gather one other party has also said it in another place, that the Government did not have a mandate, through its policy speech at the last election, to introduce sales tax. That statement

raises thousands of anomalies. But let us just follow through the case of the wine industry which I know best. The first attempt at taxing it was by Scullin in 1929. He made no reference to such a tax in his policy speech. If honourable members want to see the record of the Melbourne Argus at that time on this tax, they are welcome to it. I have a copy here. Bury, as Treasurer, also brought down an excise on wine. Was it announced in a policy speech? Of course it was not. It had no relation to a policy speech, nor did that Government have a mandate for it. When the Whitlam Government came to office in 1976, did it really make a policy speech statement to the effect that it was going to remove sectioh 31A from the Income Tax Assessment Act? Of course it did not. More latterly, in terms of this Government's action, it is quite true that there was nothing in its policy speech to forecast this matter. The whole history of this nation is studded with revenue raising moves that are not mentioned in policy speeches. So it is gigantic humbug for the Opposition to try that one on through the Press as it is currently doing.
My friend, the Deputy Government Whip, has asked whether I could save a little time for other honourable members who wish to make a contribution to this debate; so I will move very quickly to the anomalies section itself. That section comprises Bills Nos. 1 to 9 which deal with anomalies, exemptions and inconsistencies. The Government has of course, a big problem when it tries to remedy an anomaly because so often an attempt to resolve an anomaly results in a worse one arising in its place. I will touch on an example of that in a few minutes. I wish to comment, as I am sure other honourable members participating in this debate will no doubt wish to, on the matter that affects my electorate the most-that is, the matter of farmers' trucks and contractors' trucks, which have been brought into the 17-!- per cent tax category. Due to an anomaly which previously existed, they did not attract sales tax at this level. I think it is proper to go back in history which, of course, only members as venerable as me are capable of doing-there are some rare exceptions-and look at the time when this tax exemption status was given to trucks. It was brought in at a time when export grain returns were very low and when many cereal farmers were experiencing a high level of non-profitability in their enterprises. It was apparent to almost everybody that of all the enterprises of that kind the most inefficient were the labour intensive, small grain producing farms in Australia. It was equally obvious that the productivity of those farms could be improved by increasing the size of

884 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

the farms but more particularly by increasing That fruit is soaked in a sugar solution for a fort-

mechanisation. It was felt that an improvement in night. ;Both the fibre and the sugar are broken

this very consequential area of export earning indown and replaced by beet or sugar cane sugar.

come in those days-in spite of the low prices The final analysis of the crystallised fruit is 80 per

received by farmers-could be brought about by cent sugar, not 52 per cent fruit and fruit sugar.

proper and more efficient use of mechanised There is an important difference. I believe the

measures. So the Government of the day acted by Treasurer intends to check out my contentions.

introducing those exemptions. One of the most productive and most efficient industries throughout the length and breadth of the land is the whole bulk handling side of the grain industry as it exists today. But in the wake of the exemptions came all the anomalies in the world.
Successive govc;rnment wondered why an exemption was given in the case of a wheat or grain farm but not a livestock farm. In turn, the

Mr Young-Another South Australian industry closed down.
Mr GILES-The honourable member should tell me about the wine industry. That would keep him quiet for a while. I hope that the Government will have a careful look at the small glace fruit industry. If my contentions are correct I believe that a correction should be made on another occasion.

contractors who contracted their big trucks for Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

profit an~ were not rural producers in the true . Order! The honourable member's time has

sense of the word also became used to claiming expired.

successfully for exemption of sale tax on the vehicles they purchased. So, from the point of view of my electorate, I was naturally unhappy that the Government had to uncover that anomaly. But there is a lot of logic in the Government's move. Why should some of the people I have mentioned receive exempt status for purchases of large trucks when others cannot? The whole thing either had to be extended even further or the anomaly had to be patched up. I do not see any-
thing wrong with the Government's logic in this respect. If a government is trying to produce' a domestic surplus of $1 ,500m, in my view that sort of action is perfectly justified. I, as a Government member, will of course stand up in the bush and elsewhere for the wisdom of that decision.

Mr HOWE (Batman) (2.42)-This legislation indicates the Government's decision to move in the longer term from dependence on direct taxation for revenue to a much greater dependence on indirect taxation. Of course we ought to put that into context. Since 1975, the Government has been sharply increasing indirect taxes. Prior to the current move to impose a much wider range of sales taxes across the board, the Government gained a very large part of its total revenue from
taxes on petrol. Over the past five or six years, the Government will have collected $10 billion in tax on petrol alone. In the current year, it will collect $3,357m, a very significant proportion, perhaps nine per cent, of total revenue. The movement towards indirect taxation in the form of the petrol

I have time for only just one other example. I think the Government is creating another anomaly by trying to do away with one. I refer to a very small industry, but a growing one, which produces glace fruits. It is mostly South Australian based except for the glace side of the pineapple industry in Queensland. It deals with seven

.

tax does not have a very long future. I believe that in this legislation the Government is anticipating the fact that revenue from the tax on oil will decline and it is looking for another form of taxation which perhaps will not be recognised by the general public in a direct way in the sense that an increase in income tax might be recognised.

major varieties of fruits. I will not run through What we have before us is very much the thin

them. That small industry has a 40 per cent export end of the wedge. The Government is building up

component which is increasing. Its competition is sales taxes .as an increasingly important pro-

crystallised fruit which is brought in entirely from portion of its total revenue. I think it is important

France. Crystallised fruit has attracted a 15 per to say that because this Government does not pro-

cent sales tax in the past. The competitive posceed, on the whole, on a rational basis in any sense

ition has been altered materially so that both but narrow political sense. It is not engaged in any

products now attract sales tax of 17t per cent. So, kind of overall program of tax reform. These sales

to that point, one might ask: 'Where is the tax proposals cannot be described as a tax reform

anomaly?' The anomaly is that glace fruits were package. A few months ago, the Treasurer (Mr

removed from the fruit category to the confecHoward) floated the idea of a value-added tax.

tionery category in spite of the fact that a very. There were debates and discussions about that. At

quick process retains the structure of the fruit and the time he argued about the need for a different

the fruit sugar-fructose. One must compare glace mix in taxation. Of course, when the debate got

fruit with the French produced crystallised fruit. under way the Treasurer and the Government

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 885

retreated. In this Budget sales taxes were dramatically increased as part of a move which is very much in line with the move that the Treasurer was contemplating some months ago.
It is important to emphasise that this is not part of any overall program of policy reform. Whilst the Asprey Committee, for example, recommended the introduction of VAT and canvassed the possibility of increases in sales taxes, it did so within the context of a number of proposals which would have led to sweeping reforms in the tax system if they had been adopted. The Committee saw the need to look at the question of equity in consumer taxes, and in an overall program of reform, to provide for a system of tax credits for lower income families to compensate for the obvious inequitable character of an increase in sales taxes. It also recognised the need at the other end of the scale to introduce capital and capital gains taxes to assist in providing a level of equity to the overall system of taxation. I do not think it would be possible for the Treasurer to argue that what he is about is in any sense an equitable system of taxation. Yet equity is one of the fundamental principles, though not the only principle, by which a system of taxation ought to be judge<l.
No doubt the measures which have been introduced by the Government will result in a further shaw increase in the degree of inequity which is being built into the taxation system as Ii whole. The increases in sales tax will collect another $150 to $200 a head from the Australian population, a very sharp increase in the total burden of taxation. This is being done without compensating effect to cushion the impact of those changes on lower income families. Alongside these proposals there is nothing from the Government in terms of either capital taxes or the resource rent taxes so strongly favoured by the Treasury. Nor on the other side is the Government concerned to bring about any dramatic change in tht< social security system along the lines of a negative income or a guaranteed minimum income as has been canvassed, for example, by Professor Henderson in the poverty inquiry. Furthermore, the imposition of indirect taxation in this case and in the earlier cases I mentioned seems to run directly counter to the Government's professed strategy. The Government is introdcing taxation which must be inflationary. In the Government's own policies it hardly seems to be concerned about inflationary impacts. Inflation has been built into the system as a result of its oil pricing and taxation policies, the health insurance changes this year, and now the imposition of a heavy indirect taX.

I think we can say quite confidently that, with these sales tax measures alone, another one per cent will be added to the consumer price index. We can look at examples of where this sales tax is going to fall. As the shadow Treasurer has indicated, the impact will be very much on the ordinary family. For example, as a result of sales taxes imposed on building materials, $500 or $600 is likely to be added to the price of a house costing in the range of $35,000. It is a very severe impost in a situation where, because of the rise in interest rates, it is becoming increasingly difficult for ordinary people to purchase their own homes, The Government says that it is on about home ownership. When we look at the Government's record we see that it is on about reducing the opportunities of people to own their own homes.
We could also look at the impact of sales tax on transport. We are talking about very basic areas of people's expenditure-housing and transport. As a result of the increased imposition contained in these measures, the prices of cars are likely to rise considerably. For example, a Holden Gemini will cost $116 more, a 6-cylinder Commodore will cost $168 more and a Datsun Bluebird will cost $130 more. At a time when the vehicle industry is not exactly in a very healthy condition we find that the Government is moving to make it more difficult for people to purchase cars. I would have thought we ought to be stimulating the market, if anything, and not depressing it at a time when there is so much uncertainty about the future of the industry.
We can look at increases in sales tax on a whole range of consumer goods, which I will come back .. to in a moment. These increases will represent a massive difference to the cost of living for the normal family. It has been estimated that they will cost a four-person family an additional $245. These unfair increases will swallow up any increases in family allowances, which, of course, are not being provided for what is regarded as the average family in Australia-a man, his wife and two children. They have to be looked at in the context of a Budget which will allow income tax to rise by 21 per cent-well above the expected rate of increase in incomes this year. This is also happening in the context of a government which, through its changes to medical insurance, will add $10 a week to the costs for the average Australian family.
It has been said, but it needs to be said again, that this Government is entirely insensitive to the effects of its policies on ordinary families. The principal impact of these changes, it cannot be emphasised enough, is not going to hit the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) or those people

886 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

that the Government parties represent. It is going are being referred to the Industries Assistance

to hit ordinary'people living in the suburbs of the Commission and that levels of protection will

cities and in the provincial centres of this country. almost certainly be reduced. It there is a chance to

I am talking about doubling, from 2t per cent to 5 have a go at manufacturing industry, this Govern-

per cent, the sales tax on basic furnishing items, ment is prepared to take it; and these sales tax

such as crockery, glassware, cutlery, washing mameasures are an example of that.

chines, vacuum cleaners, radiators, light fittings, candles and so on. These increases mean that those people who are trying to get themselves established in a most difficult economic climate are having an additional impost placed on them. The increases will affect their capacity to get a vehicle, which is no longer a luxury but an abolute necessity for people living in the suburbs of the great cities. There will be increases in the prices of a whole range of items covering cosmetics, shaving creams and hair oils. The cost of television tubes is to go up by perhaps $70-perhaps more-as a result of the imposition of increased sales tax.
Of course, the public is not aware of all these increases because the Government, in its announcements, did not place very much emphasis on the Schedules to the Bills, on the lists of items, and on

The Government, in its obsession with resource-based development, has allowed capital inflows to occur at a massive rate without any
control over those flows to ensure that they go to the development of new industry. On the other
hand, the Government, by these measures, is showing no great sympathy for the state of existing industry. The imposition of sales taxes, as the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) has indicated, is essentially unfair. They, along with other measures that the Government has taken, redistribute the burden unequally. At a time when we have a severely contractionary Budget, we have these measures which are likely to prove contractionary within the context of the overall economy.

the comprehensiveness of the imposts which are The Government is in fact signalling a long

now being placed on so many of the basic conterm change in the taxation mix, but once again it

sumer items which ordinary people need. There has not had the honesty to say that that is what it

are some basic points which need to be made. This is really about. It has not really set the changes

Government has no interest at all in equity. The within the context of overall reform of the tax-

Government is not interested in providing supation system. It has simply slipped in these

port for low income families-quite the reverse. changes in a way which means that their impact is

The Government bears down on people on lower hidden and will unfold in future years so that we

incomes. It is not interested in equity. It is not can expect to see sales tax used in a way in which

interested in providing any kind of effective tax in historically it has never previously been used in

relation. to wealth. The Government, which Australia.

,. professes to be concerned about the housing and

building industry, has taken, by these measures, a I believe this question of sales tax represents

massive swipe at the building industry, which is once again the priorities of this Government. Its

already being crippled by very high interest rates. priorities are to reduce the living standards of or-

It has, through these measures, added significantly . dinary Australian families and to redistribute

to the price of a family home. It has raised the cost negatively. Its priority is certainly not taxation re-

of purchasing and running the family car. It is form. It is certainly not on about reducing the tax-

making basic necessities more expensive.

ation burden on ordinary families. It is a cynical

government which uses taxation by stealth to

Again the Government appears to have quite ensure that people have as little opportunity as

ignored the employment implications of its decisions. The impact of increasing sales taxes on

possible to protest against its policies. Policy is, in fact, this Government's enemy. It rules by in-

clothing, footwear and other basic consumer stinct, and its instinct always is to operate in a way

items means in reality that there will be considerwhich protects the .interests of its supporters and

able difficulty in maintaining employment in ignores the interests of the overwhelming majority

those areas, and certainly the costs will be passed of Australians.

on to ordinary consumers, because we are talking

about items for which the price is inelastic. These Mr PORTER (Barker) (2.59)-That was an

decisions, in my view, show a cynical disregard for interesting contribution from the honourable

the employment prospects of thousands of Ausmember for Batman (Mr Howe). He seemed to

tralians. The moves have to be placed within the conflict directly with the supposedly alternative

context of the Government's determination to Budget of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr

bear down in every way on manufacturing indusHayden)-that rerun of the 1976 alternative

try in this country. It is not simply that matters Budget. The honourable member for Batman said

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 887

that the Government was interested only in attacking industry whereas the Leader of the Opposition said only the other night that the Government was not interested in people but was interested only in industry. I wish members of the Opposition would make up their minds about what they really believe.
These Bills are to implement three Government decisions outlined in the Budget. The first group of Bills is to increase by 2t per cent the existing rates of sales tax as they apply to sales taxable items. The new rates of sales tax will be effective as from Budget night. The second group of Bills is to implement the Budget decision to correct a number of anomalies and inconsistencies in the sales tax law. This will mean that a number of items previously sales tax exempt will now be taxed at the rate equal to that applied to other light goods in their class. It will also mean that some goods will now be exempt from sales tax. This is consistent with the exemption applied to other like goods in their class. I shall dal later with one of those items in this category. Finally, the third set of Bills relates to the imposition of a 2t per cent sales tax on a number of items previously not subject to sales tax.
The Treasurer (Mr Howard), when announcing the new sales taxes, said that there is advantage in some change in the mix of direct and indirect taxes to increase the potential for desirable reductions in direct taxes and particularly personal income tax as economic and budgetary conditions permit. Honourable members will recall that the Government has on two occasions reviewed the nature and source of the Commonwealth Government's revenue, particularly as it relates to the composition of taxation as between direct and indirect taxes, On both occasions, for a number of reasons, the Government did not decide to introduce a new broadly based indirect form of taxation. Whilst these new sales tax initiatives involve a slight shift in emphasis they do not constitute a new, broadly based tax because major areas such as the service industries are not subject to these new or increased tax rates. However, it is a small step towards reducing our dependence on personal tax as a source of revenue and relying a little more heavily on indirect tax whilst maintaining the tax free status of basic food items.
If we look to the proportions of revenue raised by personal income tax, company tax, customs, excise and sales tax and the crude oil levy w~ see that over the years the proportion of the Commonwealth Government's revenue raised from personal income tax increased from 34 per cent in 1958-59 to a peak of nearly 57 per cent in

1977-78. Personal income tax now provides more than half the total tax revenue for the Commonwealth Budget. Over the same period customs, excise and sales tax as a proportion of the total Budget have fallen from around 40 per cent to just over 20 per cent. Clearly, we now rely on income tax as the major source of our revenue and indirect taxes make a much smaller contribution to our total income. As time goes on this reliance on personal income tax is likely to increase because the income from one of the forms of indirect tax, that is the crude oil levy, will directly decline in future years as Australia uses up its old oil resources and becomes more dependent on the more recent oil discoveries which are not subject to the crude oil levy.
Therefore, whilst our overall tax burden is lower than the average of the industrialised world and whilst our level of personal tax is lower than the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average, over time we have become more reliant on personal income tax and less reliant on indirect taxes. Also our indirect taxation tends to be concentrated on a limited number of items unlike, for example, most European countries. In my view there are a number of advantages in redressing this shift toward a greater reliance on personal income tax. Also, bearing in mind as I have said that revenue from the crude oil levy is likely to grow less rapidly in the years ahead, this would have further aggravated the imbalance. I therefore welcome the Government's initiative to increase our reliance on indirect taxation rather than direct taxation and also to spread the base of that indirect taxation in order to include goods which were not previously taxed.
The arguments for a change in emphasis in our tax raising mechanisms are numerous. Firstly, personal income tax, being an extremely visible form of taxation, can become a disincentive for people to increase their work effort and income if the tax rate is such that they believe their marginal return is not worth the effort. I am firmly of the view that lower, rather than higher, income tax rates will increase the incentive for people to earn extra income and therefore increase our standard of living through increased production and increased. productivity. Secondly, indirect taxation has the advantage of being somewhat harder to evade and avoid than personal income tax. Of course the disadvantage is that it is likely to contribute to an increase in the consumer price index.. However, as the Treasurer has mentioned, the increase in the CPI, and so the inflationary impact of the imposition of these taxes, is likely to be small.

888 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

It could also be argued that a heavy reliance on indirect taxation such as sales tax can be regressive depending on the rate of tax and the items which are included in the tax base. Clearly, this current change will not result in a heavy reliance on sales tax. I believe one would be hard put to sustain this argument in the present circumstances. Having explained that I believe the Government's initiative in undertaking this move to increase indirect taxation is a good one as it constitutes a small step to redress what I believe is becoming a fundamental imbalance in the source of Commonwealth revenue, the question then arises as to why the Government did not reduce income tax at the same time as it increased sales tax.
The revenue which is expected to be raised from these sales tax moves is, in this financial year, around $553m. That revenue could have been used to increase the domestic surplus, as has been done in the Budget or for personal income tax deductions. For example, that money would have enabled us to increase the tax threshold by about $250. That is a reduction in tax of about $4.80 a weekfor the ordinary taxpayer. The Government decided against this course and instead will use the money to reduce the amount the Government would otherwise have had to borrow. The Government believes the Australian community will be best served by a reduction in the Government's borrowing requirements, and this move seeks to take the steam out of interest rate increases. Last financial year the Commonwealth, State and local governmens borrowed in excess of $4,OOOm. The amount to be borrowed this year can be reduced by a domestic surplus, such as predicted in this Budget, and thereby interest rates will be reduced below what they would otherwise be.
The . question then for the Treasurer was whether to use the sales tax revenue for tax reductions o.r to try to take the steam out of interest rate incr~asesby using the revenue to lower our loan requirements. On, my calculations Ii. one per cent increase in interest rates on a $30,000 home loan would more than wipe out the $4.80 tax benefit which could have arisen if the sales tax revenue had been used to reduce income taxes. Therefore, if the Government had used the sales tax revenue to reduce income tax rather than try to reduce interest rates the general, Australian public could well have been worse off because the tax benefit may have been-absorbed by increased interest rate 'payments. The Government has taken the sound course of bringing pressure to bear on the interest rate problem, and this will benefit all Australians. Clearly once interest rates

are reduced and become more stable the Government will be in a better position to reduce income taxes and so move towards the restoration of a reasonable balance in our reliance on indirect and direct sources of taxation.
I now refer to the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Bill which alters the sales tax classification of certain goods. Over time a number of anomalies have become evident in the sales tax treatment of a number of goods, and this Bill seeks to remedy some of those. One particular anomaly which seriously affected my electorate relates to the timber industry. I first raised this matter with the Treasurer in 1978. As far as I am aware, all equipment used in felling and removing timber from the forest to the roadside is tax exempt, except log forwarders. When introducing this Bill the Treasurer stated:
The expansion of logging of soFtwood Forests has led to the development of speCialised equipment called log Forwarders, to haul the Felled logs From the Felling point in the Forest to roadside pick-up points.
I am delighted that the Government has accepted that in the interests of equity and consistency a sales tax exemption will now be provided for log forwarders. The sales tax involves between $10,000 and $20,000 per log forwarder and it may well be more now, depending on the price of log forwarders. A number of these pieces of equipment are in use in the pine forests in the south-east of South Australia, serving the mills in the Mount Gambier, Millicent, Nangwarry, Kalangadoo, Mount Burr, Penola and other areas. The Government has now removed the restriction placed by the imposition of this tax on the use of this technogically advanced equipment. I am sure that not only the people using the log forwarders but also the whole of the timber industry will benefit from this rational decision. I might add that I also welcome the Government's decision to exempt from sales tax protective clothing of a kind used for sport or recreation such as helmets, guards, gloves and mittens.
One area on which I believe the Government must keep a close eye is the administration of the collection of the new taxes. We must continually review the administrative procedures in order to ensure that we minimise the inconvenience to the public and especially to small businesses, which in some cases will have to administer the collection or the exemption claims arising from the imposition of these new taxes. That matter must be the subject of continual review to ensure that the burden, especially that imposed on the small businessman, is not unreasonable. I conclude by supporting the Bills and welcoming the Government's initiative in moving away from an even

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 889

greater reliance on personal income tax as the major source of Government revenue.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (3.12)-The new found reliance that this Government is placing on sales tax is really to be expected. Sales taxes are hidden taxes; they are not highly visible like income taxes. They are in fact a dishonest way of increasing the money accruing to the Government. It was interesting to hear the forgettable comments of whats his name, the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter), who said that he thoroughly endorsed this principle. It is a principle of deceit and one would possibly expect the Liberal Party therefore to endorse it. I wish to talk about the inflationary aspect of this tax. When one surveys the free enterprise failures that clutter the front bench of the Liberal Party one can understand that those honourable members really do not understand the impact of what they are doing. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) said the other day: 'Goodness gr-acious, a family would have to spend $140 a week to incur a $3.80 rise'. In parts of my electorate where, although wages are high, costs are high also, the penalty will be more in the order of $7 a week. Does anyone seriously think that the impact of this measure will not flow through into demands for higher wages and higher costs all round? Of course it will. It is ridiculous to suppose otherwise.
One of the other aspects of this legislation at which we much look is the pork-barrelling aspect. We find that there is to be no tax on wine. That is totally inexcusable. Beer is already taxed .very heavily. Why is there to be no tax on wine? There is absolutely no justification whatsoever for that exemption. We also have the situation where, in the case of anomalies, the Government can decide that log forwarders-specialised pieces of equipment used in certain parts of the country-are to be excluded. In parts of my electorate which contribute far more to the gross domestic product than does the timber industry-I refer to the iron ore industry-a certain piece of equipment is used for communication between the various mine sites, which are often widely spread.
Mr Howard-You want to apply taxation on gold. That is right in the middle of your electorate. What is your position on that?
Mr CAMPBELL-I am quite happy to talk about that. Here we have a piece of equipment ideally suited to this industry~ It is called a motor vehicle. All of a sudden the Government has' imposed a 17t per cent tax on motor vehicles which, for some reason or another, it does not apply to the farming industry. It is not a case of anomalies; it is a case of idiocies. We find that this

pork-barrelling occurs in seats in which it will very much benefit the Government. These in another aspect of sales tax which needs to be look at. I refer to its divisiveness. If affects country people far more than it affects city people. Because costs are higher in the country, goods sold in the country will incur a much higher tax than goods sold in the city. Another aspect is that due to the delays that people in the country suffer in getting equipment and goods-although. they
have ordered goods prior to the Budget they cannot take delivery of them until after the Budget-we find that many people in the country are being forced to pay substantial amounts of money for goods that the previous week their city counterparts would have bought tax free. How can the Government justify this in terms of developing the country when the great resources that this country needs are mainly in the outlying areas?

The impact of this tax on development has also

to be considered. No doubt it will have a stifling

impact on the cost of development, of getting

projects off the ground. I have been talking to

people from Mount Newman Mining Company

Pty Ltd who are looking at. extending a railway

line. They are now faced with paying tax on this

railway line. All private railway lines in this

country that are not used for the carriage of

people are owned by mining companies. They are

there to provide the lifeline by which we can pro-

vide the exports that are so vital to Us. But here we

have, out of the blue, a sudden cost impost. It is

not a 17t per cent cost impost, because this cost

impost applies not only to trains and to rolling

stock but also to railway lines and sleepers. In this

instance railway sleepers are bought at Whyalla

and carted under contract to Mount Newman, so

the freight component is almost the saine as. the

actual cost of the article. That mining company is

not faced with a 17t per cent increase'in costs.

The real increase in costs will be somewhere near

27 per cent. How anyone can say that the Govern-

ment is justified in hampering the development of

industry t6 this extent is beyond me.'

,

Contrast the Government's policy with the policy of the Australian Labor Party. We would apply a resource tax. The difference is that ar.esource tax is paid only on profits. Here is the Government slugging companies at the bottom end. Companies thatare try1ng to get off' the ground, companies that are trying to develop, are being slugged by this Government, I believe basically because this Government simply does not understand how the economy works. I think it has demonstrated that fact on many occasions. I turn to the cost of housing. A house. which presently

890 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

costs $35,000 is going to cost almost $1,000 more. Opposition said that it was a disgrace and should

In the isolated areas of this country houses do not be removed. Then when it was removed the Op-

cost $35,000. In parts of my electorate that position objected more loudly than anyone else.

$35,000 house costs $100,000. Sales tax will rise The same sort of bunkum emerges in the situation

proportionately. It is a thing that would be berelating to sales tax. The Opposition is claiming

yond the comprehension of anybody who underthat the imposition of this additional sales tax will

stood how the free enterprise system worked.

be disastrous, particularly for the lower income

That is the real world situation. The costs imposed by this sales tax legislation will have wide spread ramifications throughout the community. They will probably lead to the closure of marginally profitable mines in some areas. They will certainly lead to a delay in projects that would otherwise have got under way. The division that this tax will cause in the community is obvious. It is a regressive tax that will have a far greater effect on the people on lower incomes. Obviously, if a person pays the same amount of tax as another person but does not get as much money, it is going to hurt that person a lot more. It is part of a sterile philosophy of this Government, which has sought over many years to transfer money from the poor to the wealthy. It has been one of this Government's principal policies since 1975. It

groups in this country. That position has been

echoed in editorials by newspapers such as the

Sydney Morning Herald without examining the

reality of the situation. It is interesting to hear this

criticism without any recognition of the fact that

on a national income accounts basis, the increase

in indirect taxes this year will be lower than it was

last year. There was no cry of disaster that was

effective last year. Domestic consumption expen-

diture and household disposable income went up

by over 3 per cent. That is the Budget forecast

again for this year. There was no evidence that a

bigger rise in indirect taxes, which took place last

year, had the sort of disastrous impact that was

. then forecast wrongly by the Opposition and

which is being forecast, again wrongly, by the

Opposition.

.

is going to cause increasing division in the comThe reality of the sales tax situation is this: munity. I believe that this cancer can be cut out, Sales tax revenues this year will make up 7.2 per

and the divisions in our society healed, only by the cent of total government receipts in real terms. To

election of a Labor government at the first availestablish that point, I seek leave of the House to

able opportunity.

incorporate a table in Hansard showing Com-

Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (3.19)-As is usual monwealth Government Budget receipts in con-

when changes are made in the taxation s.ystem of stant 1974-75 dollar terms.

this country, a monumental amount of bunkum is spread around. I remember, for example, when'

Leave granted.

this Government introduced tax indexation the The table read as follows-

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY STATISTICS GROUP Commonwealth Government Budget receipts at constant 1974-75 dollars(a) 1972-73 to 1981-82
($ million)

1981-82 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 estimate

Customs duty, imports Excise duty Sales tax
Indirect tax(c) Taxes on individuals-.
PAYEnet Other
Total Total tax revenue
Total receipts

7\0 1,754 1,058 3,521

735 1,892 1,179 3,805

841 1,729 1,154 3,724

802 2,007 1,212 4,021

894 1,929 1,281 4,105

810 1,957 1,258 4,026

909 2,563 1,180 4,652

937 3,026 1,137 5,099

991 3,210 1,157 5,358

4,372 1,285 5,656 11,692 13,113

5,156 1,523 6,679 13,227 14,521

6,071 1,643 7,714 14,085 15,273

6,041 1,893 7,934 14,495 15,278

6,622 1,960 8,582 15,250 16,602

6,900 1,782 8,682 15,208 16,753

6,932 1,604 8,536 15,525 17,023

7,410 1,755 9,165 16,639 18,054

7,772 1,884 9,655 17,868 19,343

994 3,113 1,451 5,557
8,593 1,795 10,388 18,809 20,277

(a) Current values converted to 1974-75 dollars using the Gross Non-Farm Product Implicit Price Deflator (June Quarter 1981 National Accounts). Deflator used for 1981-82 was based on 1980-81 plus 10.5%.

Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service from Budget Paper No.1 Budget Statements

1981-82.

.

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 891

Mr BAUME-I thank the House. This table shows in real terms-that is, accounting for inflation-what has happened to government receipts. It clearly demonstrates a fact that the Opposition will no doubt find very uncomfortable. The total proportion of government revenues made up of sales tax this year will be 7.2 per cent. The total proportion of government revenues made up of sales tax under the Hayden Budget was 7.7 per cent, a far bigger proportion than is now being collected.
Mr West-More lies.
Mr BAUME-The honourable member for Cunningham, with his usual level of intellectual sagacity says: 'All lies.' Now, he may well not be able to--
Mr West-I said: 'More lies'.
Mr BAUME-The honourable member said 'More lies'. It may well be that the Parliamentary Library Statistics Group which prepared this cable can be accused of telling lies by the honourable member for Cunningham. I would not put it past him; it would be about his normal level. All I am doing is seeking to present to this House the reality of what has happened rather than the fiction that has been presented both in this House and in what I had hoped would have been responsible organs-for example, the Sydney Morning Herald. It seems to me extraordinary that the Sydney Morning Herald could have written an editorial complaining about the disastrous impact of taxes on lower income groups and stating that they would hit most severely lower income groups without conceding one fairly significant point. One would hope that it is a significant point. It was certainly worth mentioning in the editorial, I refer to the fact that no food will be hit by these indirect taxes. Sales tax will not apply to food. There is a far greater propensity for people in lower income groups to spend a larger proportion of their incomes on food than, in fact, is the case with richer groups. So a larger proportion of pensioner spending, for example, will be free of sales tax than, in fact the spending of people who are richer. This is evident from a Commonwealth Government survey on household expenditure which was done by the Australian Government Statistician. No doubt the honourable member for Cunningham, with his usual wit and capacity to reply, will say that this is all lies.
Mr West-Mr Deputy Speaker. I raise a point of order. Would you ask the honourable member to address himself to the subject matter of the debate and to cease making personal insults.

Mr BAUME-Having been accused of being a liar by the honourable member for Cunningham, I think he can cop a bit in reply.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-I will now take the opportunity to mention to all honourable members that speeches, up to this point, have been heard in silence. I suggest that the remaining contributors to the debate also be heard in silence by honourable members on both sides of the House. I call the honourable member for Macarthur.
Mr BAUME-Thank you Mr Deputy Speaker. I must say I will be grateful if I do not have to listen to the honourable member for Cunningham. It is clear from the Australian Government Statistician study that something like 26 per cent of the purchases of lower income groups are for food alone. When one adds to that the other items that are not taxed-for example, fuel and power, housing costs and alcohol, which has attracted no additional indirect tax-and which make up lower income group consumption patterns, one finds that something like only. 2S per cent of pensioner spending will be made in the area where sales tax has been increased. That fact, which is available from the official statistics, has never been mentioned by the whinging honourable members opposite. It was not mentioned by the great editorial writer in the Sydney Morning Herald. It is extraordinary that a newspaper like this, which itself is to suffer a burden as a result of increased sales tax, is prepared to run a campaign against sales tax in the Budget on a basis which seems to me to be slightly lacking in honesty.
It seems to me impossible, iIi an editorial looking at this subject in a genuine way, to ignore the fact that food is totally exempted from sales tax when that editorial is protesting that this Budget attacks viciously the lower income groups. I want to stress the position of the pensioner population of Australia. Fortunately, as a result of this Government's decisions, pensioners receive full indexation for cost of living rises. Yet the bulk of the cost of living rises which will be brought about by the sales tax increases will not affect pensioners one bit. I have just established the facts for the laughing members opposite. I will again establish the position for them if they are prepared to listen. The Statistician's figures on household expenditure clearly show where the money goes. It does not go in the area of taxable items unless, of course, one. wishes to deny the proposition that the Australian Government Statistician is capable of making an honest study.
Let us see whether, in fact, all these alleged higher prices will come about. Will the consumer

892 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

have to pay in each case for the increased sales me that a fair degree of this attack is as mis-

tax? Let us look at newspapers. I have just dealt directed as the past attacks on the present

very briefly with that section of the community. It Treasurer's Budgets-attacks which continually

is highly unlikely that the newspaper industry will have talked about gloom and disaster when in

pass on 0.5 of a cent, which would be the impact fact, as a result of the last two Budgets, for.

of the sales tax on a 20c newspaper, to the conexample, we have had a increase of 330,000 in the

sumer for one very simple reason-that is, a number of people at work, the biggest two year in-

newspaper would be a two-coin purchase if, increase ever in the number of people at work in

fact, its cost went up to 21c. The newspaper in Australia. We had an increase of 6.6 per cent in

dustry will naturally seek not to do that. That gross domestic product in real terms. That is a

might explain why various sections of the rise, by the way, of double the best two year

newspaper industry are so upset by the increase in period of the Labor Government. We have had a

the sales tax-a degree of upset which seems to rise of 6.6 per cent. I suggest therefore that the

me to be certainly beyond the realities. As I said, achievements of the Government in the budget-

the newspapers did not bother to mention the fact ary area have never been matched by the Oppo-

that indirect taxes would rise less this year than sition and could not ever be matched by the Op-

last year and the editorial in the Sydney Morning position. The sorts of complaints being made

Herald did not bother to mention the fact that about this Budget now fall into the same category

food was exempted. That is not all. Not only will as the bunkum Opposition members have talked

groups like the newspapers absorb that price inin relation to the last two Budgets.

crease because, I suppose, of the market impact of making newspapers a two-coin purchase, but also within the retail trading industry there will be a remarkable reluctance to pass on the full extent of the 2t per cent tax rise. This is the case for one very simple reason and the Opposition .can establish it by looking at the profit margins, after tax of organisations such as the Coles group and the Woolworths group which have a very small profit margin. They are involved in a very competitive industry and there is-cut-throat
competition.

'

Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (3.32)-This legislation before us at present proposes to amend the nine sales tax Acts by making some 36 sub-
stantial changes. In his second reading speech on
18 August, the Treasurer (Mr Howard) stated that there had been no general review of the sales
tax classification of goods for many years and, because of a recent review, the Government proposed, by this legislation, to remedy a number
of anomalies and inconsistencies. We have the
Government's official reason for bringing in this
legislation. On the basis of ironing out inconsisten-

Mr West-Do you support tax on building cies, we find that the amending legislation pro-

materials? How much will cars go up?

vides for many increases and some decreases in

Mr BAUME-Mr Deputy Speaker, it is interesting to hear that the honourable member
for Cunningham prefers to make his speech while I am speaking. I would be grateful if he would
keep quiet for just a minute. The reality of my ar-
gument is shown in a statement by Mr Brian

sales tax. Five categories of items attract a de-
crease in sales tax and sales tax on 29 categories is to increase. Of course, that is not the real reason
for bringing in these measures. The real reason is
that the Government wishes to increase its income by slugging the Australian community.

Walsh who is the general manager of David Jones
Pty Ltd, one of the country's largest retailers. He said in Sydney yesterday that regardless of the effects of the tax, retailers would have to mark their goods at prices the market would accept. He went on to state:

The Treasurer, in his second reading speeches, stated that the changes outlined in this legislation
would result in a net increase of $107m and $132m during this financial year. This statement could be misleading, however. If we turn to table 3 on page 11 of Budget Paper No.4, we see that

The increase on some goods may never happen as far as the receipts from sales tax this year will increase from

customer is concerned.

$2.10 billion to $2.91 billion, an overall increase of

That is the reality of the situation. It seems to me $811 m. This increase of $811 m will be made up of

that we have a situation in which there has been a $132rt;1 from the 2t per cent impost on previously

continual and extraordinary attack on this Budget exempt goods, $72m from the lift from 2t per cent

on ludicrous grounds, on grounds that the oppoto 5 per cent on other goods, $485m on goods

sition to the budget is basically because of the alraised from 15 per cent to 17t per cent, and

leged'impact it will have on the lower income $122m on goods raised from 27t per cent to 30 per

group. The facts clearly show that this impact will cent. I realise, of course, that some increase would

not be anywhere as significan.t. on the lower inhave occurred because of inflationary costs of

come groups, as has been maintained. It seems to goods sold. In October 1974, the Department of

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 893

the Treasury issued Taxation Paper No.5 dealing with Commonwealth taxation of goods and services. In .that paper the Department of the Treasury pointed out that the Government could gain additional revenue by widening the impost of sales tax, particularly on those goods in the exempt category. I seek leave to incorporate in

Hansard table 5 on page 5 of that paper which shows the estimated expenditure, sales and excise taxes on certain categories of goods for the year ended 1970-71.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

TABLE 5

Category of expenditure
Personal consumption expenditure Food Cigarettes and tobac.co Alcoholic drinks . . . . . Clothing, footwear and drapery Chemists' goods Electrical goods Furniture, floor coverings Hardware, et cetera Newspapers, books, et cetera Toys, sporting and travel goods, other goods Operation of motor vehicles Purchase of motor vehicles Other personal consumption expenditure (including rent) . . . . . . . . . . .
Total personal consumption expenditure (includingrent) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Business expenditure and capital expenditures, et cetera
Total

Estimated total
expenditure
$m 3,815
547 1,307 1,773
560 557 469 390 325 529 993 1,025
6,772
19,062
n.a.
n.a.

Estimated tax
$m 21 285 463
1 26 44
9 30 6 57 136 124

Tax as a percentage
of expendilure
% 0.6 52.1 35.5 0.1 4.6 7.9 1.9 7.7 1.8 10.8 13.7 12.1

Percentage of tolale revenue
taxes on commodities
% 1.2 16.4 26.7 0.1 1.5 2.5 0.5 1.7 0.4 3.3 7.8 7.2

1,202 533
1,735

6.3

69.3

n.a.

30.7

n.a.

100.0

Mr MOUNTFORD-In relation to table 5, that paper states:
The figures in the third colum of Table 5 give some indication of the weight of tax on specific expenditure categories. (These latter figures, incidentally, do not give a precise measure of the extent to which the imposition of the taxes would have affected the final prices of the goods concerned.) Although receipts from revenue taxes on consumer commodities in 1970-71 represented only 6.3 per cent of total personal consumption expenditure, the ratio of tax to various categories of expenditure varied a great deal.
This ratio is very low in the case of food because commodity taxes are imposed on very few food items. In addition, it is apparent that about one third of personal consumption expenditure . . . bears no Commonwealth taxation of this kind. This consists predominantly of expenditure on various services-for example, rent, education, entertainment, fares, etc.
Expenditure onservices is, of course, a growing component of personal consumption. Such expenditure will therefore doubtless continue to increase faster than expenditure on consumption goods. Moreover, by comparison with many goods subject to tax, some of these services are very much in the discretionary spending class, e.g. the. services provided by restaurants, hotels and guest houses, cinemas, theatres, etc. This prompts the question as to whether at least some of these areas of expenditure should be brought within the taxation field.

The paper went on to state that personal consumption and services areas which are not presently taxed could be looked at with the purpose of taxing possibilities. What we see, therefore, in these measures which are covered in the legislation before. us at present is that they largely follow the suggestions put forward by the 1974 Treasury Paper, which incidently were not proceeded with by the Government of the day-a Labor Government. The Department of the Treasury and the Treasurer obviously are concerned only with measures which will increase income without giving any consideration to the effect they have on the Australian community. What these increases mean is that the Government is seeking to balance its Budget by taxing the Australian community a further.$81Im this financial year. These increases will mean that a typical family will payout between $3.50 and $4 a week more for their basic weekly requirements because of the impost of additional sales tax. For those families with a number of children going to school, it will mean even higher increases because of the clothing content involved.

894 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

What we have is yet another one of the Government's broken promises. The Treasurer stated on 12 March this year, when he announced the Government's decision not to proceed with the introduction of a new broadly based indirect tax, that the Government was anxious to 'minimise the inflationary consequences of collecting additional revenue' and that it did not wish to 'move towards greater reliance on indirect tax without
providing a noticeable offset in personal tax reductions'. Quite contrary to these promises, taxpayers will now be slugged with an extra $892m increase in sales tax in a full year which, the Government admits, will add at least 0.75 per cent to the inflation rate. Increased sales taxes are completely reprehensible as they hit hardest at those on the lowest incomes. Many articles essential to the family budget will be hit. Sales tax on furniture, floor coverings, whitegoods, crockery and bedding is to be doubled, from 2t per cent to 5 per cent. Not only will increased interest rates mean a higher cost of buying one's home but also will it now be even more expensive to furnsih it and live in it. Clothing, building materials, shoes, books and newspapers will all be subject to the new 2t per cent tax, with the tax on school books costing parents an extra $6m a year. The increased family allowances for large families will quickly be eaten up by the higher cost of keeping children in clothes and shoes. The Housing Industry Association estimates that the tax on building materials is likely to add $1,000 to the cost of building and furnishing a new home. The National Roads and Motorists Association has calculated that the cost of a new 6-cylinder Holden Commodore will rise by $178 and the cost of a 4-cylinder Datsun will rise by $150. Even the oil to run the car will cost 17.5 per cent more. The net result on the family budget of all these increases will be over $4 a week, as I have said. This will have a disastrous impact on family living standards which have already been battered by rising interest rates and more expensive health costs since the last election. Added to the increase in 'income tax of $11 a week for a family with a
breadwinner on average weekly earnings, this means a massive tax increase of $15 a week.
As an indirect tax, these sales tax increases will hurt those families on lower incomes. Whether one earns $10,000 or $40,000 a year, the same costs will need to be borne on items essential to family living. Rather than increasing indirect taxes, the Government should be reducing them so as to ease the pressure on lower income groups in our community. This year increases in sales tax will give the Government a further $892m in a full year. I believe that this legislation is only the

beginning, with future years bringing further increases, including increases in the food and services areas. As personal consumption expenditure on food is almost double that of the clothing and manchester area and as servicing expenditure is similar to the clothing area, we can get some idea of the additional sales tax revenue which could be raised by the Government in future years.
The honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) stated just a few moments ago that 26 per cent of the household expenditure of lower income groups is spent on food. We can see, therefore, the effect that possible further sales tax increases would have on those people in the lower income bracket, which includes many millions of our fellow Australians. The sales tax scheme is one whereby the Government obtains additional wealth by stealth. The present legislation is another broken promise by the Government. The Government has no electoral mandate for these matters. For that reason and because the Australian Labor Party has a policy to reduce indirect taxation owing to its inequitable sharing amongst high, middle and low income earners, the Opposition opposes the legislation.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (3.41)-1 am pleased to be speaking in this debate in support of the Government's sales tax proposals. As the House knows, the Government has decided in the Budget to increase by 2t per cent each of the existing rates of sales tax effective in relation to goods passing the taxing point after Budget night. Additionally, the Government has legislation before the House to apply tax at the rate of 2t per cent to a range of goods that were exempt, including clothing, footwear, drapery, soft furnishings, manchester, building materials, books, magazines and newspapers, packaging and wrapping materials, and hand tools but not including medicines, food or wine. At this stage, I think it is important that I react to what the honourable member for Banks (Mr Mountford) just said. I think he tried to use scaremongering tactics to frighten the people in the community by saying that sales tax would be extended to food. That is not so. Traditionally, if one looks at sales taxes and retail taxes around the world, food is exempt. I can assure the House and the Australian community that, in fact, food is not included in this sales tax legislation. I think the honourable member should withdraw that comment.
Let us look at sales tax because it is an important tax and it has an impact on all people in the community. Under the existing legislation, manufacturers and wholesalers are charged with lodging returns and paying that tax. In 1975 the

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 895

Asprey Taxation Review Committee recommended that there be a broadly based tax on goods and services. In fact, the Committee recommended that there be a value added tax. I totally reject the imposition of a value added tax and I am pleased that the Government has, in fact, also done that. I think it adds to great costs in the community. There is in place a sales tax system and I think the Government has shown good sense in introducing this new legislation. Sales tax is nothing new. When the Romans conquered Egypt they imposed a general sales tax. Sales tax was first introduced in Australia in 1930.
I think an important aspect of the measure that we are introducing is that we are taxing for the first time a large number of goods in the community where the cash economy exists. In other words, we now have in force a group of sales tax Acts that, broadly speaking, cover at various rates of tax a whole range of goods, but not services, in the community. That means that in the long run the emphasis on personal income tax can be relieved. I hope that in the long run the heavy reliance on personal income tax will be relieved. My view is that no person should pay more than 50 per cent of his or her income in taxation. Similarly, I hope that in the long run we will increase the tax threshold-the so-called amount before tax is paid-by relying on sales tax of this kind. It is worth reiterating that for the first time the cash economy is in fact being taxed in part.
I would like us to look at the impact of sales tax in a constructive way so that we cansee whether it should be changed in the future, whether changes in the method of collection need to be made in the long run. I support the legislation before the House; but we do not live in a perfect world, so let us just look at what we might do in the long run. It is very hard for a Treasurer when introducing a Budget to maintain secrecy and, in fact, still make broad inquiries as to how changes should come into effect because the more people he consults, the more risk there is of breaching secrecy.
The present method of sales tax collection involves manufacturers and wholesalers. They are, in fact, playing the role of tax collectors. They are, in fact, collecting a tax which is actually borne by the consumer at the end of the chain. The manufacturer or wholesaler has to pay this tax to the authorities within 21 days. This period of 21 days was obviously put into the Sales Tax Act in the days when people paid their accounts in 21 days. Things have changed and will change, especially when interest rates have gone up. I hope that the effect of the domestic surplus proposed in the Budget will moderate them. I am confident about that. It is standard practice in the

community today for people to take terms of 60 days or 90 days for payment. In fact, the manufacturers and wholesalers will have to finance the payment of this tax. I have written to the Treasurer (Mr Howard) about extending the time of payment from 21 days. I know that he will look at that. I know that there is a cost to revenue. But there is a difficulty for those people who, in fact, have to collect the tax. It affects their liquidity and cash flow. I think that has some effect on the small manufacturer in Australia who has the capacity to expand by way of increased employment. That person now has to worry about paying sales tax within that 2I days and in the terms that I have mentioned. I ask the Treasurer to look at this matter and try to come up with some imaginative alternative that relieves the burden on these people. A large amount of time is spent by small businesses on administration and this can discour-
age them. It also creates the liquidity problems to which I have referred.
I am surprised iil many ways that the manufacturer organisations have not made the point that I have made today. I have long been an advocate of extension of the time for payment beyond 21 days. The sales tax method of collection is one that, as I have said, has been around for a long time. In the longer term, I would like to see the point of collection of sales tax extended to the retail level.
Let me give an example. Let us take an item priced at $1 and apply a fictional rate of 30 per cent sales tax. The wholesale price is $1.30. Retail mark-ups are, in fact, 100 per cent, so that the retail price of the good is $2.60. The government
gets 30c in tax and the cost to the consumer is $2.60. One could extend the tax payment point to the retail level. The item could still cost $I, to which would be added a retail mark-up of 100 per cent, bringing the cost to $2 for the article. The sales tax could be at the rate of 15 per cent so as to get the 30c for the Government and one would have a price of $2.30. This would mean a lower price to the consumer and the Government would still have its 30c. Such a prospect is not before us today; it is something for the future.
I was pleased to hear the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) quote the Managing Director of David Jones (Australia) Pty Ltd or a senior executive of that organisation-I apologise if I am wrong in my details-as saying that, in fact, retailers would not pass on fully the cost of this tax. I think this provides an opportunity andchallenge for retailers not to add to the level of inflation, not to increase their mark up, because of the mechanism by which sales tax is collected. I ask retailers to act responsibly in the present climate and to look at the mark-ups and margins

896 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

and, in fact, as a whole, perhaps reduce those margins. I hope that the Retail Traders Association will make some statement in that regard to reassure the community.
Finally, in support of this legislation which is before the House and in a constructive waybecause, as I said, we do not live in a perfect world and the time is limited before a Budget is brought down-I want to look at the various rates of sales tax and at some of the anomalies and inconsistencies which have been corrected by the Treasurer in the Budget. These are included in Budget Paper No.4. Under the sales tax legislation previously exempted goods will be taxed at rates of 2t per cent. There are now four basic rates of sales tax. There is a new rate of 2t per cent on previously exempt goods and a rate of 5 per cent which generally applies to household goods. There is a general rate of 17t per cent on other goods and a rate of 30 per cent on luxuries. That is an average of 13 per cent as a rate but, of course, not 13 per cent across the board in terms of contribution to revenue. Different items 'contribute different amounts to revenue.
If one looks at sales tax anomalies and inconsistencies, one item that does stand out is nonreturnable containers, such as bottles and cartons used in the marketing of soft drink. I ask the Treasurer to have a look at this item because I think anomalies still exist even though some have been corrected. What has happened is that by taxing non-returnable containers such as bottles, the soft drink industry will have added costs and the price of lemonade in milk bars and supermarkets will go up. In fact, an anomaly still exists because fruit juice and flavoured milk are exempt from sales tax. In my view the tax on these containers should be reduced to a rate of 2t per cent or fruit juice and flavoured milk should be taxed at the rate of 17t per cent as are the non-returnable containers. Finally, I want to look at some of the confectionary items, such "as the traditional ones that are very popular in many households. I have a weakness for one or two myself. Some of these are Picnic, Chomp, Kit Kat, Polywailles and Chokito.
Mr. N. A. Brown-What is your favourite?
Mr SHIPTON-The Minister asks which is my favourite: My favourite is Kit Kat.
Mr Barry Jones-Come on. We are running out oftime.
Mr SHIPTON-Seriously, they are taxed at 17t per cent. The honourable member for Lalor points to the clock. I am cognisant of the time. Perhaps the Treasurer might look at those items in relation to chocolate coated biscuits. I support the sales tax legislation. I will be pleased and

proud to vote for this legislation. I am pleased that it will pass through both Houses of this Parliament as soon as possible.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (3.54)-1 oppose these iniquitous increases in sales tax. Sales tax is a form of indirect tax. It is most unfair. It is regressive and it bears down disproportionately on low income earners and pensioners as, indeed, all indirect taxation does. What is more, sales tax is inflationary. I draw the attention of the Hous~ to the remarks made by the Treasurer (Mr How\lrd) on 12 March this year when, in renouncing the Government's intention to increase broadly-based consumer taxes, he made this very point. I will return to that matter later. However, it is an easy way for a government which eschews other forms of taxation such as a resource rent tax on nonrenewable mineral exports and increasing corporate taxes-a wealth tax-to generate income.
Instead of seeking by those means to increase revenue this Government in this Budget has increased sales taxes by $890m. The Government increased taxes on the current range of goods, which were not subject to sales tax, by 2t per cent. However there has not just been an increase of 2t per cent. Different items have been increased to 5 per cent, 17t per cent and 30 per cent. I will give the House and all the people of Australia some examples. Furniture, floor coverings, electrical goods such as toasters, jugs and mixing machines, et cetera, are taxed at a rate of 5 per cent. Goods taxed at a rate of 17t are motor cycles, caravans and motor vehicles parts. Industry does not escape. Computers are subject to 17t per cent sales tax. In the highest category, items taxed at a rate of 30 per cent include radio and television receivers, electric shavers, razors and so on. Those are goods 'which the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) and other honourable members were happy to call luxury goods.
In the second category there are those commodities which are now subject to higher taxation because the Treasurer chooses to say that anomalies exist. That range goes up from total exemption to 30 per cent and from 2+ per cent to 17t per cerit. Some goods in those ranges are television picture tubes and motor vehicle safety belts. Why the Government wants to tax motor vehicle safety belts is beyond me completely. Also included in that range are oil and greases for road vehicles. As if the Gov'ernment is not getting enough money already-$3.3 billion from that levy and it wantsio tax greases and oils for motor cars paid for by motorists. Irtdustry does not escape either because road vehicles used in the mining industry and forklift trucks used in

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 897

stevedoring that are not carried as ships' equipment will be increased from being exempt to attracting a rate of 17t per cent. Of course, then 'there is a whole new range of goods which are subject to a tax of 2t per cent as was mentioned by the Treasurer in his Speech. These include clothi.ng, kiddies footwear, building materials, books, magazines, newspapers and so on.
The Government has acted in a peculiarly sadistic way against the, building industry. It has increased interest rates on housing loans by 2 per cent in the last four months which has resulted in a $50 per month average increase for an average housing loan of $30,000 over a period of 25 years. It has reduced the amount of Federal funds given to the States for public housing from $584m in real terms six years ago to $262m this year. It has now imposed a new and extra sales tax on the building industry. That must surely be regarded as the final coup de grace.
I want to give the lie to what the honourable member for Macarthur was saying. He said that a lot of increases in sales tax will not be passed on. He said that they will be rather insignificant. The Housing Industry Association calculates that a modest brick veneer cottage will cost an extra $500 to build. The Guild of Manufacturers estimates that furnishing a home will cost an extra $500. That is $1,000 extra to start with. These figures do not include basic electrical appliances such as refrigerators, stoves, vacuum cleaners, television sets and freezers. The price of a large television set will increase from between $80 to $150. The honourable member for Macarthur must be mad to say that these are insignificant increases. Television picture tubes will increase by 30 per cent and will cost an extra $100 to $150. The National Roads and Motorists Association has calculated that the price of a 6-cylinder Holden Commodore will rise, as my colleague the honourable member for Banks (Mr Mountford) has said, by $175 at the very least.The cost of a 4cylinder Datsun will rise by $170.
This Government has viciously and carefully devised a taxation onslaught, not against corporations, but against wage and salary earners and pensioners. The figures on page 227 of Budget Paper No. I point out that total income taxes have risen by 22.2 per cent, total sales taxes have increased by a massive 38.6 per cent, but company tax has only increased by 10.1 per cent. I might add that although it is not as much this year, reveue from the iniquitous oil levy has risen, by 10.7 per cent to $3.35 billion, which is an enormous impost on the motorists of Australia. Of course that comes about by charging $A30.79 per barrel for Bass Strait oil that costs a dollar per

barrel to produce. From that $3.35 billion so raised, 50 per cent goes to the Government, less the $2.70 per barrel-the old Gorton charge-to the company, which is Esso-BHP, and the other 50 per cent goes to the company less the $3 per barrel levy to the Government. Not content with this super $3.35 billion ripoff, this Government is going to jack up the sales tax on oil and grease by 17t per cent. As my colleagues have said, we calculate that this will reduce living standards for an average family by approximately $4 a week.
To this can be added the further impost of personal income tax. Let me give an example: A wage and salary earner with a dependent spouse earning $15000 a year and receiving a 13.5 per cent salary increase during this financial year will see his income tax rise by almost $11 a week, on top of the $4 extra in sales tax. So that family is paying an extra $15 a week. This is the highest taxing government in the history of the Australian nation. We can go further and look at health insurance charges. Those who are not now in private health insurance funds, after I September will be faced with a $10 to $18 a week extra charge for health insurance right through the range for whichever rate they choose. Those who already have health insurance are faced with an increase of $1.60 a week. As a result of this Budget, this accumulating pile of extra charges on families can be added to that. Those who are paying off housing loans are faced with increasing interest rates which, as I said, have risen by 2 per cent in the last four months. That means an extra $50 a month on average for those paying off an average loan of $30 000. So if a family happened to fit into all these categories-that is, has a dependent spouse, was not previously paying health insurance and was paying off a modest housing loan-as a result of this Budget it would be liable for anything up to an extra $40 per week out of its disposable income.
The point I want to make is that this Government is a government of broken promises. As the Treasurer is sitting at the table, I refer him to his speech of 12 March this year which refers, firstly to inflation and secondly, broken promises. With regard to inflation, the Treasurer said:
As a general rule. each additional $SOOm.raised through indirect tax.es results in direct and indirect additions to the consumer price index. of almost one per cent.
That is, $500m equals a one per cent increase. Well, the Treasurer should do his own sums. In this case $890m equals 1.7 per cent over a year. He is prepared to jack up inflation in this country by 1.7 per cent. We heard it from his own mouth. I turn now to the broken promises. In that same speech the treasurer put all these arguments

-

898 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

about how repressive taxes were, about how inflationary they were, about how easy to impose they were and how much revenue they were creating. He then arrived at this startling conclusion:
Thererore. and despite obvious advantages rrom many other points or view. the Government came firmly to the conclusion that the inevitable squandering of the gains made and maintained in the fight against inflation in recent years was a price it was not prepared to pay.
The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said:
A great deal or hysterical nonsense has been reported about taxation. The Treasurer has said that he does not favour a Value Added Tax. I agree with. him.
So what does the Treasurer say about that? Inflation has risen by 1.6 per cent as a result of these increased taxes. That is another broken promise to add to the Government's litany. It is the history of other countries, especially the United Kingdom which resorted to high rates 6f indirect taxation, to have increasing unemployment. I might add that the United Kingdom has a 15 per cent value added tax as aresult of the 1979 Thatcher Budget. Since then, there have been record rises in unemployment in the United Kingdom, approaching three million at the present time. Unemployment has increased by 300,000 since the last Budget in the United Kingdom in April.
I conclude my remarks by reiterating our challenge to certain senators in the Upper House who might be having second thoughts about their attitudes-senators who were elected by the people of Australia on a campaign slogan of keeping governments honest. All I can say is: Why not keep them honest? This Government has no mandate for what it is doing here. Unless the Australian Democrats want to be known throughout Australia as the dithering and divided Democrats they will keep their campaign promise. These tax Bills are not supply Bills, they are money Bills, similar to Bills which have been voted against by Opposition parties in this place over many years, similar to income tax amendment Bills, oil excise duty Bills and similar to the Medibank levy legislation which this present Government rejected when we were in gqvernment. Therefore, it is idle for any member of the Australian Democrats to say either in the Senate or outside it that the people of Australia will be satisfied with an attitude that the Australian Democrats will send the Bills ba~k to the. House of Representatives for amendment and if that request is not met the Democrats will not oppose the Bills, because in that sense they will be removing the greatest lever they have, the one which the people of Australia entrusted them to use against this Government. We urge them to show strength and to join with Labor in opposing this iniquitous package of sales

tax Bills which this Government promised not to introduce.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (4.7)-1 think it is quite apparent from what has been said so far and from the record of the Australian Labor Party both in government and in opposition, that the ALP is uncompromising in its opposition to these proposals and will continue to resist what quite clearly amount to unjust, inequitable and indefensible attempts on the part of this Government to extract from ordinary Australian people and ordinary Australian families progressively increasing proportions of the total tax grab. We are uncompromising in our opposition and I endorse entirely the suggestion made by the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) in appealing to the Australian Democrats in the Senate to honour the undertaking they have given to the Australian people, the only reason they occupy those positions in the Senate at present.
These Bills are undoubtedly discriminatory fiscal measures which are designed simply to raise money. I know there has been some attempt on the part of the Government and on the part of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) to wrap up the policies in some type of economic jargon and some socially responsible sounding cliches. But in fact they remain simply provisions to obtain more money. In the process of doing so, the Government satisfies its ideological commitment to the most affluent sections of the Australian community.
Some of these attempts to clothe these and other taxing measures in respectable garb have included expressions-we are becoming bored with their continuous repetition-of this kind: The Government is attempting to adjust the tax mix; the Government is looking for more appropriate reliance on indirect taxes; the Government is seeking to allow the Australian people more opportunity to decide how they will spend their incomes. Of course, the implication of those attitudes is that if taxes are taken from people at the time they earn their income their capacity to decide how they will spend it will be reduced; but if the taxes are taken from them at the time when they spend their income, in some magical and mystical way, the capacity of these income earners to spend money is not in any way reduced. Of course that is not the case and no amount of cliche spruking on the part of Government spokesmen will make it the case.
This year, indirect taxes will provide the Commonwealth Government with a total of $1 1,273m-an increase over last year's figure of $9,820m. I said that our record both in opposition and in governmeritindicates that we will not in
,

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 899

(
any way support the proposition that indirect taxes should provide a larger proportion of total taxation revenue. When we came into government, in 1972-73 the proportion of total Commonwealth revenue raised by indirect taxes was 30.1 per cent, which was far too high. The Labor Government set about to reduce that percentage. By the time we were unceremoniously dismissed from office, in our last Budget in 1975-76, we had reduced the percentage to 28.4. As we might expect, the Government which is now in office has maintained a constant, regular and continuing attempt to build up the percentage again. During this Government's term it has increased from 28.4 per cent to 29.8 per cent and it continues to rise. For example, since 1975-76 sales tax revenue has increased by 107 per cent. During the same time, the increase in the consumer price index has been 80 percent.
Government spokesmen have attempted to suggest that this adjustment from equitable and direct taxation to inequitable, unjust, indirect taxation should continue because the proportion of total taxation revenue in Australia which comes from indirect tax is lower than it is elsewhere. This is simply not the case. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development figures indicate that indirect taxes on consumption in Australia as a proportion of total taxation is 27.4 per cent. Let me compare that figure with some other OECD countries. In Canada, it is 24.5 per cent; a lower percentage. It is 14.9 per cent in Japan, 21.7 per cent in New Zealand, 24.6 per cent in the United Kingdom and 14.9 per cent in the United States of America. The OECD average is 26.9 per cent, which is lower than the percentage prevailing in Australia. How this Government can possibly justify this continuing change to indirect taxes as a proportion of total taxation which it knows is an inequitable, unjust, indefensible imposition on ordinary Australian families and income earners is completely incomprehensible.
Concern in connection with this action is not shared only by members of the Opposition. When the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) was speaking earlier, he was most concerned that a newspaper like the Sydney Morning Herald should editorialise against these proposals. It is not only the Sydney Morning Herald which did so. Less than a week ago, the Canberra Times, referred to indirect taxes as 'socially regressive taxes.' It also stated that 'the sales tax provisions are iniquitous'. That is not a soft term. It is a damning term from a responsible editorial in a responsible newspaper. It does not matter how cliche ridden statements from the Treasurer

and this Government become on matters of this kind; nothing will detract from the fact that these proposals are designed to rip off ordinary Australian families.
The Treasurer does not need to be told that if a pensioner-I am referring to another indirect tax-fiUs his petrol tank at a cost of $20, $11 of the money coming out of his pocket goes into the national coffers. If someone earning $100,000 a year fiUs his petrol tank at a cost of $20, $11 goes from his pocket to the national coffers. How inequitable! How unjust! How discriminatory! How sinful it is that a government should actively pursue with all the vigour at its disposal a continuous transfer of the responsibility of meeting national expenditure by increasingly placing this burden on the shoulders of those people in the Australian community who are least able to bear it. Examples have been given of some of the proposed changes. I said initiaUy that they are simply a means of raising revenue. It does not matter how much they are couched in jargon. How is it possible for example-this point has been made before by others but let me repeat it-for any government to justify an increase from no sales tax to 17t per cent sales tax on motor ve-. hicLe safety belts?
Mr West-It is ridiculous.
Mr ROBERT BROWN-It is ridiculous and absurd. It quite obviously results from the fact that most of the State governments-perhaps all of them-have now made it compulsory for the motor vehicle owner-not only the person earning $100,000 a year or more but also the pensioner-to equip his motor vehicle with safety belts. The Government and the Treasurer have attempted to take advantage of this requirement by putting a sales tax of 17+ per cent on motor vehicle safety belts. It was suggested-the details are given in Budget Paper No. I-that these changes were designed to overcome anomalies and inconsistencies. Were they indeed? Let me give an example. Certain protective equipment, not for use in the course of industrial operations, was changed from an exempt tax classification to a 17t per cent rate. Protective clothing-not equipment certainly-of a kind used for sport or recreation which was previously exempt will now be taxed at 15 per cent. A table designed to overcome anomalies and inconsistencies indeed!
This further confirms the point that I have made and on which I will finish. These provisions are designed simply to rip off ordinary Australian people to an increasing extent, to make sure that the ordinary families increasingly carry a bigger share of the burden as wen as those people who

900 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

are finding it increasingly difficult to buy and furnish a home. We know that, as a result of these provisions, the cost of merely constructing a home will increase by between $750 and $1,000. The cost of furnishing the home will increase by about $500. The cost of providing all the electrical equipment and appliances within the home will take the price up further. Those 40,000 families on the Housing Commission list in New South Wales, and the 250,000 families in Australia living in caravans and all the people who are looking for an opportunity at some time in the future to provide themselves and their families with homes will have that opportunity taken further from their grasp, the Treasurer and the Government can take the credit for that situation.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (4.19)-in reply-I thank those members who have participated in this debate. First of all, I remind the House that any taxation changes, unpopular as they inevitably are if they involve increases in taxation for any section of the community, have to be seen in their overall economic context as part of a Budget which seeks to achieve an overall economic objective. At this time, amongst other .things, the economic objective is to take pressure off interest rates which is a very important cause to all Australia's families, and the entire country. Therefore, it is important to see these changes within the context Of the Budget because they are clearly an integral part of the Budget and cannot be severed from it. It has been our view from the beginning that they are central to the Budget. That has been and will remain the view of the Government on this legislation.
It is also important to try to preserve a sense of perspective about what is involved in these changes. One of the things that intrigued me about the debate and about the contributions of members of the Opposition to the debate was that they could not quite make up their minds whether the Government was effecting a major change in the taxation system or whether it was not such a major change at all. They did not quite come to grips with that issue. They could not quite determine what their attitude was.
There can be no doubt that these measures represent a broadening of the existing wholesale taxation base. I do not dispute that. I do not argue that. I make no apology for that. I see virtue in improving the taxation system by achieving a better mix-I apologise to the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown) for the use of the jargon-between direct and indirect taxation. But one ought not to lose one's sense of perspective or one's sense of proportion about it. One ought to

remember that when this anti-indirect tax party over there, the Australian Labor Party, was in office, sales tax increased at an annual rate of 19.1
per cent. Yet in the years that this Government has been in office, including this year with these sinful imposts, as the honourable member for Hunter calls them, sales tax increases will average 12.7 per cent annually. That is an example of what an anti-indirect tax party is. So even according to their own principles and their own criteria, they are not being really fair dinkum.

Mr West-Why was it wrong in March and

right in August?

.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)~Order! The honourable member will resume his seat.

Mr West-Why was it wrong-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Cunningham has made his speech. The Treasurer is entitled to express his opinion. I ask him to listen to it.

Mr HOWARD-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. We have to preserve a sense of perspective. Naturally these changes represent a broaden-
ing of the wholesale tax base. As my statement to the House in March of this year has attracted so much attention in this debate-I am very grateful that the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) has read it carefully, as have a number of his colleagues-I would like to address a couple of the arguments that have been used by the Opposition arising out of that speech. The one that has been used most often is the one-I think I summarise it fairly-which says: 'In March you said that if there was a significant change in the indirect tax take you would have a compensating offset in personal taxation reductions'. That is the reference to my March speech which has been most frequently invoked by the Opposition.

It is true that that was said at the time and it is true that the Government said at the time that that could happen if there were a major change in the mixture of tax in the community. The sort of change under contemplation then included taxation of services and the possibility of a broad based retail turnover tax. For a short time it even included the possibility of a value added tax, but as everybody will know that was dismissed fairly early in the piece and remains an option that is
very unattractive to the present Government and, I would think, to most people who have experienced the operation of value added taxes in Europe. But there was nothing in what we said in March which constituted a promise that whenever there was an increase in indirect tax collections, that would be immediately matched by an offset in personal taxation cuts.

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 901

It is true that, when the Government was putting the Budget together, the possibility of applying some of the proceeds of the increased indirect taxation this year towards a personal taxation cut was canvassed at some length. The decision was ultimately taken that the economic value of a lower deficit and, therefore, less pressure on interest rates was more important at present than a marginal personal tax adjustment. The honourable member for Hunter may dispute the Government's priorities in that regard, as he is entitled to do. He is entitled to say that it is more important for the average family to have a marginal tax cut or to have the possibility of interest rates coming down. That is a value judgment that any member of this House is entitled to make. But let there be no doubt that there was not in these measures a breach of commitment in any sense, shape or form on the part of the Government.
The second thing I would like to say something about is the question of living standards and disposable incomes. The Opposition made great play during the debate of the impact of these taxation changes on the living standards of ordinary Australians. That is obviously an important and proper concern to be raised in a debate of this kind. Last year, 1980-81, household disposable incomes in Australia rose by about 3.1 per cent. The best estimates available to me and to the Government indicate that real household disposable incomes in Australia in 1981-82 will rise at about the same rate. In other words, they will rise at about 3.1 per cent. The material to support that statement is to be found on page 55 of Statement No.2 of the Budget Papers.
True it is that there will be price rises-I will come to that in a moment-and true it is that a number of hems will be more expensive as a result of these sales tax increases. But once again in order to preserve a sense of perspective and a sense of proportion, we ought not to forget, as the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) reminds us, that indirect tax last year rose at a greater rate than it is expected to rise this year. We ought not to lose sight of that fact; nor should we lose sight of the fact that real household disposable incomes will be as high this year as they were last year.
I come then to the question of price effects. Of course there will be price effects and in a number of areas the price effects will be aggravated by retail mark-ups. I have not denied that and I know perfectly well that that occurs. But equally there will be competitive pressures on certain industries. The Australian newspaper, which has followed the sales tax rises with some interest and in some detail, as recently as today quoted this view:

There is a growing feeling among manufacturers and retailers that they may have to absorb much of the sales tal( in their margins . . . Mr Brian Walsh, general manager of David Jones . . . said in Sydney yesterday that regardless of the effects of the tal(, retailers would have to mark their goods at prices the market would accept.
I refer to those comments simply to illustrate that whereas there will be retail mark-ups on top of the sales tax increase, equally in other respects there will be cases where those increases are absorbed. Indeed, in some areas they ought to be absorbed. I think of those quota holders at present in Australia who, as a result of the appreciation of the Australian dollar, are having their positions significantly improved. Because consumer demand is still very much in excess of the. availability for sale of imported goods, and as a result of lower import prices, their profit position is significantly improved. I think people in that sort of situation might look at whether the consumer of their goods deserves a little more consideration in the light of the windfall they have gained from the appreciation of the Australian dollar.
They are general remarks about the context in which the sales tax increases have taken place. Of course, precise estimates of the price effects are very difficult to make. I simply remind the House that the price effects, as a result of oil price rises, were 1.3 per cent in 1978-79, I.5 per cent the following year and 0.8 per cent last year. It is expected that the price effects of these sales tax rises will be about the same order as they were last year. Therefore, they will have an effect of under or about one per cent during 1981-82.
The only other matters to which I will refer relate to the timing of the implementation of these changes and to the category covering inconsistencies and anomalies. The first thing I will say about the category called inconsistencies and anomalies is that we are dealing here with an area where for one reason or another over the years goods of a similar kind to those which have been included in the schedule to which the honourable member for Hunter referred have been taxed at some or other level of sales tax. It is because of this that it is fair to argue that a degree of inconsistency or anomaly exists. I will give one example. Before the Budget, alarm clocks were taxed at a lower rate than all other clocks and watches, and that the situation prevailed since 1946. I have not been able to discover precisely why that anomaly crept in in 1946. There is no logical reason why that should have been the case at that time, and that anomaly clearly cannot be supported in present circumstances.
On a couple of occasions in the House I have been reminded of the fact that a 17t per cent tax rate now applies for trucks that are used for grain

902 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bill 1981

haulage. That may sound unreasonable until it is recognised that trucks used for all other purposes have been subjected to the general rate of 15 per cent for many years. As a consequence people who have owned trucks and have used them for grain haulage purposes have for many years enjoyed an advantage over other haulers and users of trucks. In the circumstances those other people are entitled to ask why that competitive advantage should continue to be enjoyed. On the subjects of anomalies and the increases in the existing rate, I again remind the House, as I did this morning at Question Time, that precisely the same procedure has been followed in respect of these sales tax changes as has been followed in the past by governments of both political persuasions in this place when indirect taxation changes were made.
In 1967 a wide range of anomalies or inconsistencies were corrected. The tax rate on a number of items increased from 12t per cent to 25 per cent. Such items included tape recorders, tape players and similar appliances, parts and accessories, television slides, photographic equipment, certain musical instruments and sound tape recordings, and the increases were introduced over night. I also remind the house that in 1975 when the former Labor Government significantly increased indirect tax-the excise-on liquor and tobacco those increases also applied from Budget night. It has been the practice ever since the Commonwealth Government has levied indirect taxation in this country for changes in existing rates and changes that can be implemented immediately to apply from the date of announcement. We have followed that practice no more no less on this occasion. It is simply not practicable, from an administrative point of view, for changes to be implemented in advance of 1 January on items that are being made subject to sales tax for the first time. That is why a different procedure is being applied to them. I make it pluperfect clear that the practice we are following is no more disruptive and no less considerate of the convenience of the business community or Australian consumers than has been the practice in the past.
I have also been asked a question as to what is the impact of these changes upon existing contracts. Wholesale tax applies at the final point of wholesale, and that has been a provision of the sales tax law in this country since 1941. It will be found in section 70A of the Sales Tax Assessment Act (No.1) that unless there is a contrary provision in a contract, a sales tax increase will apply immediately and the effect of that increase will add to the price of the goods covered by the contract. In other words unless parties to a contract

have agreed in advance and excluded the operation of that section, it has always been part of the
law that the increase will be given effect to and passed on ultimately to the person who acquires the goods.

I conclude by repeating two things. These measures are integral to the Budget. They are part of an overall economic package. They contribute in a material way to achieving the overall Budget outcome which I believe and the Government believes in the immediate future will contribute to economic stability and will preserve the very significant economic gains that this country has made over the last 5t years. They repr.esent a modest but nonetheless significant contribution to an improvement in the mixture of taxation in the Australian community. They do, of course, significantly enhance the potential for personal tax relief in future years.

Question put:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes

61

Noes

45

Majority

16

AYES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D. B. Dobie,J.D.M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M.

Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Killen,D.J.
Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,e. W. Viner,R.1.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. e. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel

NOES

Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J.

Sales Tax Bills (Nos 1 to 9)

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 903

NOES

Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G.
Cass, M. H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cross, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. e. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J. Jacobi, R.

Kelly,R.J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E.
McLeay,Leo McMahon, Los (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison. W. L Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time,

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time,

SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILLS (Nos 1 to 9) 1981

Second Readings

Consideration resumed from 18 August, on motion by Mr Moore:

That the Bills be now read a second time.

Question put.

The House divided,

Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr G, 0, H, Giles

Ayes

61

Noes

45

Majority

16

AYES
Aldermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bouchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite. R. A. Brown, N.A. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele

Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Killen,D.J.
Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. Mclean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee,l. M. Millar, P. e. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R.
Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC.

AYES
Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M.

Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tahlbling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I.

NOES

Armitage, J. L.
Beazley, K. e. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass, M. H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J.
Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S.
Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R.V.
Fry,K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C.
Howe,B. L.
Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurtford, C. J. Jacobi, R.

Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J.
Kent, L.
Kerin, J.e.
Klugman, R. E.
McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les (Teller)
Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Wallis,L.G.
West,S.J.
Willis,R. Young, M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bills read a second time.

Third Readings
Leave granted for third readings to be moved forthwith.
Bills (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time,

SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILLS (Nos lA t09A) 1981

Second Readings

Consideration resumed from 25 August, on motion by Mr Howard:

That the Bills be now read a second time.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Deputy Speaker---'-Mr G, O'H. Giles)

Ayes

61

Noes

46

Majority

15

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfietd,J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. BUTT,M. A. Cadman, A. O.

AYES

Jarman, A. W.
Jull,D.F. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh;D. T.

904 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Committeefor Defence Force Pay

AYES
Cameron. Ewe" Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Doble,J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J, M.

Macphee,I.M. Millar, P.e. Moore,J.C.
Newman, K. E. Nixon, P.J. O'Keeffe,F.L.
Peacock, A. S. Porler,J.R. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P. D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,l. McC. Spender, J. M. Streel, A. A.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.1.

NOES

Armitage, J.l. Beazley, K. e.
Blewell, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John
Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Ca.., M. H. Charles,D.E. Child,J. CroSs, M. D.
Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J.
Everingham, D. N.
free,R.V. Fry, K.L.
Hawke, R. J.L. Holding, A. e. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Jacobi, R.

Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry
Jones,Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J.
Kent,L. Kerin,J.C.
Klugman, R. E. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les (Teller) Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W.L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scoll, J.L.
Thcophanous, A. e. Urcn,T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J.
WiIIi',R. Young,M.J.

Question so resolved in t~e affirmative,

Bills read a second time,

Third Readings Leave granted for third readings to be moved forthwith, Bills (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time,

COMMITTEE OF REFERENCE FOR DEFENCE FORCE PAY
. Ministerial Statement
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-by leave-I am pleased to be able to announce that the Government has approved increases in pay and some allowances for members of the Defence Force, These increases stem from a report on work value change from the Committee of Reference for Defence Force Pay, which was presented to me on 20 August 1981. The Committee of Reference is an independent body under the chairmanship of Mr Justice p, A, Coldham, a Deputy President of the Conciliation

and Arbitration Commission, which advises the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) on Services' pay, An interim report containing recommendations on changes in work value was presented to me on 31 October 1980 and subsequently implemented, The increases now recommended by the Committee on work value change result in total increases in Service salaries of something less than 7 per cent. In addition increases in allowances which have a 'remuneration' content in the context of work value have been recommended as well,
The examination of changes in work value stem from the principles of wage determination introduced by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission in April 1975. It follows the recent spate of work value pay increases granted in the community and other areas of Commonwealth employment. The basis for the recommended salary increases is unaffected by the abandonment of indexation by the Commission in July 1981. Salaries for medical and dental officers in the ranks captain to colonel, army and equivalent, are derived from specific alignments with medical classifications in the Australian Public Service. The Committee of Reference has recommended that increases for these categories, which stem from work value change, should await completion of the review of work value cases within the jurisdiction of the Public Service Arbitrator, In assessing the quantum of salary increases, the Committee of Reference has adopted the 'averaging' approach which was a feature of the assessment of work value change in the general community.
Of the allowances affected, service allowance, which is paid principally as recompense for the non-payment of overtime and the need to work long and irregular hours, has been increased in concert with salary increases, The salary and service allowance increases resulting from work value change are to operate from 22 July 1980, that is, the date I referred the present reference to . the Committee of Reference. The revised rates recommended by the Committee have been further adjusted effective from 15 January 1981 and 7 May 1981 to reflect national wage decisions made effective from those dates, The rates of work value related allowances raised in the report are to be effective from 4 June 1981.
The Committee of Reference has recommended that the increases be extended to members of the Reserve Force from the same dates of effect. The second report completes the task of the Committee of Reference under its terms of reference with respect to work value changes, In this context, The Committee of Reference has advised:

Committee for Defence Force Pay

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 905

The assessment of work value change has been an extensive exercise involving a large and vibrant military industry which extends through a broad range of employments. To have short-circuited the task of assessing salary movement considered to be applicable would have been to stultify the application of wage fixing principles in the services.
Work value change resulting from new policies and advances in technology is extensively detailed in the report. Material on changes was obtained through inspections, information/data supplied by the Department of Defence and the service offices, exhaustive interviews with teams of service representatives, and over 1,600 individual submissions.
For my part, I acknowledge and thank the Committee for its many months of sustained effort. The current terms of reference require the Committee of reference to report further on a range of other matters. The report dealing with these matters is expected later this year.
I present the following paper:
Committee of Reference for Defence Force PayMinisterial statement, 27 August 1981.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed.
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (5.4)-The Opposition welcomes the statement of the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) on this reference on service salaries, which is now over a year old. The Opposition is concerned with delays in this type of reference and the very long periods which exist between consideration of the overall rates of Defence Force salaries. This is the first report of this nature for several years. Other sections of the community are able to initiate inquiries into their levels of salary-their work related levels-on the basis of an application to a tribunal. Members of the Defence Force are inhibited in this area in that there is no body to which they can make an application nor is there a body which can initiate or agree to hear that application. To that extent, we believe that the mechanism for dealing with Defence Force pay and related matters is unsatisfactory and is less than that which is available to other members of the community.
I have not at this stage had ~he opportunity of seeing the full report. I hope that the Minister will make that available shortly. But the average 7 per cent increase which is mentioned in his statement would seem to be a fairly low level of average increase given the time since the last similar review of work values. It is not an increase which would seem to be comparable with the overall increase in salaries and allowances in the general community which have flowed from the various sources of increase that takes place. I am aware that the national wage case decisions have in fact been automatically passed on to the Services. As indicated in this House on an earlier occasion

when the method of dealing with reports by tribunals on the Services was before this House in the form of a Bill, the Opposition believes that it is necessary that the tribunal should have a capacity to initiate its own hearings into defence force pay and also that there should be a capacity whereby the view of the Services can be put and argued before that tribunal.
The present system may well have the effect of retaining an averaging provision whereby the Services' movements in salaries are somewhat in line with those of the general community. I think that is the result of this report. All other sections of the Australian community have the opportunity to present or have presented on their behalf argument in support of the levels of salaries and the changes in conditions which have taken place. The Defence Force is a substantive section of the Australian community. It is also a section of the Australian community which, in order to obtain that type of employment, has to meet extremely high entry standards. According to the last figure that I have seen, only one in six of those who seek to enter the Defence Force are in fact accepted; yet it is doubtful-in fact I think it is extremely doubtful-that the levels of remuneration in the Defence Force reflect that high level of requirement for entry.
I hope that at some time in the future the Minister, the Government-if not this Government, a Labor Government-will introduce a system whereby an office of defence force advocate is created. We hope that it will operate out of the Defence Force Ombudsman's office and will, on behalf of servicemen, initiate inquiries and seek to have the tribunal examine specific matters. The Minister will b~ well aware of the problems which existed in Bendigo over a long period until this reference. I hope those problems have been resolved by this reference, but until such time as the report is examined this will not be known. Seriously, whilst the members of the Defence Force lack the capacity to have argument presented on their behalf, I believe the best method would be the one I have suggested, and also whilst the Minister or the Government has the power to reject those reports-to my knowledge no such report has been rejected by merely taking no action, the members of the Defence force are disadvantaged in respect of pay and conditions. I believe they have an entitlement to have their pay and conditions dealt with in exactlythe same way as other members of the Public Service and, if I may say so, members of the Parliament. If the reports of the tribunals concerned are unacceptable-to a majority of members of Parliament, disallowance provisions should exist. But the tribunal's report

906 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Remuneration and Allowances Bill

should, subject to that, be binding on the Government of the day.
I think that there will be considerable disappointment among members of the Defence Force in the increases which have been granted. As I said, they most likely reflect the average movements which the Austraalian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has granted in its deliberations, and probably some component for those payments made to especially skilled grades outside. But the Services, like other areas of the Commonwealth Public Service, are losing highly skilled people to outside ind~stry because the conditions of the Services-the pay and other facilities----:are substantially less than those which are available in private employment. The best skills that are available are in fact being bought off those who have done the training-the Services. We cannot afford to allow that sort of thing to continue. I hope that a better method of determining Defence Force salaries and conditions and a more realistic approach to the value of the personnel.can be adopted in the future.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
REMUNERATION AND ALLOWANCES AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Oppo~ sition) (5.9)-The Opposition does not oppose the Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Bill 1981. It is a Bill which proposes adjustments in salaries and allowances for members of the Parliament, seniQr publip servants, justices and judges. It will be. recalled that, during th~ recess, the Remuneration Tribunal report was released and a pUblic statement was made as to the Government's intention in respect of that report. Subsequently, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) returned from overseas. Adjustments were made to that initial proposal declared on behalf of the Cabinet. We now have the tJtird episode in this development. I trust that it is the last one. But I think one can observe fairly in passing that there seems to have been pretty fair evidence in this area, as there seems to have been in some other areas from time to time, of the Case oftbe mice playing when the big tom cat was away. I hope that when he comes back they will not go into their holes and try to change this again.
Mr Hawke-Their funkholes.
Mr HAYDEN-Exactly. I am grateful to the honourable member for Wills for his contribution. Some of us are more skilled than others in the use of the English language.

Let me state in summary what is prol"osed in

this Bill. It means that parliamentarians---cthat is,

members of this House and members of the

Senate-will get an.increase in salary of about 10

per cent this year. There will be another increase

of, 1 would expect, a little less than 10 per cent

next-year. That means, in effect, that the basic sal-

ary for members of both Houses of this Parlia-

ment will have increased by about the increase in

the cost of living in the past 12 months. It will be a

little over, certainly, but in the next 12 months, on

the forecast for inflation which has been provided

in the Budget, the increase will be a little less.

Over the two-year period it will just about bal-

ance out.

.

I cite some statistics for the record to reassure those people who may suspect that the movement over time in the basic salaries of members of this Parliament has been too generous. The facts are that the adjustments have lagged well behind wage movements in the community. If we take average weekly earnings for the period from early 1975 to the beginning of this fiscal year, the movement was 93 per cent. It we take the increase in a parliamentarian's salary from th~ beginning' of that period to which I have just referred to the beginning of this fiscal year on the basis of what was originally proposed by the Remuneration Tribunal, the increase would have been 80 per cent behind the increase in average weekly earnings. The. adjusted salary increase for the period stated will beonly 65 per cent. Effectively there is a difference of almost. 30 per cent between movements in average weekly earnings and movements in the basic salary of members of this Parliament.

!tought to be borne in mind, of course, that the determination of partiamentarians' salaries is made by an independent tribunal. It is not declared by self-interested members of parliament
as part of the normal process of the parliament. After careful consideration, recommendations are
made by three people who comprise the Remuneration Tribunal-Mr Justice Campbell, Mr Grimwade and Mr Porter. I recall clearly that
prior to -the setting up of this Tribunal it was always asserted by the media that it was inappropriate for membe~s of this Parliament to be setting
their salaries themselves. within the normal proceduresof the Parliament. It was argued by so many people in the media that what was required
was an independent tribunal to make that deter-
mination. That was done. It has not in any way discouragedthe critical comment of the media-we saw;that a few weeks ago. We are not
the only body of people whose salaries and rates of allowances are determined by separate and independent tribunals. There is a whole range of

Remuneration and Allowances Bill

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 907

them. For instance the academics have their tribunal. From recollection, the air pilots have their tribunal. Quite a number of these tribunals are operating in the community quite separately because of the particular nature of the area which is covered by the purview of the tribunaL For instance, the medical practitioners have an independent tribunal .which regularly considers their claims for fee adjustments in relation to health insurance arrangements. This decision was made by an independent tribunal. In spite of that, there was opposition to it in the community.
I put on record again my view in this matter. I did so quite directly' in the immediate aftermath of the release of this report. I restate it: I believe that the salary and allowance proposals which were determined by the Tribunal were justified. I do not accept that members of parliament should be expected to accept salary rates which are inferior to those which are available outside. The corporate sector pays quite generous salaries to people which responsibilities of an equivalent nature to those of members of parliament, to those people in the ministry who are office holders and certainly to the Prime Minister. In all cases the salaries are so much more generous than that provided under present arrangements for those people serving the nation through this Parliament. I have no embarrassment at all in declaring that members of parliament should receive adequate remuneration for the responsibilities that they have, just as I believe that justices and judges of the High Court of Australia and the federal court system in this country deserve adequate recompense to allow them to live with the proper standard of dignity and independence which is appropriate for people in those important positions.
Similarly, if we do not pay decent salaries to our top public servants and to people who are in senior positions in government instrumentalities, semi-government instrumentalities and statutory bodies-however one describes them-they will not stay there. The evidence is that because the rates of remuneration are so much more generous outside we are losing far too many top rate people from bodies such as the Commonwealth Bank and, as I noticed this morning, the Treasury. We will lose them from other Public Service departments. Those people have developed skills, they have abilities which they have refined and they want to make a valuable contribution, but they will not make it at considerable sacrifice to the standard of living and the sence of security that they are capable of achieving, particularly in their retirement, from alternative sources of employment that offer just as much stimulation and fulfilment as is available in the public sector. I

do not believe that service in the public sector shoulq require sacrifice of a degree which far exceeds that which would be expected in any other sector of the community.
I have declared my position quite clearly. I do so without any reservation or any embarrassment and I will continue to do so. If we respect the role of parliament, if we have a commitment to the standard of service which should go into supporting the community through this institution and if the public accepts that it requires the best standards and the best qualities that can be. extracted from the community in service in this Parliament, the public in turn has to accept that the level of remuneration will have to be adequate to attract such people and to retain them. One accepts as a caveat that there is more than just remuneration for service in the Parliament. Overwhelmingly, people here have a sence of mission, they have ideals, they have a commitment about their society. They have their philosophies, they have their idealogies and these things guide them and inspire them. That is why they come into this place to serve. We have our differences on these grounds but collectively, I think we would agree, we are working for what we believe to be a better Australia. We have our philosophical differences in this respect. We have our ideological conflicts. But we do this genuinely and in terms of reflecting substantial proportions of the public's view on this matter. Therefore, I believe that in serving the community we should have no embarrassment, feel no discomfort at all, in accepting a certain level ot' remuneration and certain allowances when an independent tribunal determines after very careful consideration that they are appropriate.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (5.19)-1 seek leave to incorporate in Hansard, for the information of honourable members, certain tables comparing the increase in salaries of members of parliament with that for other groups in the community between June 1974-the last date at which a work value determination was made by the Remuneration Tribunal-and June 1981.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

908 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Remuneration and Allowances Bill

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY STATISTICAL SERVICE
Salaries and Wages
Changes in selected wage and salary indicators from June 1974 (or nearest appropriate date) to the latest available date-22 June 1981

Series

Average weekly earningsOriginal Seasonally adjusted
Consumer price index
Weighted average, 6 capital cities

Weighted average minimum weekly rate of payFederalMale
Female
StateMale
Female

Commonwealth public Service salaries2nd Divisionlevel I
level 2 level 3
level 4
level 5 level 6
3rd Division Class 11 (top of range)

Commonwealth Senator or Member, basicSalary

Journalist (Metropolitan Newspapers)-weeklyGrade Al GradeA2 Grade A GradeB GradeC GradeD

Daily

Date of period

(I)

(2)

Juneqtr. $

Marchqtr. $

128.70 126.40 Index No.
154.1 June 1974 $

270.70 284.00
Index No. Marchqtr. 1981
317.7
March 1981 $

95.00 77.86

195.06 171.24

92.39 81.99

191.68 187.89

27 June 1974 22 June 1981

$

$

17,776 19,597 21,417 23,238 25,059 26,880
15,739
(a) $

34,031 37,220 40,406 43,594 46,781 49,970
29,096
(b) $

20,000 June 1974

30,026 June 1981

239.10 (c) 202.40 170.80 135.10 110.60

464.50 429.40 395.40 338.30 270.70 225.80

% Change (2) (I)
110.3 114.7
106.2
105.3 119.9 107.5 129.2
91.4 89.9 88.7 87.6 86.7 85.9 84.9
50.1
94.3 95.4 98.1 100,4 104,2

(a) Proposed in 1974 but not agreed to by Parliament until 1 March 1975. (b) Currentfigure,asat22June,1981. (c) No equivalent grade for June 1974.
Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the legislative Research Service.

Remuneration and Allowances Bill

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 909

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY STATISTICS GROUP Indicators of Newspaper Company Profits, 1974 to 1980

Company

Percentage change
1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1974-1980

Advertiser Newspapers Ltd Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd John Fairfax Ltd Herald and Weekly Times Ltd News Corporation Ltd Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd
Advertiser Newspapers Ltd Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd John Fairfax Ltd Herald and Weekly Times Ltd News Corporation Ltd Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd

Adjusted Net Profit ($m)

4.3

4.3

4.4

6.3

8.9

9.4 10.5

4.9

4.6

7.3 11.3 13.4 17.1 18.3

5.9

5.0

7.7 10.3 10.8 14.4

9.5

11.7

9.6 13.7 15.9 18.5 21.0 22.2

6.0

5.8 12.2 14.9 14.2 21.9 27.2

4.3

4.5

7.1 11.2 12.2 15.1 15.3

Earnings Per Share ($)
0.13 0.12 0.13 0.17 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.14 0.14 0.24 0.41 0.47 0.59 0.64 0.10 0.08 0.12 0.16 0.17 0.23 0.15 0.12 0.10 0.14 0.16 0.19 0.21 0.22 0.09 0.09 0.19 0.23 0.22 0.34 0.42 0.06 0.07 0.11 0.18 0.20 0.24 0.25

%
142.1 274.5
59.0 88.8 355.0 253.6
92.3 357.1 50.0 83.3 366.7 316.6

Notes(I) Published Net Profits are adjusted by Statex to give a more acceptable measure of net profits. The main adjustments concern the exclusion of non-trading revenue from sales and the treatment of non-normal surpluses included in net profit as extraordinary items. (2) Earnings Per Share data has been adjusted by Statex for bonus issues and the bonus content in cash issues.
Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service from information obtained from the Sydney Stock Exchange's Statex data base, accessed through I. P. Sharp and Associates.

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY STATISTICAL SERVICE

Medical Fees

For Medical Benefits Purposes

, New South Wales-Standard surgery visit(a)

June 1974

$4.70

December 1980 . . . $11.20

Increase (percent) . . 138.3

(a) Standard surgery visit of 5 but less than 25 minutes during the hoursof8 a.m. to 8 p.m. Monday to Friday.

Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service from information made available by the
Commonwealth Department of Health.

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY STATISTICAL SERVICE
Movements in salaries for selected occupations June 1974 . and March 1981

15 Per" June January centage 1974 1981 increase

Academic Staff-Australian Universities(a)Professor . . . . .
Associate Professor/reader Senior Lecturer . Lecturer Principal Tutor(b)
Senior Tutor . . Tutor
New South Wales Government school teachersHigh School Principal . .

$
19,614 16,389 14,724 12,352 11,396 9,002 7,285
14,632

$ Percent

40,067 33,831 29,918 25,132 21,875 18,890 16,009

104.3 106.4 103.2 103.5 92.0 109.8 119.8

29,802 103.7

(a) Salaries shown are top of salary ranges.

(b) Continuity of series affected by decrease in number of increments from 5 to 4 in 1976.
Compiled at request by the Statistics group of the Legislative Research Service from information supplied by the Remuneration Tribunal and the Australian Teachers Federation.
COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY STATISTICAL SERVICE
Pensions and Benefits, 1974 to 1981

Pension/benefit

PerJune January centage
1974 1981 increase

Age/invalid pensionStandard
Married Widow's pension-
Class A
ClassB
Unemployment benefits16-17 years
18 + without dependents
Married

$

$

26.00 64.10 22.7553.40

35.00 80.10 26.00 64.10

26.00 26.00 45.50

36.00 53.45 106.80

%
146.5 134.7
128.9 146.5
38.5 105.6 134.7

Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

910 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Bill

Bill (on motion by Mr Newman) read a third time.
BROADCASTING STATIONS LICENCE FEES AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 18 August, on motion by Mr Sinclair:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House has a general debate covering this Bill and the Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981, as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two measures. There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (S.21)-These ,Bills relate to licence fees for broadcasting and television stations. The proposals in the two Bills will change the formula under which the fees are charged to ensure that those stations with the greatest earnings will pay more under the new arrangements than they would have paid under the old arrangements and that those stations with smaller revenues will pay less under the new arrangements than they would have paid under the old arrangements. As well, the rates at which the fees are charged will be also increased. This will have the effect of increasing the revenue from these fees from about $21.Sm to about $31.5m. About half of that increase is due to the rearrangement of the formula and about half of the increase is due to the increase of the rates at which the fees are changed.
I point out from the outset that the Opposition does not oppose these Bills. I do not intend to speak at great length on these Bills because they are non-contentious. I. expect them to pass through this House and through the Senate without any great opposition. But it is, perhaps, important for me to take a couple of moments to indicate the principles on which the Opposition has approached this question. The first point to be made of course is that radio broadcasters and television stations operate on licences issued by the Government. The number of those licences is limited. They bestow quite substantial. privileges on those people who hold those licences. As well, it must be remembered that this is an industry which is a very highly regulated industry. It is

highly regulated to ensure that there is no abuse by the licence holders of the privileged position that they hold by way of their licences. There is also substantial regulation to ensure that there is a maintenance of high standards of broadcasting in this country. The third objective of the high degree of regulation is to ensure that the broadcasting and television industry acts broadly in the public interest and also there is a need to ensure a high degree of accountability in this indu'stry back to the public.
I have said that the issue of these licences does bestow great advantages on those licence holders. Some.years ago some people said that a television licence was a licence to print money. That is not universally the case but, certainly, in some areas of this industry, very high profits can be made. The only reason those high profits can be made is that the Government has issued licences to a limited number of people in the community in order that they can broadcast on radio or television. I think. there is a general acceptance in an industry which is highly regulated-or regulated at all for that matter-that it should pay for the cost of that regulation. The Government said, in introducing these Bills, that one of the purposes of increasing these fees was to ensure that the industry pays for the cost of regulation. That is something with which we concur.
However there is a second question which I think is equally, if not more important in considering these Bills. The Government in the second reading speeches when introducing these Bills has not spelt out the argument that there should De some financial return to the public in recognition of the privilege which the public has conferred on those people who hold licences. As I have said, this industry, by and large, is a highly profitable industry. I repeat that that is not to say that every radio and television broadcaster necessarily makes a high profit. But certainly this industry is highly profitable and has become even more profitable in recent times. As a result of that, I think the community is entitled to benefit from the high profitability of that industry.
It is likely that the industry will continue to be profitable because we have seen only in recent times that there have been substantial increases in the advertising rates charged particularly by television. Those rates have not been subject to any justification. They have been rates which have been agreed to by the commercial television stations and simply imposed on the advertisers. They are set at a rate which the industry believes the market will stand. Indeed, in the last year, those advertising rates have increased in Sydney by about 25 per cent and in Melbourne by about

Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Bill

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 911

22 per cent. In both cases there were two separate increases. One imagines that those sorts of increases will continue to occur and that that part of

INCOME TAX (INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS) AMENDMENT BILL
(No.2) 1981

the industry that operates in the capital citiesthose television stations which have very high levels of revenue-will continue to be highly pro-
fitable exercises.

Bill presented by Mr Moore, for Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading

It is true, of course, that the public does share in the profitability of this industry by way of normal company tax which these licence holders, in the

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (5.30)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

normal course of events, pay on profits that they earn. But I think there is a justification for having an extra tax or fee imposed in this case so that some of the profitability can be returned quite directly to the community. The advantage of these new arrangements is that the fees will be charged at a differential rate depending on the size of the revenue of the licence holders with the large revenue undertakings being charged at a higher rate. That seems to us to be quite reasonable.

This Bill will provide Legislative authority for the
entry into force of a comprehensive double taxation agreement with Denmark which was signed in Canberra on I April 1981. The agreement deals with all substantial forms of income flowing between Australia and Denmark and is the second such arrangement that Australia has entered into with a Scandinavian country. This Bill, when it is assented to, will complete the processes needed for the agreement to be given the force of law in

The Opposition does support a strong and proAustralia. Denmark has already completed the fitable commercial sector in radio and television. processes necessary there.

We do not think there should be any taxes or any Double taxation agreements have two principal

fees imposed in such a way as simply to bleed the functions-the elimination of international

industry dry. It seems to us that it is only when double taxation and the prevention of fiscal

there is a strong and profitable commercial sector evasion. The first of these involves the apportion-

that there is likely to be the advantage of quality ment, by one means or another, of the relevant

radio and quality television being broadcast in this taxation revenue between the contracting coun-

country. I think it is true to say that as the protries. There are various ways of doing this. For

fitability of this industry has increased and has beexample, some types of income are, by agreement,

come more established, the quality of the offerings taxed only in the country of residence and others

on commercial television particularly have only. in the country in which the income has its

improved. There has been a noticeable improvesource. The country of source may agree to limit

ment in the programming of commercial teleits tax on some items of income and where, under

vision in this country in recent times.

an agreement, income may be taxed in the

I think also it has to be said that it is only when there is a profitable and strong commercial sector that we are able to improve the sorts of standards that we require of commercial television and of

country of source and also in the country of residence of the recipient, the country of residence agrees to allow relief against its tax in recognition of the payment oftax to the country of source.

television generally. Only when these stations are The agreement with Denmark accords in all

in a sufficiently strong position to respond to the essential respects with the position that Aus-

sorts of requirements of higher quality does it tralian governments have taken over the years in

make any sense imposing those higher standards. relation to double taxation agreements. It pro-

As we make demands continually for improvedvides for the country of source to limit its tax on

television for, particularly, children and in other dividends, interest and royalties. Australia and

particular areas, we need to keep in mind that the Denmark will each reduce the withholding tax on

industry has to be strong enough to respond apdividends flowing to the other country from 30

propriately to those higher standards which are per centto 15 per cent of the gross amount of the

established in the public interest. I repeat that the dividends. The tax of the country of source on

increased fee and the changed way in which it is interest or royalties flowing to residents of the

being collected means that it represents a tax of other country is to be limited to 10 per cent.

about 4 per cent on therevenue of commercilll radio and television stations. We consider that to be quite reasonable. We will not oppose the legislation.

Australia's rate of withholding tax on interest is 10 per cent and this will not be affected by the agreement. However, we do not have a withholding tax for royalties paid overseas. These are taxed

Debate (on motion by Mr Jult) adjourned.

on the ordinary assessment basis. The limit on the

912 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Income Tax Amendment Bill (No.2)

tax on royalties will, therefDre, Dnly affect Australian tax on rDyalties paid to. Denmark where tax on the ordinary assessment basis on the profit element in the rDyalties is greater than 10 per cent of the grDsss rDyalties. The tax limit applying to. interest and royalties will not affect incDme of thDse kinds derived by residents of Australia frDm Denmark while, as is the case at present, Denmark dDes not impose a general tax on interest and royalties paid to. nDn-residents. HDwever, if Denmark shDuld impDse tax on such incDme in the future the limit will, of CDurse, apply.
A significant effect of the agreement CDncerns Australian resident individual sharehDlders who.
are beneficially entitled to. dividends frDm cDmpanies resident in Denmark. It is provided that these sharehDlders are to. receive the benefit of a credit from the Danish GDvernment equivalent to. Dne to. which individual Danish sharehDlders are entitled. Within Denmark it is brDadly the situatiDn that part of the tax paid by a Danish cDmpany is treated as taxable incDme of a Danish sharehDlder who. receives dividends from the cDmpany and a credit fDr this amDunt is then allDwed against the tax that the sharehDlder is liable to. pay. In defined circumstances Australian individual sharehDlders in Danish companies will, under the agreement, be entitled to. a similar credit. This will mean that an Australian sharehDlder entitled to. the credit will receive a payment from the Danish GDvernment. FDr Australian tax purpDses, the sum of the dividend and the credit will be treated as a dividend and credit will be allDwed up to. the amDunt of the Australian tax thereDn fDr the 15 per cent Danish tax.
The agreement cDntains measures fDr the fDrmal relief of dDuble taxatiDn of incDme that may be taxed in bDth cDuntries. The cDuntry of residence of the taxpayer is Dbliged to. provide the necessary relief. So. far as Australian residents in receipt of incDme frDm sDurces in Denmark are cDncerned, incDme in respect of which a limit is impDsed by the agreement on Danish tax will be taxed here with credit being allDwed fDr the Danish tax. HDwever, dividends received frDm Denmark by Australian cDmpanies, which are effectively tax-free in Australia, will remain tax-free here. SDme incDme that is taxed in full in Denmark will be exempt from tax in Australia. The agreement also. cDntains provisiDns fDr exchange of infDrmatiDn and cDnsultatiDn between the tax administratiDns of the two. cDuntries to. assist in preventing evasiDn of tax.
A memDrandum cDntaining mDre detailed explanatiDns of technical aspects of the Bill and of the agreement is being made available to. honourable members. I cDmmend the Bill to. the HDuse.

Debate (on mDtiDn by Mr Young) adjDurned.
DEFENCE FORCE RETIREMENT AND DEATH BENEFITS AMENDMENT BILL
1981
Bill presented by Mr Killen, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr KILLEN (MDretDn-Minister fDr Defence) (5.35)-1 mDve:
That the Bill be now read for a second time.
The main purpDse of this Bill is to. give effect to. the amendments to. the Defence FDrce Retirement and Death Benefits Act fDrecast in the statement. I made to. the Parliament on 14 May this year. It may assist honourable members in their understanding of the prDblems that are to. be resDlved if I were briefly to. explain again the essential background.
FDr many years, cDntributiDns and retirement benefits payable under the Defence FDrce scheme have been calculated by reference to. the rate of salary payable in respect of the substantive rank held by members. AdditiDnal salary paid on the basis of a higher acting Dr tempDrary rank has been disregarded fDr Defence FDrce retirem'ent benefits and Defence FDrce retirement and death benefits purpDses mainly because of the transitDry nature of the acting and tempDrary rank arrangements.
In May 1980, the Federal CDurt of Australia decided, hDwever, that the intended link between 'rank' as defined in the Defence FDrCe Retirement and Death Benefits Act and the annual rates of pay regulatiDns made under that Act had not been properly established. AccDrdingly, as the legislatiDn nDW stands, acting and tempDrary rank rates of pay are to' be taken into. aCCDunt fDr bDth cDntributiDns and benefits purpDses in respect of all service rendered since the CDmmencement of the scheme on 1 OctDber 1972.
I wDuld emphasise that the Defence FDrce Retirement and Death Benefits AuthDrity has no. discretiDn in this matter. It is Dbliged by the law as it nDW stands to. take cDntributiDns on the basis of acting Dr tempDrary rank. There is no. discretiDn available, and I wDuld hDpe that thDse peDple who. are interested in Dr affected by the amendments wDuld understand that. As a cDnsequence, a relatively small number of beneficiaries, estimated to. be of the Drder of 550, are entitled to' higher retirement benefits; and a very large number of bDth pensiDners and serving members are required to' pay additiDnal cDntributiDns withDut any CDrrespDnding increase in benefits. I wish to. emphasise

Defence Force Retirement Benefits Bill

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 913

that. They would have to pay their contributions but there would be no corresponding benefit flowing to them.
I turn now, to the practical effects of the Bill before the Parliament. First, it restores to the scheme" with effeCt from 14 May 1981, the original intention that a member's contributions and retirement benefits be calculated on the basis of the annual rate of pay applicable to substantive rank held by the member during service. Second, it makes special provision for all those persons who during the currency of the present scheme have held acting or temporary rank, in the way I go on to explain.
Pensioners or beneficiaries entitled to additional pension benefits will be paid these benefits in full, including any available commutation amounts, from the date of their retirement. As from 14 May 1981 however, their pensions will be adjusted by reverting to what they would have been if calculated according to the substantive rank held on retirement and taking account of any additional commutation lump sums received.
The pensioners to whom I have just referred, that is those in receipt of or entitled to an additiona,l benefit, will be required to pay additional contributions based on their acting or temporary rank rate of pay but only in respect of that period of acting or temporary rank service that immediately preceded their retirement. All additional contributions that would otherwise be payable in respect of acting or temporary rank are waived. These are the beneficiaries of whom I have spoken who would be obliged to pay contributions on their acting or temporary ranks and yet would not receive any corresponding benefit. In other words, only persons who retired or died while holding acting or temporary rank and who qualify for higher levels of pension benefits are liable to pay additional contributions to the limited extent that I have indicated. Currently serving members will not be disadvantaged by having to pay higher contributions in future because of their temporary higher rank status.
The other amendments which I have taken the opportunity to include in the Bill, involve the rationalisation of the provisions relating to pensioners who re-enter the Defence Force. They are designed principally to cut down the high costs of additional pension and commutation benefits that so frequently become payable to pensioners who re-enter the scheme for relatively brief periods. In summary, they provide that only pensioners who re-enter on an appointment or engagement for a period of not less than one year shall again become contributors to the scheme. On their second

or subsequent retirement they will be entitled to appropriate pension increments for their additional service but be excluded from further access to the commutation provisions. They will no longer be required, however, to repay portion of their commutation proceeds during their period of additional service. Pensioners who reenter for brief periods of less than one year will not again become contributing members, nor will their retirement pensions be cancelled on re-entry as is currently the case. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Scholes) adjourned.
CUSTOMS (VALUATIONS) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (5.41)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The main purpose of this Bill is to introduce into the Customs Act 1901 new provisions for the valuation of imported goods for Customs duty purposes. These new provisions are designed to give effect to the agreement on implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, GATT. The Government decided in May 1980 to adopt this agreement on a free-onboard basis, FOB, so as to exclude the costs of overseas freight and insurance from the Customs value. This decision took into account the views of State governments, industry associations and other interested groups within the community.
Australia's present system of Customs valuation is based upon the Brussels Definition of Value, BDV. This compares each actual transaction with an ideal transaction establishing an entirely open market value in an arm's length situation. The major difference between the GATT valuation and the BDV valuation is that the GATT valuation is a positive valuation system using the actual prices and charges for imported goods.
I will now take a few moments to describe the methods by which a Customs value will be arrived at under the terms of the provisions in clause 8 of the Bill. For the purposes of the Customs Tariff Act 1966, the value of imported goods is defined by section 156 as the Customs value of the goods. Section 157 sets out six methods, that are to be applied in sequence, for arriving at the Customs value. I expect that the first of these methods will

914 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Customs (Valuations) Amendment Bill

be the method most commonly used. This involves the ascertainment of the transaction value of the goods which is determined in accordance with section 159.
The starting point for this method. will be the FOB price of goods when sold in a relevant transaction prior to their arrival in Australia. The terms 'price' and 'relevant transaction' are defined in section 154. Before it forms the basis for the assessment of the transaction value, the price may be adjusted, if necessary, in accordance with sub-section 154 (2). Further adjustments may also be necessary under section 159.
The second and third methods are based on the transaction values of goods which are, respectively, identical or similar to the goods to be valued. Section 155 provides the basis for identifying identical or similar goods. Section 160 sets out the adjustments that may, if necessary, be made to the values of the identical or similar goods for the purposes of valuing the relevant imported goods.
The fourth method is based on the deductive value of the goods ascertained in accordance with section 161. This method takes as its starting point the price of the imported goods, or of identical or similar goods, when sold in Australia. Deductions are then made, as necessary, to take account'of elements reflected in the price because of the transportation of the goods to Australia and their marketing in Australia. The fifth method requires the assessment of the computed value of the goods which is to be calculated in accordance with section 161A. This method is based on the costs of production of the goods, adjusted to take account of the costs and profits that usually would have been reflected in sales of those goods when sold FOB. for export to Australia. If all the methods I have referred to fail to establish a value for Customs purposes, sub-section 157 (8) will allow the Comptroller-General to determine the value. In making such a determination the Comptroller General will be limited by the provisions of subsection 157 (9).
Section 158 explains the circumstances in which a method of valuation cannot be used. Importantly,a method cannot be used if there is a lack of sufficient reliable information for its use. The first method cannot be used in certain cases, particularly where the relationship between the parties to the transaction influenced the price of the goods. Sectionl61C confers a right on the owners of imported goods to be informed of the basis on which their goods were valued. Finally, secton 161D provides that the ComptrollerGeneralmay review any valuation made by a

Customs officer and confirm, vary or replace that valuation with another valuation.
The adoption of the GATT valuation will bring Australia into line with the valuation system practised by other major trading partners such as the United States of America, Japan and the European Economic Community. The Government expects' that it will not have widespread consequences for levels of tariff protection now provided to Australian industry. Reference to the Industries Assistance Commission will however be considered during the first year after introduction of the system if any significant variations in customs duty appear to affect adversely Australian industry or importers. The Commission has already been asked to include in all future reports recommendations as to the appropriate levels of assistance uJ;lder the new system. The new system is also expected to make customs valuation more predictable for importers. It has the support of most main organisations involved in the importation of goods as well as organisations representing local manufacturers.
The other amendments contained in this Bill are of a formal nature. In particular, clauses 6 and 7 propose amendments to section 151 of the Customs Act to delete redundant provisions following the elimination of British preferential tariff margins in the Customs Tariff Act 1966. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Young) adjourned.
BROADCASTING STATIONS LICENCE FEES AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (5,49)-Before the debate was interrupted we heard a brief outline of the consequences of the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill and the Television Stations Fees Licence Bill from the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins). As he rightly said, these are non-contentious Bills. He explained how, although there will be an increase in revenue from the changes in the design of collecting revenue for the licensing of radio and television stations, a fairer system will be worked out. It will result ina number of radio and television stations in Australia paying lower licence fees than they presently pay. In fact, fees will actually be reduced for 120 of the 130 radio stations. I understand that for 20 of the 50 commercial television stations in Australia licence fees will also be reduced. I think they are fairly significant figures.

Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Bill

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 915

The honourable member for Fremantle pointed out that it was always one of the cries of the industry that having a television station licence or a radio station licence was certainly a licence to print rnoney. It is true that that has changed in some degree. If we look at the way radio and television ate going in Australia at the moment we find that in certain'cases, especially in the case of radio broadcasting, the exact opposite is true. At the moment commercial radio stations in Australia are receiving less revenue from the total advertising cake than possibly they have ever previously received. I believe that this year, for the first time in Australia, outdoor advertising, billboard advertising, will take a greater percentage of the total amount of money spent on advertising in Australia than will radio.
It is important that support be given to the radio organisation in Australia. Commercial radio has served this country very well over the years. It is a tremendous means of communication, especially in outback areas. Obviously we cannot have the situation, which unfortunately has tended to develop in recent years, in which some licencees are even thinking of handing back their radio licences. That situation obviously can be alleviated by the terms of the legislation before the House today.
The honourable member for Fremantle pointed out that these fees represent about 4 per cent additional taxation revenue for the Government. He said that that was probably a good thing because of the controlled and regulated nature of the industry and because of the fact that there were some good profits to be made in some areas of radio and television. I would not argue against that aspect. In fact for many of the metropolitan television stations profits have never been higher. In the case of major metropolitan television stations it is not unusual to hear of turnovers in excess of $200m a year. I understand that one of the top stations in Australia this year made a net profit of about $50m. Those sorts of figures are certainly records, and that 4 per cent can be a contribution towards the betterment of radio and television in this country.
One aspect that could well be looked at by the Parliament is just how we could improve, without too much regulation, some aspects of television in Australia. I suppose that one area-it was raised by the honourable member for Fremantle-which causes very great concern throughout the nation is children's television programs. The Australian Children's Television Foundation has been established and it is doing some work, but I feel that the commercial networks have great difficulties in

being able to produce top standard children's television programs. In fact they have great difficulties in finding out exactly what children want to watch on television. I suppose it is all very well for us to ask television networks to spend very big sums of money on devising children's television programs, but frankly they are not much good to anybody if they are not going to be watched. That in fact has been the experience in the past.
Mr Young-Simon Townsend's program is a good one.
Mr JULL~I never have the opportunity to watch Simon Townsend.
Mr Young-You should watch it.
Mr JULL-It probably is a good program.
Mr Young-It is for your age group.
Mr JULL-The honourable member for Port Adelaide is suffering from illusions of equality again. We can do some very real research into what is required by our young people. The Australian Children's Television Foundation, in a limited sense, is undertaking some of that research, but we could well' get the networks together to invest rather large sums of money to physically undertake a most exhaustive survey on how we are going to get young people to watch educational programs-programs that will be of some very real benefit to them.
Then there is the problem, as I mentioned earlier, of the high cost of making good quality children's television programs. In one of my early speeches in this House I suggested that there could be a system whereby the major commercial television networks and even the Australian Broadcasting Commission would have the opportunity of making contributions to a pool where experimental television could be undertaken with the aim of trying to produce some sort of program that would be accepted by the Australian viewing public, especially young people, and, most importantly, to look at the prospect of exporting those children's television programs. The problem with children's television does not exist only in this country. It is a problem world wide, with the exception of programs of the nature of Sesame Street and Blue Peter in Great Britain, and Australia could make a very real contribution to the betterment of this aspect of television programming in Australia and throughout the world.
I have no objections to this rearrangement of the fees for broadcasting and television stations in Australia. As I said, in some of those areas where incomes have been declining in a very real sense some relief will be provided. In the capital cities some major sums will be reaped, especially from

916 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Bill

the commercial television stations, and that will contribute to the regulation of the industry in Australia. Of course, it may well be worth our while examining even further the prospect of being able to get more and more experimental television under way in this country.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (5.56)-1 support the two broadcasting and television Bills before the House and would like to make a few comments about them and about a few related matters, as previous speakers have done. The legislation is aprogressive move because it will give a better deal to regional television and broadcasting stations. While the bigger metropoli~an television and radio networks will be paying more by way of licence fees, I am sure they will be able to cover the
rise. If I had any criticism of this legislation at all, it would be that the overall percentage rate of the fee is possibly too low. As the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) said, the legislation will bring the overall percentage rate to around 4 per cent. This extra money that will go into the Government's biscuit tinwill gross next year about $ 10m. I hope that that $IOm will be put back into the entertainment industry in some way to help Australian industry and Australians.

Unfortunately they are in the 1978-79 annual report of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. At that time the gross revenue was $532m; so $700m would, I believe, be a quite realistic figure at this time.
In the local television industry and its related branches, such as radio and film, Australia has a wonderful natural resource-the people who work in the industry. I believe that in the majority of areas in the entertainment industry, especially the technical side, Australia is as good as any other country in the world. Therefore, we need continually to encourage all in the entertainment field to better themselves. One way of assisting is by having a viable commercial sector. There can be no doubt about that. However, Federal Government assistance to other areas, such as the ABC, Channel 0/28 and many areas of radio and film, has been rather pathetic. I do not believe, as I have stated in this House before, that the new film tax concessions will by themselves benefit the industry. In fact if we look at the Australian Film Commission appropriation we see that this year it is only $1O.18m compared with $1O.16m last year.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.

While I believe in a strong and viable commer-
cial sector in television and broadcasting, I do not believe I would be astray in saying that the major
networks can easily afford the. new fees as struc-
tured in this legislation. Massive increases in com-
mercial rates have been introduced by the commercial television networks over the last few
months. I will quote from the B & T Advertising.
Marketing and Media Weekly of 20 August, as follows:

The rate increases in Brisbane and Perth follow similar increases in Sydney and Melbourne which have attracted strong criticism from national advertisers.

Sydney stations announced their 10 per cent rate increases last week, effective in October, just months after announcing 15 per cent rises in rates for this year.

In Melbourne, the tv stations will increase rates by 10 per

cent from October 4. This follows a rise of about 12 per cent

last April/May.

~

That means that the rises in Melbourne and Sydney will range from 22 per cent to 25 per cent. But
by compound arithmetic it is in fact more; in Mel-
bourne it is about 23.2 per cent and in Sydney it will exceed 26 per cent"':"and that is only in a mat-
ter of a few months. These seemingly very big rises
must put a rather heavy strainon advertisers,
although one could just as easily assume that the industry could well afford it. Of course, the gross
revenue of all commercial radio and television
stations would be close to $700m. I arrived at that figure when I studied the latest figures available.

Mr CHARLES-As I was saying before dinner, Federal Government assistance in television and the related areas of film and radio has not been as good as it should have been. I said that the Government appropriation last year for the Australian Film Commission was $10.16m. This financial year it will be only $1O.18m, and the Australian Film Commission will be severely hampered by that minute rise in appropriation. In fact the same could be said in respect of the Australia Council, which is another part of the entertainment industry and which deals with ballet, opera and the arts in general. It has a slightly bIgger appropriation but the funding is substantially reduced in real terms.
I sincerely hope therefore that the comprehensive report of the Dix Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission, which was commissioned by this Government and which is a complete review of the ABC will be studied very closely by the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) and the Government. I hope this Governmerit has the courage to implement some of the 270 recommendations. I do not expect all or even the majority of them to be implemented, but there are some very good recommendations which I hope will be implemented. I also hope that there will be ample opportunity in this House for a full and comprehensive debate on the Dix report before any recommendations come into effect, apart

Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Bill

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 917

from some ideas that the ABC management might take up as a natural matter of course.
A responsible lead is needed by this Government in regard to the media, something which has not 6ccurred before. Considering the farcical amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act in June one can only live in hope. However, the conservative federal governments have a history in this country of caving in to vested interests in the broadcasting industry. There is a lot of uncertainty within the industry about a number of subjects, some of which are centred around the commercial homestead and community broadcasting satellite system and cable television, which I have some doubts about although I am still wading through the mass of evidence that one needs to look at in order to make a comprehensive decision. Subscription television is also attracting a lot of debate. However, there are some other areas, I refer to children's television, which the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr DaWkins) and especiaIly the honourable member for Bowman (Mr JulI) have talked about at some length. I fully endorse the remarks of the honourable member for Bowman in regard to children's television and the Australian content issue overall. The Australian content issue has not attracted as much debate as it should have attracted, as it is very high on the list of priorities.
New technological developments are making the communciations arena an exciting field, and that will continue to occur for many years. I sincerely hope that everyone in the television and broadcasting field will have an opportunity for input into the direction of our communications industry. Let us hope that this industry will not be manipulated and controlled by a few for the benefit of a few. I referred earlier to our industry. Every Australian should be concerned with communications and the wonderful things that will or should be achieved in the years to come. This legislation to change the licence fee structure is a step in the right direction, although as I asked before dinner, is it enough? I support the legislation.
.Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (8.4)-ln his second reading speech the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) stated that the main purpose for imposing licence fees was to cover the costs of industry regulation and to contribute to government revenue. There is no doubt that there is a grave need for funding to support television services, particularly. public television, and also a grave need to provide an improvement in television reception in hilly ~reas such as the Dandenong

ranges in the electorate of La Trobe. I am not opposing this legislation but I will mention two matters. Regrettably the Government is neglecting public television. A number of interested groups, including educational institutions, have plans at an advanced stage to operate public television stations. But the Government has made no offer of the necessary funding. With the introduction of the new fees, the Government should now be prepared to make a funding commitment which should enable public television stations to commence their programs. There is every indication that public television could be as successful as the present comrimnity based radio stations such as 3CR and 3RRR have proved to be.
The second matter to which I draw the attention of the House is the very poor quality of television reception in many homes in areas such as the Dandenong ranges in my electorate. This problem has been on public record for years. Over 12 months ago the previous member for La Trobe and the previous Minister involved assured the many thousands of people concerned that television reception improvement was to be expedited by the Government. Since then my requests for detailed information of action-being taken by the Government have shown that any action in this area is at a preliminary planning stage only. Justifiably my constituents feel that they have been misled. I have received many hundreds of inquiries about government action on this matter. Feeling is running high throughout the area. Over 20,000 people in my electorate alone are affected by this lack of response to the problem.
It is particularly regrettable and worthy of note that the Government was prepared to permit the frequency changeover of Channel 10 in Melbourne without receiving some guarantee from its friend, Mr Rupert Murdoch, that his company was prepared to offer a good quality picture on the new channel to all viewers. Industry regulation is urgently needed for circumstances such as frequency changeovers. In fact since the changeover many people in my electorate have been unable to receive a satisfactory picture from Channel 10. The reception from Channel 7 and Channel 9 is also of poor quality. In some places even Channel 2 reception is poor. Promises have been made by the Government that the reception would be improved early in 1981 with the installation of translators. Yet nearly a year after the promises were made nothing has happened.
People in my electorate are becoming more and more frustrated and angered by the lack of action on the -part of the Government on what has come to be regarded as a vitally important means of relaxation and communication in our society. The

918 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Bill

Minister, in commending this legislation to the House, advised that the licencefees were expected to yield the Commonwealth an extra $5m in revenue. I submit to him that he has a responsibility to utilise immediately part of this revenue to honour the undertakings made by his Government to television viewers in my electorate. The urgent provision of adequate television reception by the installation of translators seems to me to be a most relevant use of the resources provided by these licence fees.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (8.9)-I rise also to support this legislation and to make a few comments on its passage. I draw attention to the fact that this legislation to raise licence fees was announced not in the last Budget but in the one before. Even though one or two more matters were announced in the last Budget the legislation coming through now is totally different from a lot of other measures being put through Parliament at present. The fees are based on a progressive scale which at the present time is in total contrast to much of the Budget legislation that will come into this House. The new scale of fees will mean that about 120 radio and 20 television stations will pay less and about 30 television stations and 10 radio stations will pay more. The progressive scale means that the more a person earns the more he pays. This is in total contrast to other legislation and other measures which this Government, 12 months after this announcement, is bringing to this House, where we have very regressive measures for raising money.
The question may be asked as to how come we have this legislation regarding television and radio broadcasting licences which appears to be in obvious contrast to the latest Government policies. Perhaps the reason is that this measure was announced 12 months earlier and the Government is now taking a completely different line on the way it raises funds. The introduction of these fees will put an extra $lOm into the Government coffers. An amount of $5m of that will be represented by increased revenue and $5m represented by the new schedule. There is no doubt that it will be a fairer system for the television industry. Industries and companies will be paying according to their ability to pay. As I said before, this is in stark contrast to what the Government is doing in other areas.
I wish to take the opportunity to address -a few remarks to contrasting situations in regard to television reception in my area, which is the McMillan electorate, and also the electorate of Gippsland. The first point relates to the loss of reception which has occurred in that area in the last 12 months. The second relates to the failure of the

Government to provide reception to peopleliving in another area of the electorate-the Upper Yarra Valley area-which is 40 miles from the capital city of Melbourne. In t/le 12 months prior to the last Federal electionthis Government, through a previous Minister, made promi~es -to both these areas which to date have not been kept. In the first casethe people in the central and east Gippsland areas enjoyed television reception which allowed them to receive a wide range of choice in their viewing. In fact, in some parts they not only received all Victorian metropolitan stations as well as their own regional stations but also programs from Tasmania.
The Fraser Government then decided to allow Channel 0 in Melbourne to change to Channel 10. This necessitated the local Gippsland station changing to another frequency. Of course, Mr Rupert Murdoch and Sir Reginald Ansett were to be the beneficiaries of this change. The Channel 10 slot would allow them to reach a wider audience in Melbourne, thus increasing their advertising revenue. These Bills, I suppose, could be commended for the fact that perhaps now some of that extra revenue will-be put back into the public purse. One might ask: How did this affect the country viewers? According to the Government and the Minister at the time the change was not supposed to affect anyone. They promised that if it did steps would be taken to rectify any loss of previous reception. A decision was made to switch the local station from Channel 10 to Channel 8. This placed the local signal in between the two Melbourne signals-7 and 9-and effectively snowed right out the reception of the Melbourne stations for many people.
The Minister at the time said that the Government would honour its commitment and that nobody would lose their television reception. Filters were provided by the Murdoch-owned Channel 0 to improve the reception for thousands of local people. However, in many cases the filters are ineffective and the present Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) isstill in the process of seeking a satisfactory solution. No doubt the Minister, who visited the. area on 15 June, is attempting, as he has informed us, to see whether his De~ partment can come up with a solution. We hope that some time in the very near future that area may see the results of those efforts, particularly as legislation going through the House tonight virtually means that $lOm extra will be going into the Government coffers. The promises made by previous Ministers may now be honored in view of the money that is to be made available.
My second point relates to the Upper Yarra area, where there is no reception at all for many

Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Bill

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 919

peop~e. In spite of a promise to provide a translator station in that area no definite progress has been mflde. In fact, the last commitment from the Ministt!r was that the translator would be built in 1981-82 when funds were made available. The BiIIs going through the House tonight will provide an extra$lOm for the Government coffers and I hope that the commitment made by the Minister that this translator would be built when funds were made available wiII be honoured. I believe the people in that area will be looking to see that some of the funds which are to be collected under this legislation will be used for that purpose.
This promise has not yet been fulfilled in spite of the publicity, prior to the tast election, of the previous Minister and the former member for the area who turned up to be photographed turning the sod for the commencement of construction of the translator. The previous Minister was full of promises and very short on action, It is to be hoped thfJ.t the present Minister for Communications wiII perform in a more positive manner towards these country people now that funds are being made available through the radio and television licence Bills.
In conclusion, I wish to make a few remarks in support of regional television. The fear of losing national advertising revenue is a genuine worry to many provincial television executives. This is not surprising. Station GVL8 in the Latrobe Valley earned 75 per cent of its total advertising revenue from national advertising in the,last year and 25 per cent from local advertising. there has been an increase in local advertising of sOfIle 4 per cent since 1978-79. The last figures available from the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal show that since the change in that area took place local advertising has increased. Television is a capital intensive industry where high returns are necessary to be able to pay taxes and dividends and to have a reasonable amount of mOriey left over to re-invest in the business. However, high returns on revenue and shareholders' funds does not necessarily mean that regional television stations could stand' a change, such as networking, which would destroy thein overnight. I urge the Government to move warily on issues such as the satelIite system, networking, cable television and other new develop~ ments. The Australian Labor Party believes in a strong commercial sector and supports the Bills, particularly as they represent a step in the right direction with a move to a progressive scale of Ii.: cence fees.
Question resolved in the affirmative.'
BiII read a second time.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr MacKellar) read a third time.
TELEVISION STATIONS LICENCE FEES AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 18 August, on motion by Mr Sinclair:
That the Bill be now read a second time,
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr MacKellar) read a third time. '
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Secolld Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed from 26 August, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read'a second time.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (8.19)- Just prior to the adjournment of the House last evening I drew attention to the increasing burden of total individual taxation which was being placed on the shoulders of pay-as-you-earn taxpayers. I mentioned that during the last 16 years, between 1965-66 and 1981-82, the contribution to total individual taxation paid by pay-as-you-earn taxpayers had increased from 67 per cent to 82.7 per cent. At the same time the contribution made by non-pay-as-you-earn individual taxpayers declined from 33 per cent to 17.3 per cent.
This matter,has been of considerable, continuing and increasing concern to the Opposition. We are particularly conc.erned by the fact. that this adjustment in the burden of total taxation should have been occurring. The position is that if nonwage and salary earners in 1981~82. were to pay the saipe proportion of Jotal tal'. as they paid in 1965-66 they would be paying an additional $3,278m. That is, they would be, paying almost twice,:i\s rriu~h as they a~e goingto pay. Of course, this $3,278m is revenue which is required by the
llP' Government for Governmen,t purposes and it has
to be made If it is not being paid by this section of taxpayers, quite clearly it is beingpaio by wage and salary earners in their pay, d~ductions. :

920 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

I suppose a number of reasons could be adhas been provided in the Budget Papers forposs-

vanced for this situation. One of them is, perhaps, ible tax avoidance by wage and salary earners, be-

that since 1965-66 there has been a decrease in the cause that facility simply is not available to them.

proportion of non-wage and salary earners and, Just as a final indication of the way in which the

therefore, the proportion of tax which they have burden of taxation is increasingly being passed on

paid has declined for that reason. In fact, that is to the shoulders of those people least able to pay

not the reason. The proportion of that group of tax, I ,seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table

taxpayers was shown in the recent census to be 13.8 per cent. In the 1966 census it was shown to
be 14.5 per cent, so the situation is not explained
by a decreasing proportion. It could perhaps be explained by a decrease in the proportion of total income being earned by non-pay-as-you-earn taxpayers. In fact, the evidence proves that that ex-
planation is not correct. One reason remains. That is that this particular group of taxpayers has found it possible to engage in tax avoidance schemes which have made it possible for them to reduce their taxation every year, and in the current year to the extent of $3,278m. The Budget provides for tax losses in the current financial year due to tax avoidance schemes by non-pay-as-youearn taxpayers to the extent of $220m and for

which shows the tax rates which have been applied since 1977-78 until this year when the tax scales were compressed into three separate levels and the tax rates which would have applied had full tax indexation been applied by this Government as it undertook to do. If the Government had done that the tax threshold this year, instead of being $4,195, would have been $5,356.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-Order! If the honourable member is seeking leave to incorporate a table he will have to secure it before his speaking time elapses.
Mr ROBERT BROWN-The table has been approved for incorporation by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt).
Leave granted.

companies to the extent of $80m. But not one cent

The ta,ble read as follows-

TAX RATES APPLIED

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1981-82

Tax threshho1d
32cin$ 46cin$ 60cin $

$ 3,750
3,750-16,000 16,000-32,000
32,000-

$ 3,893 3,893-16,608
16,608-33,216 33,216-

$ 3,893
3,893-16,608 16,608-33,216
33,216-

$ 4,041
4,041-17 ,239 17,239-34,478 34,478-

$ 4,195 4,195-17,894
17,894-35,788 35,788-

CPII966-67=loo

241.0

260.7

287.2

314.2

348,0 (est.)

% increase in CPI
%increase in CPI to apply Tax threshhold 32cin $ 46cin$ 60cin $

9.5

8.2

10.2

TAX RATES WITH FULL INDEXAnON

3,750 3,750-16,000
16,000-32,000 32,000-

9.5 4,106 4,106-17,520 17,520-35,040 35,040-

8.2
4,443 4,443-18,957 18,957-37,913
37,913-

9.4
10.2 4,896 4,896-20,891 20,891-41,780 41,780-

10.7 (est.)
9.4 5,356 5,356-22,855 22,855-45,707 45,707-

Person with taxable income of$5,356 should pay nothing, but will have to pay $371.52 and additional sales tax $208.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (8.25)-One point raised by the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown) certainly needs to be commented on. I refer to the curious approach by the Australian Labor Party to the question of tax avoidance. I do not want to dwell on it too much except to say that there has never been a government in Australia's history that has done more to prevent tax avoidance, that has brought in more legislation, that has closed off more tax avoidance schemes and that has saved more revenue than

the present Government. It is intriguing that the Labor Government, whose main contribution to
preventing tax avoidance was to say that it
planned to do something-which it found itself
incompetent to do and which eventually was tidied up by this Government-achieved very
little except to introduce a set of schemes which totally inhibited investment in the mining sector
in Australia. Apart from that, it has an abysmal record on tax avoidance. For it to maintain this phoney criticism of this Government, which has
taken so many positive steps to ensure that the tax burden is more equitably shared around

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 921

Austr,alia, seems to me to be a typical piece of hypocrisy along the lines that we have heard so far in this Budget debate.
There is another style of hypocrisy in the criti-
cism of,this Budget. I refer to the persistent allegation that this Government, which is committed to the concept of small government, which has dramatically reduced the level of rise in government spending, is somehow a secret big government. We have heard members of the Opposition
talking about the massive increase in the six Budgets that this Government introduced-an alleged massive increase in Budget revenues. I must admit that I am picking on the Sydney Morning Herald again, but even that newspaper, which I once held in very high esteem in terms of its capacity to editorialise intelligently, is taking a similar line-or perhaps in view of the intellect of members of the Opposition, they got. the. idea from the Sydney Morning Herald. For example, the Sydney Morning Herald in its editorial of Wednesday, 19 August, the day after the Budget was presented, argued that the Government had done very little to cut back the size of the public sector and said that the Government's own spending was going up. To dramatise that, to prove that

this Government is a big government,it then dealt with the question of the receipts of the Government.
This seems to me to underline the massive confusion that exists in the minds of the Opposition and some commentators. Because this Government has certainly increased its revenues over the last six Budgets by a considerable amount, it is accused of being a big Government. What these commentators failed to recognise-I am glad that the honourable member for Hunter lists himself among that group-is that the bulk of the Government's increased revenue has been required to make up the massive gap between expenditure and revenue that was opened up during the Whitlam years. It might sound as if one is harkening back to a long time ago, but the effort has been dramatic. To demonstrate this fact, I shall outline the statistics provided by the Statistics Group of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Library. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard various statistics supplied by that body.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY STATISTICS GROUP Commonwealth Government Budget Sector outlays at constant 1974-75 dollars(a) 1972-73 to 1981-82
($ million)

Purpose

1981-82 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 estimate

Defence Education
Health Social Security and Welfare Housing Urban and Regional Develo-
pment Culture and Recreation Economic Services General Public Service
Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities
Public Debt Interest Total outlays

1,690 611
1,083 2,906
337
68 160 1,831 1,077
3,397 932
14,094

1,613 1,044 1,152 3,026
410
175 193 1,813 1,224
3,361 866
14,877

1,628 1,663 1,283 3,712
702
378 237 2,353 1,296
3,700 888
17,839

1,595 1,630 2,541 4,329
484
351 218 1,766 1,250
3,818 833
18,813

1,694 1,716 1,974 4,943
426
206 200 1,238 1,259
3,977 1,096 18,729

1,701 1,719 1,931 5,315
361
123 187 1,102 1,283
4,234 1,180 19,140

1,737 1,686 1,934 5,397
255
83 187 1,089 1,277
4,382 1,314 19,341

1,833 1,590 1,931 5,352
209

1,947 1,613
. 2,009 5,458
188

69 196 1,124 1,307

61 220 1,309 1,363

2,048 1,621 1,430 5,656
199
39 230 1,351 1,418

4,327
1,354 19,293

4,387

4,931

1,409

1,398

19,964 (b) 20,350

(a) Current Values converted to 1974-75 dollars using the Gross Non-Farm Product Implicit Price Deflator (June Quarter 1981 National Accounts). Deflator used for 1981-82 was based on 1980-81 plus 10.5%.
(b) Includes Allowance for Wage and Salary Increases (Non-Defence) of$30 million at 1974-75 Prices,
Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service from Budget Paper No. I Budget Statements 1981-82.

COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY STATISTICS GROUP Commonwealth Government Budget Sector outlays at constant 1974-75 dollars(a) Annual percentage changes 1972-73 to 1980-81

Purpose

1981-82 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 estimate

Defence Education Health Social Security and Welfare

-4.6 +70.9 +6.4
+4.1

+0.9 +59.3 + 11.4 +22.7

-2.0 -2.0 +98.1 +16.6

+6.2 +5.3 -22.3 +14.2

+0.4 -0.2 -2.2 +7.5

+2.1 -1.9
0.2 +1.5

+5.5 -5.7 -0.2 -0.8

+6.2 +1.4 +4.0 +2,0

+5.2
+0-5 -28.8 +3.6

922 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

Purpose

1981-82 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 estimate

Housing Urban and Regional Develo-
pment
Culture and Recreation Economic Services
General Public Service Payments to or for the States, the
Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities
Public Debt Interest Total outlays

+21.7
+ 157.4 +20.6
-1.0 + 13.6
-1.\ -7.1 +5.6

+71.2 +116.0 +22.8 +29.8
+5.9
+ 10.1 +2.5 +19.9

-31.\
-7.1 -8.0 -24.9 -3.5

-11.6
-41.3 -8.3. -29.9 +0.7

-15.3
-40.3 -6.5 -11.0 -1.9

-29.4
-32.5 0
-1.2 --{l.5

+3.2 -6.2 +5.5

+4.2 +31.6
-0.4

+6.5 +7.7 +2.2

+3.5 +11.4 +1.\

-18.0
-16.9 +4.8 +3.2 +2.3

-10.0
-11.6 +12.2 +16.5 +4.3

+5.9
-36.1 +4.5 +3.2 +4.0

-1.3 +3.0 -0.2

+1.4 + 12.4

+4.1

-0.8

+3.5 +1.9

(a) Current Values converted to 1974-75 dollars using the Gross Non-Farm Product Implicit Price Deflator (using June Quarter 1981 National Accounts). Deflator used for 1981-82 was based on 1980-81 plus 10.5%. Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service from Budget Paper No. I Budget Statements 1981-82.

Mr BAUME-I thank the House. The statistics I have just incorporated and those that I incorporated in the debate on the sales tax Bills this afternoon show a very significant trend. They show that under the three Whitlam Budgets there was a spending rise in real terms-that is, after taking account of inflation-of $4.7 billion, but an increase in revenue in that time of only $2.6 billion. In other words, there was a $2.1 billion gap between what was raised and what was spent. When the Fraser Government came into power it had to close that gap. That has involved the disastrous situation with which this Government has been lumbered-the cost of closing the gap that was opened up by the previous Government. Let us dramatise the figures. The total increase in spending in six Budgets of the present Government in real terms is $1.5 billion. That is one third of the increased spending of the previous Government in only three Budgets. It is just fascinating, and I am astounded that both the Sydney Morning Herald and the Opposition are incapable of grasping the simple fact' that spending under the Whitlam Government in three Budgets alone increased at a rate that was treble the total rise under six Budgets of the present Government.
Mr Coleman-Treble!
Mr BAUME-Treble! I thank the honourable member for his interjection. It is absolutely unbelievable that the present Opposition which was in government at that time should maintain this nonsense that the present Government is a dreadful, onerous and oppressive government when it has had to pick up that bill which was left forit. I was a massive bill. Let me show the House and the people of Australia how big that bill has been and what the impact has been on this Government. The three Whitlam Budgets increased by only $2.6 billion the total revenues of the Commonwealth, although its spending went up by $4.7

billion. As a result of that the present Government has. had to increase its revenue by $4.5 billion in real terms, whereas it increased its spending by only $l.5 billion. In other words, to close the enormous gap, to fill the dreadful hole into which this economy was quietly sinking, the present Government has had to increase its revenue by three times the amount that it has been able to increase its own spending. In other words, it has had all the criticism for increasing its revenue and none of the credit for increasing its spending from those people who, of course, benefit from the spending.
Let us look at the realities. The Whitlam Government received all the credit for handing out $4.7 billio~ when it raised only $2.6 billion. The Fraser Government has received all the criticism for having to close that gap, having to raise $4.5 billion, while it has increased its spending by only $1.5 billion over six Budgets. It seems astounding that credit is not given where it is certainly due for a magnificent and successful attempt by this Government to close this dreadful gap from which the Australian economy was bleeding to death. When we look at what this Budget has achieved we see that we have been able to have that tight sort of economic control at a time when we have been able, nonetheless, to increase the number of people in jobs by 330,000 in two years. As I said this afternoon, that is the biggest 2-year .increase in the number of people at work in Australia's history. We have been able to do this despite the fact that we have held our taxation rates at levels far below the average in most industrialised countries. I seek leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard tables showing tax revenues as a percentage of gross domestic product in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 923 \

TAX REVENUE OF MAIN HEADINGS AS PERCENTAGE OF GDP (1978)-OECD MEMBERS

Revenue from taxes on:

Social security

Personal Corporate

income

incomeEmployee Employer

Payroll Property

Goods and
service

tOt her

Total

Australia
Austria Belgium
Canada Denmark Finland
France Germany Greece Ireland
Italy Japan Luxembourg
Netherlands New Zealand Norway
Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey
United Kingdom United States OECD Average

12.59
9.84 15.45 10.16 22.23 16.13 5.21
11.30 n.a. 9.56
6.67 5.28 13.24 12.37 18.03 17.16
2.87 4.17 22.55
11.44 8.82 11.44 10.41 11.68

3.07
1.32 2.63 3.55 1.38 1.57 1.85
2.19 n.a. 1.67
2.88 4.43 10.68
2.93 2.42
2.29 n.a. 1.24 1.63
1.99 0.99 2.47 3.44 2.70

0.00

0.00

1.55

2.56

9.04

0.00 28.81

5.54

6.32

2.98

1.20

13.09

1.14 41.43

3.67

8.52

0.00

1.24

11.54

1.13 44.18

3.66*

0.00

3.11

10.03

0.62 31.13

0.35 0.00

0.23 3.76

0.00 0.00

2.66

16.67

0.84

14.23

om 0.07 43.59 36.54

3.85

11.78

0.90

1.32

12.40

2.36 39.67

5.70

6.88

0.26

1.11

9.85

1.05 37.82

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

1.67

2.91

0.00

1.96

15.57

0.04 33.38

1.97

9.03

0.00

1.20

8.56

2.27 32.58

2.53

3.67

0.00

2.06

4.15

1.94 24.06

5.49

7.78

0.38

2.57

8.79

1.27 49.88

7.51

7.88

0.00

1.93

11.99

2.18 46.79

0.00

0.00

0.00

'2.65

7.11

0.15 30.36

0.00

8.44

0.00

0.83

17.81

0.41 46.94

2.47

5.17

0.66

0.39

9.94

4.65 26.15

2.23

9.04

0.00

1.17

4.87

0.04 22.76

0.00

13.69

9.36-

1.86 0.00

0.44

12.71

2.26

6.41

om0.62 53.50 31.47

3.38*

0.00

1.23

7.02

1.09 22.53

2.29

3.72

0.99

4.13

9.14

0.27 34.45

2.87

4.48

0.00

3.65

5.12

0.22 30.19

2.53

5.96

0.44

1.84

10.25

0.40 *35.80

* Total of employee and employer and self-employed social security contributions. t A residual item, including some taxes inallocable under these headings, and social security contributions of self-employeds. :j: This figure is the average of the countries' totals, not the total of the OECD average for each tax. Source: Revenue Statistics of OECD Member Countries 1965-790.00 OECD Paris 1980.
TAX REVENUE OF MAIN HEADINGS AS PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL TAXATION (1978)-OECD MEMBERS

Revenue from taxes on:

Personal income

Corporate income

Social security Employee Employer

Payroll Property

Goods and
services

Other

Australia
Austria Belgium Canada Denmark Finland France
Germany Greece Ireland
Italy Japan Luxembourg Netherlands New Zealand Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom United States OECD average

43.71 23.76 34.96 32.65
51.01 44.15 13.13 29.89
n.a. 28.64
20.48 21.95 26.54 26.43 59.38 36.55 10.96 18.30 42.16 36.34 39.16 33.79 34.49 32.20

10.64 3.18 5.96 11.41
3.16 4.30 4.66 5.79
n.a. 5.00 8.84 18.41 21.40 6.27 7.98 4.87 n.a. 5.44 3.05 6.34 4.40 7.18 11.40 7.61

0.00 13.38 8.31
0.80 0.00 9.70 15.06 n.a. 5.01 6.04 10.53 11.00 16.05 0.00 0.00 9.46 9.79 0.00
6.65 9.50 6.92

0.00
15.25 19.28 *11.75
0.53 10.30 29.70 18.18
n.a. 8.72 27.71 15.25 15.60 16.84 0.00 17.98 19.79 39.71 25.59 *29.75 *15.02 10.79 14.85 16.12

5.38

8.88

31.39

0.00

7.20

2.91

31.60

2.72

0.00

2.80

26.13

2.56

0.00

10.00

32.24

1.95

0.00

6.11

38.25

0.14

0.00

2.29

38.96

0.00

2.26

3.33

31.27

5.95

0.69

2.95

26.05

1.39

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

0.00

5;88

46.64

0.11

0.00

3.68

26.28

6.97

0.00

8.56

17.24

8.06

0.77

5.15

17.63

1.91

0.00

4.13

25.62

4.66

0.00

8.73

23.40

0.51

0.00

1.77

37.94

0.89

2.51

1.48

38.02

11.31

0.00

5.15

21.39

0.22

3.47

0.83

23.76

1.14

0.00

7.19

20.38

0.00

0.00

5.45

31.17

4.80

2.93

12.19

26.54

-0.07

0.00 h.1O

16.97

0.69

1.15

5.53

28.53

2.54

924 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

- Total of employee and employer and self-employed social security contributions. Source: Revenue Statistics o/OECD Member Countries 1965-790.00 OECD Paris 1980.

Mr BAUME-I thank the House.
Mr Robert Brown-Are they more cooked figures?
Mr BAUME-That is the sort of interjection I would expect from the Opposition, which cannot possibly face the reality of what the official statistics show. The only way the Opposition can counter the points I am making is to pretend that the statistics are phoney. They are official OECD &tatistics. The other statistics I have produced are from the Parliamentary Library. If members of the Opposition want to denigrate the Parliamentary Library and accuse it of dishonesty, it is fine by me. If the Opposition is serious in trying to counter what I am trying to say, it might be useful if it did something positive, rather than sneer at official statistics which were not provided by this Government. Let us look at the statistics. If the Opposition can deny the import of these statistics, let it try later. Let us look at the simple question of revenue from taxes as a proportion of gross domestic product for the OECD countries. One will see that Australia's revenue from taxes in 1978 is listed as totalling 28.8 per cent of gross domestic product. Let us compare that with countries such as Canada with 31 per cent, France with 39 per cent,Germany with almost 38 per cent and the Netherlands with 46 per cent.
Mr Cunningbam-What was it under Whitlam?
Mr BAUME-That is typical of the sort of interjection one would expect from the Opposition. The Whitlam Government spent money that it did not have. That it why we have this enormous tax bill and that is why-
Mr Young-That was like you when you were in the stock brokers.
Mr BAUME-I would expect that kind of interjection from the honourable member for Port Adelaide because that is the level of the objection of the Australian Labor Party to the serious points I am making about the economy. It seems to me that the only weapon that the Labor Party has is the weapon of insults, offensive interjections and personal attack: It does not have the capacity to criticise the realities of what the figures show. When the Labor Party can raise its standards, as it attempted unsuccessfully to do at the last election, and debate the issues of this Budget, instead of whingeing about little things, instead of appealing to the base elements, and instead of terrorising the people of Australia by claiming that this is an horrific Budget when it is not, and when the

Labor Party can raise its standards above personal abuse, we might get a decent debate in this House on the BlJdget.
Mr Coleman-They never will.
Mr BAUME-I agree with the honourable member for Wentworth, they never will. Certainly, they never have in the period I have been a member of this House. I was endeavouring to say that the Netherlands has a percentage of total tax to gross domestic product of 47. In Sweden-that socialist heaven-taxes are 53.5 per cent of gross domestic product, as against 28.8 per cent in Australia. Britain's figure is 34.5 per cent and that for the United States is 30.2 per cent. The OECD average is 35.8 per cent. For honourable members opposite to complain about the tax level in Australia is absurd. It seems to me that,.by international comparisons, we have a pretty sound tale to tell. We have a record which, I think, is reasonable.
Let us see whether the Ia.test increase in taxes on goods is something that is improper, indecent, obscene or anything else that the Opposition wants to pretend it is. According to the OECD survey, Australia was one of the lowest countries in the world in terms of the gross domestic product accounted for by taxes on goods and services. The figure was about 9 per cent, compared to 12 per cent for France, 12 per cent for the Netherlands, 12.7 per cent for Sweden and the OECD average of lOt per cent. One can see that so far we have lagged behind the rest of the world in the indirect taxes area. It seems to me that the switch that is now taking place in a small way has a great deal of merit in terms of international comparison and in terms of equity. An interesting point which members of the Opposition do. not seem to recognise is that the average wage earner in Australia spends something like 40 per cent-
Mr Robert Brown-Mr Deputy Speaker-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Me Jarman)~ Does the honourable member wish to raise a point of order?
Mr Robert Brown-Indeed, and it is a genuine one. I am interested in the figures that the honour~ able member for Macarthur has just quoted for indirect taxes in the OECD.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will explain his point of order.
Mr Robert Brown-I would like those figures to be clarified.

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 925

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member knows that that is not a point of order.
Mr BAUME-The Opposition is seeking to waste my time because the points I am making effectively demolish the rubbish that has been maintained in this debate by the Opposition. I turn to the switch to a small degree of indirect taxation revenue, having established quite clearly that indirect taxes as a proportion of total gross domestic product in Australia have been far below the rest of the world. I have said that in terms of equity there is a fair case for maintaining the switch in the way it has been done in Australia. The average wage earner, the average householder, spends something like 40 per cent of his income on items which are subject to these new taxes. In other words, 40 per cent of his income will attract this 2+ per cent increase. But for the lower income earners, something like only 25 per cent of their salary will be subject to taxation of this kind because, as I said this afternoon, they have a higher propensity to consume food.
Mr Mildren-What about the pensioners and the unemployed?
Mr BAUME-The pensioners have a fully indexed pension which takes fully into account the rises in indirect taxes, which basically affect the rich far more than the poor. However, because this Government introduced full indexation of their income, pensioners will receive, in fact, a full indexation benefit although the bulk of their spending, something like 75 per cent of it, will not be directed towards items on which indirect taxes will be increased in this Budget. So let us nail this question of equity. The fact is that pensioners, who will not have to pay any indirect tax on their food, will receive the benefit of full indexation on all the items on which they do not spend anything more than approximately 25 per cent of their incomes.
Mr Barry Jones-You said that this afternoon. That is exactly what you said this afternoon.
Mr BAUME-Exactly. I said it this afternoon, and I am endeavouring to reinforce it. Let us look and see where the Government is spending this money. Where have the big increases been? It seems to me that when the Government is attacked for increasing its spending we should look at issues such as social security. The pensioners are the people who have received the biggest increase in-government spending since this Government has been in office. The biggest rise in our spending has been in the area of social security-in real terms an increase of $1.3 billion or 30 per cent since this Government has been in office. Certainly, defence expenditure has shown a

rise, and a rise which I am certain has been appreciated by the members of the defence forces in my electorate, for example. The morale of members of the defence forces deteriorated rapidly under the previous Government which reduced their share of government spending to approximately 8.5 per cent. It is now back up to 10.1 per cent. The Government intends to continue to increase that share. I certainly take the view-I believe all members on this side take this viewthat that impact on defence morale of the savage manner in which the defence forces were treated under the previous Government has left a scar which is only now beginning to heal with the increase in defence funding. It seems to me that when we see that spending on social security is by far the biggest area of advance in this Budget, we recognise-
Mr Cunningham-Not so.
Mr BAUME-Someone says: 'Not so'. I am comparing this with the last Hayden Budget. I would have thought that might have been an amusing point from which to begin. Certainly, it would raise some hollow laughs opposite. The big increase in social security has been brought about by the recognition by this Government that automatic indexation of incomes for pensioners should take place. It seems to me that the only inhibiting factors in maintaining this Budget, in selling this Budget to the people and in getting rid of the deliberate confusion being created by people opposite that there will be a disaster in this Budget, are some little items which are very important to the people involved but which are not significant in terms of total revenues. The Government is well aware of the fact that I believe it to be a mistake that the Government did not index the pensioner health benefits card. I am also disappointed that something could not have been done about interest rates on home loans, although I recognise the risks involved in that.
Despite all the criticism from the Opposition about the disaster this Budget will bring upon the nation, I remind members of the Opposition that this is the sort of thing they said about the last two Budgets. It is what they said last year when we had a 3 per cent increase in real spendillg and more than a 3 per cent increase in household disposable income. The same forecasts are in the Budget Papers for the current y~ar because the increase in indirect taxes this year will be less than the increase in indirect taxes last year. Not one member of the Opposition has had the honesty or the integrity to concede that point. The impact on spending of this Budget in terms of increased in, direct taxes will be less than it was last year, and

926 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

yet despite those rises last year our national spending went up by more than 3 per cent.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (8.45)-This is an atrocious Budget, and the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) knows it. The only thing we can say about his speech is that we will give him marks for loyalty but nothing for matter. Let us put it very clearly: If there were an election tomorrow he would be annihilated in the seat of Macarthur, because the Government has done nothing but redistribute the resources of the people it represents to organisations usually belonging to foreigners. It is significant that a fair segment of the honourable member's speech related to countries other than Australia. Let us look at the facts where this Government is concerned. At page 87 of the Budget Papers the Government clearly admits that at least 2.3 million people are in poverty, because it refers to this estimated number of holders of health cards. The Government admits that itself. This is the sixth Fraser Budget. We will say it is the sixth poverty Budget. It is a Budget that has budgeted for a $1,500m surplus-a surplus which will be extracted from the people's pockets and which will not be given back to them. I will table figures later which clearly will show that in the six Budgets the Government has done nothing but redistribute money from the poor to those who do not need it. That applies right across the board, whether one is talking about social services, health, education, housing or whatever. Every State Premier is against the Government. We in the Opposition have been inundated with telexes from the Government's own 'supporters~ the employers-wondering what in the name of fortune the Government will do about their industry, which the Government has referred back to the Industries Assistance Commission to consider the question of protection. We have been inundated with telexes from those who are interested in the newspaper or publishing industry, saying that this is the only Western democracy to tax information. Where is the Government's support? Is it not about time we tested the Government by asking: 'Where is your mandate?'
Let us look at this matter in detail. The poverty line, as far as the Government is concerned for a family with two children is $200. At least three million Australians fall below that line. So what sort of an economy has-the Government created in its six Budgets? Why make excuses all the time, saying that there is a reason for your doing this. Let us look at the Government's history ove-r the

period since 1975, when all those promises, whether they related to health schemes, indexation, pensions or whatever, were never kept. These people we are talking about are disadvantaged. The Henderson Commission of Inquiry into Poverty clearly showed that for an Australian family of four to survive it would need $227 a week, and most Australians agree with that. When the McMahon Government commissioned the first inquiry into poverty in Australia, 1.3 million Australians were living below the poverty line. There are now 3 million Australians living below that poverty line-an increase of 1.7 million. In regard to the Government's cover up, Professor Henderson said:
This Government is guilty of trying to suppress the evidence. Obviously it doesn't want the real facts to come out.
Nor should it expect the facts to come out unless we have debate in the Parliament. and clearly show the situation. Let me remind all honourable members that if someone is poor, he is disadvantaged. If one is the child of a poor family one is even more disadvantaged because one has to compete with others who are not so disadvantaged. That can apply to health schemes. If one is a child of a poor family one is not as healthy and does not get the same care. It is more likely that one will be hospitalised and suffer from infectious diseases, malnutrition or whatever. The opportunity of having an upper occupation in life is denied one, Statistics clearly show that a poor child has oneseventh of a chance of attending university, There is plenty of evidence of thilt. If honourable members look at the report of the Karmel Interim Committee for the Australian Schools Commission, which we commissioned when we were in government they will see that it clearly showed that two-thirds of positions in universities were given to the'top elite because of the occupational back-up of the parents. All these disadvantaged persons' problems are permanent and are increasing in Australia, whether they be in regard to health, education or housing, or the problems of just being poor. These facts can be verified by any medical authority, any university or any commission of inquiry. What is it that the Government can saY is fair and reasonable? In our view, it has no right to penalise the poor parents but in the mind of any Australian it is not justified in penalising the children of the poor, which is what this Government is doing.
Let us look at the facts in regard to wealth distribution in this country. A report given to the University of Sydney showed that 10 per cent of people owned 60 per cent of the wealth and the richest 2,000 people in Australia owned as much as the poorest 2.25 million people. That has never

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 927

been denied by the Department of the Treasury, and all vulnerable groups. The whole idea of jus-

and that is information which surely must interest tice and equality in our democracy is to guarantee

any government because its tax gathering is not that there is a redistribution of wealth in those

limited only to income; it is related to all other terms. It has not been done in the six Budgets

aspects of getting income and benefits for all Aussince 1975. We have to turn back to the eight-

tralians. The Government's duty and obligation is eenth century to see what has happened. In our

to redistribute those resources back to those system the benefits which accrue to wage and sal-

people in need. It should give equal opportunities ary earners are not just simply in the form of

to every Australian to guarantee that this is a money wages. Let us make this very clear. There

strong democracy. Wealth should be shared by has to be provision by governments in respect of

those who create it. When we look at our history health, housing, recreation, transport, communi~

we see that a small group is getting the benefit and cation, education and social security. In other

that the great majority of people are bearing more words, there is another factor, which we will call a

of the burden.

social wage, on top of a money wage. In the last

Statistics reveal that 10 per cent of the adult population receive 92 per cent of interest, dividends and rent. One can see that there is a great disparity between what is happening and what should be happening. None of these figures, none of these instances, appear in the Budget columns or get one mention in the Budget Speech of the

six major Budgets, including the last Budget, the Government consistently and savagely cut that social wage. The cumulative cuts amount to $26 billion. At the same time the increased tax take from wage and salary earners, that is, from both non-indexation of taxes and the imposition of new taxes, -amounts to $21 billion. There w~ have it.

Treasurer (Mr Howard). One can wade through Taking both the increased tax grab and the rethe jargon that is given as economic theory in the rduction in the benefits of the social wage, almost

Budget Speech. But we must realise that the $47 billion has been extracted from the living

Treasurer cannot even understand his own words. standards of Australian people. There has been a

I want to draw these facts to the attention of Aus- $47 billion rip off of wage and salary earners in six

tralians. They live with these problems and they Budgets: Accordingly, I seek leave to incorporate

understand them. They expect the Government in Hansard three tables numbered I, 2 and 3. I

to understand them also and to bring in a Budget have shown them to the Minister for Health (Mr

that is mindful to the situation.
Tax collections and Budget allocations are important mechanisms in creating a just society, par-

MacKellar) and he has agreed to their incorporation in Hansard.
Leave granted.

ticularly for the poor, the socially disadvantaged The tables read as follows-

Table 1
SOCIAL WAGE
Figures compiled and tables prepared by T. Wilshire, Sydney University and P. Raskall, Kuringai College of Advanced Education, for the office of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition

1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

Education Health(a)
Social Security (b) Housing (c)
Urban Development Culture and Recreation Transport and communication Water and electricity Employment training Consum~r protection Legal aid and public safety

(d)+ 55 - 818 + 286 95 - 199 31 - 524
9 13
I +4

- 158 - 981
+ 14 - 237
- 336
- 54
- 802
- 43
+ 22 I
+3

- 24 -1,080
- 358 - 402 - 425
- 60 -1,068
- 90 + 52
2 +2

- 203 -1,216 . - 739 - 540 - 492
55 -1,167 - 80
14 3 +3

- 148 -1,149 - 776 - 604 - 553
II -1,171
61 + 22
3
+6

- 154 1,292
- 860
- 754 - 655 +6 -1,292
- 75 + 54
5 +6

Current dollars Constant dollars

-1.345 -2.127

-2,573 -3,717

-~,455
-4,614

-4,506 -5,462

-4,448 -4,927

-5,021 -5,021

(a) Changed arrangements for health funding affect comparability of the functional classification between 1980-81 and

1981-82. The data used makes adjustment for these changes and increased outlays under 'Health' in 1981-82 by $1150.6 million

to maintain comparability.

(b) Adjusted to reflect increased number of recipients by various categories. Thus, data used reflects real change per recipi-

ent in budgets since 1975-76.

.

(c} Reflects net advances to states and territories for housing.

928 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

(d) All sums in SAm.
Indirect taxes PAYE income tax
Current dollars Constant dollars

Table 2 SOCIAL CONTRIBUTION

1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

- 30 +540

- 197 + 892

+ 936 + 935

+510 +807

+ 695 +1,004

+1,871 +2,498

1979-80
+1,430 +1,735
+3,165 +3,836

1980~81
+2,138 +2,713
+4,855 +5,378

1981-82
+2,758 +4,609
+7,367 +7,367

Table 3 NET CHANGE TO PERSONAL BENEFIT

1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

Social wage (Less) Social contribution

-1,345 + 510

-2,573 + 695

-3,455 +1,871

-4,506 +3,165

- 4,448 +4,855

- 5,021 + 7,367

Net change . . Constant dollars

~I,855
-2,934

-3,268 -4,721

-5,326 -7,112

-7,671 -9,298

- 9,303 -10,305

12,388 -12,388

Total in constant dollars after six ~udgets=S46,758 million.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-On the converse side, the Government has been generous to the private sector and the wealthy. Tax collections from these groups have declined by over $6 billion. This has been a gift, a rebate, from the Government. Honourable members will note that, unlike the position of wage and salary earners, direct assistance to industry has been increased by $1,500m. I

again seek leave to incorporate in Hansard, with the Minister's approval, three more tables-I will call them tables 4, 5 and 6which detail those changes in redistribution.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

Table 4
CORPORATE/WEALTHY CONTRIBUTIONS
Figures compiled and tables prepared by T. Wilshire, Sydney University, and P. Raskall, Kuringai College of Advanced Education, for the Office of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition

1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

Coal export levy Company income tax Witholding tax Payroll tax Non-PAYE income tax Estate duty Gift duty

---6 --47 -12
-2 -320 -10
-2

--40 --49
0 -3 +625 +1 -7

-57 -364
"':14 -II -936 -20 -14

-75 -341
0 -14 -833 ---65 -15

-97 +595
+7 716 ---640 -107 -18

-87 +629
--4 -19 -895 :"129 -19

Current dollars . . (1981) Constant dollars

-399 -631

-723 -1,044

-1,416 -1,891

-1,343 -1,628

-276 -306

-524 -524

Industry assistance Research
Current dollars Constant dollars

TableS DIRECT ASSISTANCE TO INDUSTRY

1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

-191

-173

+1

-5

-10

+4

-196

-183

+5

-310

-264

+7

1979-80
+74 +23
+97 + 118

1980-81
+254 +43
+297 +329

1981-82
+327 +80
+407 +407

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 929

Table 6 NET CHANGES

1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

Direct assistance to industry . . . . (Less) Corporate/wealthy contribution

-310 --631

-264 -1,044

+7 -1,891

+ Jl8 -1,628

+329 -306

+407 -524

321

780

1,898

1,746

635

933

Total in constant (1981-82 prices) after 6 Budgets=$6,313 million.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I thank the House. In six Budgets over six years this Government has extracted over $162 billion in taxes and $90 billion in income tax-most of it from those who pay as they earn, as has been said before by my colleagues. In 1975-76 PAYE tax was 41.7 per cent of total tax collections. This year it has climbed to 45 per cent. What is the converse situation? Company tax was 15 per cent in 1975-76. It has now fallen to 13.7 per cent and profits are rising much faster than wages. This year alone PAYE tax is up 22 per cent while wages have risen only 13t per cent and company tax has risen only 10.1 per cent. Last year profits rose by 18.2 percent.
In six Budgets this Government has redistributed more income than any Government in Australian history. The direction of this redistribution has been towards increasing inequality, not just for the poor but for most Australians whether they be in the lower or middle income groups. It should come as no surprise to anyone that this Government holds the record for the greatest budgetary contribution to increasing inequality of any government since the Bruce-Page Government. Yet the Government has not rested on that record. It will now force a similar policy on all State governments. The much vaunted new federalism was supposed to give greater autonomy to the States but it is has done nothing of the sort. New federalism has involved a combination of untruths about what funds are available to the States and then the cutting of those funds.
At the same time the Government is cutting not only its social wage contributions but also the social wage in respect of State Governments. Let me give an example. On 4 May at the Premiers Conference the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced the cancellation of the existing tax sharing formula under which the States got 39.87 per cent of income tax collections. Instead the Government did away with the formula and the Statt"~ got a 9 per cent increase in the tax sharing funds. They should have got a 15 per cent increase to match the provisions of the previous formula. What does this mean, for example, to New South Wales? In that instance it means that

New South Wales gets $143m less from taxes, the taxes which its own people pay. We should bear in mind also the increased sales taxes which will be imposed and which will net over $800m. An amount of $300m will be extracted from the people of New South Wales in sales tax. Is it any wonder that the Government parties will be annihilated in the forthcoming State election? The Commonwealth Government has robbed all State Governments but it has been severely savage oil New South Wales.
Let us have a look at some other factors as they apply to New South Wales. The Government in New South Wales was encouraged as a result of a letter from the Prime Minister to accelerate electricitydevelopment. So the New South Wales Government applied to get $171m from the Loan Council. That was refused. Again we see a savage attack on New South Wales after it was asked to do something about development in relation to electricity. I understand that the Leader of the Opposition in New South Wales was down here urging the Fraser Oovernment to carry out this sort of policy. I understand that he wants the Prime Minister to campaign for him in the forthcoming election campaign. I suggest that they both remain on sick leave; it is the only chance they have of even getting 10 per cent of the votes. Would anyone in New South Wales want to vote for a Government that does this to the people in that State?
We should look at some other matters in respect of the Federal Government. In the last six Budgets the Federal Government has cut real net payments to New South Wales for housing from $177m to $13,5m. Why has it done that? It is only shifting the responsibility and the burden on to State governments. Let us look at health. I ask the Minister for Health who is at the table whether it is a fact that he has done away with the health agreement. The Budget says so. The Government has a new commitment but the commitment is nowhere near what it was before. I have advice from the New South Wales Government setting out details in the health area. The cuts amount to $1 OOm because the Government will not :share the cost burden any more. The Government has said also

930 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1981-82

that it will guarantee that New South Wales imhim that the Australian Labor Party will not do

poses higher hospital charges. The Government that. We will oppose the Bill. Fancy anyone worth

says in respect of outpatients that hospitals will his salt standing up and saying that he willsend us

charge $15 and that it will take from its grant 60 a message but if we do not agree with it that will

per cent of the fees that are expected to be colbe all right. I would give them a message. The

lected in respect of outpatients. The additional message ought to be given to the worthy Senator

burden for New South Wales in that respect is Chipp who, I might add, was a beneficiary of the

another $1 OOm.

withholding of Supply in 1975. He even got a

Mr MacKellar-You know that is not true.

short term Cabinet post. He seems to have hada double take as to what the propriety is in this area.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-It is true. I will show "Let me make it very clear. We can oppose tax

the Minister the figures. The Minister is an Bills. We have made it clear that we will not reject

honourable man and he would know himself that the annual Appropriation but we can talk about

hospital charges are' being increased. He knows .taxes as everybody has done. We are talking about

that he is going to take from those grants. He people, their entitlements and what the Govern-

knows that the States cannot afford to do this. I ment is doing to the families iri Australia.

am prepared to discuss the matter with him at a later time. The figures I referred to were supplied by New South Wales. In total New South Wales, because of this Government's Budget, is $570m worse off in all fields. How can any Liberal Party member from New South Wales continue to support that situation?

I come to housing quickly because my time is running out. Interest rates have' added $55 a month to repayments on a $30,000 loan. Total repayments on that loan have increased by $17,000. In addition, the average family now has to pay 46 per cent of its income in rent. What is happening to our great society? Let us have a look at what

The Government has done very well. It has foreigners think. They are coming in with their

boasted that it has increased jobs by 140,000. But money hand over fist, buying up rural properties

most of these jobs, according to research done by and everything they can, because the inflow is not

the University of New South Wales, are part time. for our benefit but usually to take over existing

What does part time workdo for a person? It corporations. His usually to make advantages for

means that a person gets poor working conditions, them. So the Treasurer boasts that he thinks this

faces short term hiring, no occupational choice, will help us. Help us! My God, from the point of

no superannuation, shift work, family disruption view of what has happened in the last year, 75 per

and little opportunity if he or she is sick. The cent of the $6 billion was invested for speculation

Government says that it has done something. Figand takeovers. The figures now show that in the

ures clearly show that unemployment in this coming year as much as 30c of every dollar saved

country totals about 850,000, two and a half times by Australians will be mobilised by foreign inves-

the official figure. The Government knows in retors to buy more of Australia's resources and

lation to the h.ealth card whic,:h it has been talking assets. They are coming in to take our money and

about that three million people will be dependent buy our assets. What nation worthy of the name

in that area. That is an indictment of its own will allow its assets to be sold to foreign investors?

programs. So as we go through the whole aspect of When will the Government wake up and see that

this Budget and look at the imposition of sales tax it cannot transfer our heritage to somebody else?

we ask ourselves: 'What will it do?' It will extract We have the talent, the ability, the integrity and

another $550m from the Australian taxpayer to the national spirit to develop our country and we

build up a surplus Qverthree years SO that perhaps have the money, The quick answer for us is to in-

the Government can give a tax rebate, Is that not vite the Government to go to the polls on this

what this Government is about? It is taking from Budget. We will give it a chance, because we will

Australians who can ill afford it.

reject its sales tax Bills. If it does go to the polls we

Let us talk about the morality of this sales taX. I predict that it will be annihilated.

am amazed at the Australian Democrats in the Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory)

Senate who say that they have to obtain legal (9.5)-Samuel Beckett's play Waitingfor Godot

advice in relation to this matter. I must say their has been described as a play in which nothing hap-

legal advice was pretty poor. It has been very pens twice. The same statement could well apply

clear for some time-the Government is expert at to the package of. anti-Budget arguments being

it-that we can always reject a sales tax Bill. 1 am delivered to us by the Opposition. Yesterday the

amazed to hear Senator Mason saying that the Sydney Morning Herald describ~d the speech by

Senate will send us a message; but if we do not the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in this

accept the message they will pass the Bill. I tell debate as follows:

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 931

From the little we heard, the Opposition's policies don't add up to much.
Since Tuesday night we have heard a succession of Australian Labor Party speakers pour forth so much doom and despair that I wonder if the chief architect of the Australian Labor Party's current arguments is not Samuel Beckett himself. I make no apology for linking the Opposition's arguments with the theatre of the absurd. The two fit together well. The reason is simple. The Australian Labor Party's despair about the economy is so far removed from reality that it is laughable.
Quite. the contrary to what the Australian Labor Party would have us believe, the economy is looking good. Fact one is that inflation is down to 8.8 per cent. Fact two is that unemployment is at its lowest level for four years. Fact three is that private investment is up by 20 per cent. This Budget is aimed at improving this pattern of economic success achieved by the Government. It is a Budget that points to continued economic growth in the forthcoming year.
The reduction of the Budget deficit by almost $1,OOOm, to $146m, should ease the pressures on interest rates and make more funds available to home buyers and others in the community without, at the same time, fuelling inflation. The sensible approach of this Budget will produce lasting success in the economy. On this side of the House we are intelligent enough to realise that one cannot legislate improvements in the economy. One cannot legislate against unemployment or inflation, or legislate for economic growth. But one can create the right conditions in which such improvements can take place. One can create a stable economy for development to take place.
In my electorate, the Northern Territory, the prospect of future development is particularly welcome. Since self-government in 1978the Budget of the Northern Territory Government has grown from $350m to $756m this year. This reflects not only the transfer of State-like functions from the Commonwealth to ihe. Northern Territory, but also the rapid economic growth in the Territory which has taken place under the Everingham Country-Liberal Party Government. This Federal Budget contains a continuing high level of commitment to the Northern Territory. Members will be aware that the basic framework for financial arrangements between the Commonwealth and the Northern Territory is set out in a memorandum of understanding agreed to between the two governments in 1978. Under the terms of that memorandum, the Commonwealth will provide the Northern Territory with $618.9m this year. This is a generous contribution

representing $4,765 per capita in the Northern Territory for State-type services.
It is worthwhile pointing out that over the period 1978 to 1981 the revenue raised by the Northern Territory Government has increased from $60m per annum to $130m per annum. This doubling of the local revenue base has occurred without imposing burdens on local taxpayers except in this year's Northern Territory Budget, which levied a tobacco tax and made other minor adjustments. In recent times and since the memorandum of understanding was negotiated, the Northern Territory Government has had extra functions transferred to it such as regulating uranium mining for which additional funding is necessary and may require close attention to detailed settlement of adequate funding.
Significantly, additional Commonwealth expenditure on its own department such as the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, the Department of Social Security, the Department of Defence, the Department of Transport and Telecom Australia and on capital works projects also provide an important boost to the economy. Furthermore, these specific Budget items will enhance the development of the Northern Territory and alleviate some of the disabilities of living in an isolated area. For all the Labor Party's screaming one would think-that the Government is doing nothing about helping Australia's needy through social security. This Federal Budget will increase social welfare spending by 14.7per cent or $1,265m.
Mr Birney-By how much?
Mr TAMBLING-By $1,265m. This means that for every dollar of tax collected 47c goes towards social security payments. In the Northern Territory, some 5,948 families will take advantage of the new provisions for family allowances. Throughout the year I have received a number of complaints about unemployment benefit being paid to the spouse of a person on strike. I am pleased the Government is taking action to halt this situation. I am concerned, though, about the problems of those receiving income security payments in the Northern Territory. Additional assistance in the form of zone allowance does exist for ordinary taxpayers. However, people receiving unemployment benefit; pensions and other social security payments receive no such entitlements which recognise the factors of isolation. I ask that the Government consider some extra form of relief for those on social security payments to counterbalance this discrimination. It is a sad fact of the Northern Territory lifestyle that often aged people are forced to leave for

932 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

southern States for no other reason than the expense of living in the Northern Territory.
I mentioned before that this is a Budget of development with major implications in the Northern Territory. As honourable members are aware, the most exciting new development in the Northern Territory is the emergence and maturity of the uranium industry. It is pleasing to note that $16m has been allocated for the Alligator Rivers region. With the Australian Labor Party opposed to uranium mining on the one hand and continually apologising to the Northern Territory electorate on the other for its anti-uranium stance, it could not hope to match the high priority which the Fraser Government gives the uranium industry. Of the $16m set aside for the uranium province, $9.9mhas been made as a contribution towards labiru township, specifically for a hospital, police station and housing. In addition, the Office of the Supervising Scientist has been given $4.2m to monitor uranium mining operations. The National Parks and Wildlife Service has $2.4m to run Kakadu National Park. Coupled with the 2S per cent increase in the Northern Territory Government's Budget allocation for the Territory Parks and Wildlife Commission which has a budget of $lS.9m, I hope that the Commission will assume a greater role in the administration and management of Kakadu National Park and, in fact, take over functions from the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service.
Tourism in the Territory is rapidly expanding. It is the second largest industry after mining. The scope for further investment in tourism is unlimited. Finance for Uluru National Park and the provision of $13.4m for national roads, some of which will go towards the first tourist developmental road at Ayers Rock, will provide an important impetus for this industry. Similarly, the massive increase in funding for employment programs comes at an opportune moment in Northern Territory development. Because of a small population base and its isolation, the Northern Territory has had considerable difficulty in attracting skilled workers to the major. resource projects. The 31 per cent rise in the allocation for national manpower training programs should go part of the way to providing skilled labour for development. I point out however that the success of these resource projects and, inevitably, the development of the Territory depends on a stable community being created with the development of a stable work force. It is no secret that an effective way of doing this without imposing undue costs on the private sector and eventually on the consumer is by providing some form of tax concession. At the moment this is done by offering a

zone allowance tax rebate. With the view to providing consistent and stable development, the level of the zone allowance should. be substantial throughout the Territory, including the service port of Darwin.

As we have all experienced, growth is fraught with pains. In the case of the Northern Territory this is housing. The Northern Territory Government in its own Budget this year has been innovative in trying to encourage home ownership and
housing development but it is neither possible nor proper for government to meet all housing needs. I challenge the traditional sources of housing finance, banks and building societies to make more of their funds available for home finance in the Northern Territory. The security and the need are both obvious.

Mr Holding-What interest rates do you

suggest?

.

Mr TAMBLING-It is a matter of getting money, not interest rates. The Labor Party policy would certainly mean that the money would dry up. I turn briefly to communications. With the generous Budget allocation for the Australian Broadcasting Commission, Territorians are
expecting an improvement in services. The Australian Broadcasting Commission has provided an excellent service to isolated areas over the years which commercial enterprises have not found viable. However, I indicate to this House the concern of many people in remote parts of Australia, most of whom cannot listen to this debate tonight, who are worried that the additional services will be diverted to where they are least needed, that is, to the metropolitan areas at the expense of rural areas. The report of the Dix Committee into the' ABC placed high priority on the provision of a second network for ABC radio in regional and outback areas. It argued that 'it offers the best means of redressing the imbalance of ABC radio
services between metropolitan and outback areas'.

One of the most pleasing aspects of this Budget is generous funding for Aboriginals and Aboriginal organisations. The Department of Aboriginal Affairs has received substantial increases as has the Aboriginal Development Commission. Funds have been made available for Aboriginal employment, housing and health schemes. Not only is the Government trying to alleviate the problems which are affecting Aboriginals but also, through such organisations as the Aboriginal Development Commission, it is promoting Aboriginal advancement, self-reliance and cultural and commercial freedom. It is an encouraging sign that 7S

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 933

per cent of the funds at the disposal of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs for advancement programs will go to Aboriginal managed organisations. In the Northern Territory the Department is allocating no fewer than 42 grants to organisations for Aboriginal improvement.
My final comment on this Budget of development relates to the continued provision for the Alice to Darwin railway, a project which is symbolic of the excitement and faith in the Northern Territory. One of my constituents summed up the Budget today When she said: 'It's exciting to see things getting done'.
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (9.17)-The wife of the honourable member for the Northern Territory (Mr Tambling) must be .very loyal. Now that the Australian Democrats have made up their minds-it has caused them great consternation-this will be the Government's third last Budget. If everybody on this side of the House shared my view it might be the Government's last Budget. I believe that the Australian Labor Party should play politics in Australia in the same rotten fashion in which they are played by the Government. The Senate has the power, as the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) told us last Tuesday week, to block the Budget. This Budget being as reprehensible as it is, to use the Prime Minister's words of 1975, the Senate should use its powers to block it. The people should be asked to vote on whether they want a Budget of this nature.
Earlier in the debate someone said that it is not relevant to talk about whether matters related to the Budget were raised in the Prime Minister's policy speech of 1980. He said that this is the 1981 Budget and We should forget all about the 1980 policy speech. This is the third time that the Prime Minister has pulled the stunt of saying one thing at the election and doing another straight after. I believe that the people of Australia should adopt the term used by the Returned Services League 'Lest we forget'. If the Democrats are now going to water on their earlier statement that they would knock back the sales tax measures this Government can live at ease for another three years. All its measures will be passed because of the weak kneed messages that will be sent back from the Senate as a result of the sta,nd of the Democrats. The Government can go on shaping its Budgets as it haS done this time and force its policies on the Australian people.
What the Government will not do is present a Budget of this nature in 1983. This Budget is designed to allow the Government to give back to the voters in 1983 some of the taxes it is grabbing

in 1981 and 1982. Nothing could be clearer than that. I-do not believe the Government is doing anything at all to try to hide the motivation of this Budget. It will take money from people in 1981 and 1982, give a little back in 1983 in order to survive and take it again in 1984. That is the way this Government has operated since it was elected in 1975 and obviously it is the way it will continue after this year.
Under this Government the problems that have been caused and the injustices that have been created are as much acts of deliberate policy as they are the result of incompetence. It has hidden behind the excuse that its policies and the burdens that have gone with them are economic necessities. The Prime Minister's assumption that what he wanted was what the rest of Australia wanted evaporated with the reaction to his comment that 'life was not meant to be easy'. Since then he has adopted the false rhetoric of fighting inflation first and promising that economic recovery is on its way. We have been told of the prospect of a consumer-led recovery, an investment-led recovery and an overseas-led recovery. All of these have amounted to nothing and now we are supposed to sit and waitfor a resources-led recovery. If the Government is allowed to continue with its present foreign investment and development policies, most people will not enjoy many of the benefits of this either.
Now the long lead times of resources projects are being used by the Government as a further excuse for not coming to grips with unemployment. The Government has dumped the unemployed. It has not just walked away from them; it has hounded and stigmatised them in a sickening media campaign to neutralise unemployment as an election issue. As time has worn on, the ranking of Government Ministers for employment has _ slid about as far as it can go, as has the Govern~ ment's financial commitment to the unemployed. In this Budget the Community Youth Support Scheme has been abolished. This action has ignored the fact that the average period ofunemployment for 15 to 19 year-year-olds in this country which is going through a so-called boom is 26 weeks. .
The Government's policies are often contradictory. It has said that fighting inflation is its first priority but it has fuelled inflation with its oil pricing policy and its sales tax increases. We have heard about the benefits of small government,.but taxes have not been reduced. The burdens must be spread across a smaller tax base.. Under the Prime Minister that .burden is increasingly put on the wage earner. The estimate of average weekly earnings, to which the Government prefers to

934 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

refer, is the seasonally adjusted estimate of average earnings before tax of all male civilian employees in Australia, including the highest paid as well as the lowest paid. For the March quarter of 1981 that estimate is $283.90 a week or about $14,700 a year. A similarly calculated estimate of the average weekly earnings of adult male full time employees, excluding managerial and executive staff, is $245.50 a week or about $12,700 a year. According to the. latest Budget figures, 75 per cent of individuals have annual incomes of under $15,000. But about half earn less than $11,000 a year and almost 40 per cent of wage earners receive less thlln $10,000 a year. The biggest group earns between $9,000 and $10,000 a year. These are the people the Prime Minister is putting the screws on. The 0.26 per cent of the individuals who earn more than $50,000 a year are the ones he is looking after.
It is sickening to the people of Australia to witness Government members like the Treasurer (Mr Howard) of this country being interviewed on television telling the people of Australia that he can understand the problems of the average person who earns $300 a week. Let me. repeat: Seventy-five per cent of wage earners receive less than $1 5,000 a year or $300 a week. About half of the wage earners receive less than $11,000 a year and 40 per cent receive less than $10,000 a year. The Treasurer does not know what people earn. How can he understand the hardships that are being forced on the people through measures like this Budget?
The Government's double standards for the community are nowhere more evident than they are in the field of taxation. Despite the Prime Minister's mention of the benefits of tax indexation in his policy speech last year, only seven months later the Government announced that it had made its last indexation adjustment and that any future adjustments would be made on a discretionary basis having regard to economic conditions. This means that from now on the Government can rely on inflation to make its tax increases. The real value of. deductions for dependants will decline and increases in wages will .mean higher average tax rates. These burdens will fall disproportionately heavily upon those on lower incomes. For example, if we use the Government's prediction of a 13.5 per cent increase in the average wage across the board, a person currently earning $8,000 a year would have an increase in his tax bill this year of 57 per cent. If a person on $8,000 a year receives a 13 per cent wage increase, as predicted by the Treasurer in his Budget, his tax bill in the next financial year will

go up by 57 per cent. The tax bill of a person earning $14,500 a year will go up by 21 t per cent, and a person currently earning $50,000 will have an increase in his tax bill of 17.8 per cent. That is the way in which the Government intends to raise the additional revenue it requires this financial year.
In recent years company taxation revenue increases have barely kept pace with inflation, while increases in revenue from personal income tax have far exceeded inflation. The Government's failure to redress the growing imbalance of the burden between corporate taxes and personal income taxes is nowhere more evident than in the area of resources. Honourable members on this side of the House have frequently argued for a resource rental tax. We are not talking about punitive taxes to discourage investment. We are talking about ensuring that an adequate share of the benefits derived from the nation's mineral wealth is distributed amongst the people. The day that Australia considered itself a nation poorly endowed with mineral resources ended in the early 1960s with the lifting of the iron ore export embargo.
To go on talking for another 20 years about the need to ensure that companies should be able to extract every ounce of profit from every tonne of ore because of the risks of exploration is to divorce oneself from sOme modern realities. There are enough examples of mining companies having been given leases over ore bodies which they took no part at all in finding. In many cases the exploration was carried out by the Government-owned Bureau of Mineral Resources, Geology and Geophysics. In other cases there has been a substantial body of geological knowledge about an area and the ore body has already been well defined. Examples can be found at Weipa and on the New South Wales coal fields. Should the companies given the right to exploit such resources also be given the right to extract super-normal profits? In our opinion they should not. I think most people in the community are sceptical that capital intensive resource-based industries will provide the number of jobs we require directly or indirectly to alleviate the present social and economic situation. If the Government maintains its present position we will continue to see a group of foreign companies extracting super-normIII profits from our resources while the Government continues to tax the wage earner beyond his capacity to pay.
Tax is not the only issue in relation to the mining industry coming out of this year's Budget. Last year the Government set a target range for the growth in the money supply of between 9 per cent and II per cent. The flow of foreign capital into this country was so great that towards the end

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 935

of the financial year it was realised that the growth in the money supply would reach almost 13 percent. The Government for the last six years has believed that the remedy for inflation is a harsh monetary policy~in plain English, to impose credit squeezes. The more' foreign investment, the greaterthe growth in the money supply, the more pressure the Government has brought to bear on interest rates. The fact that the Government's policies are brutal, wasteful, inefficient and wrong does not alter the fact~the Government's approach to monetary policy and foreign investment has meant that Australians have had .to bear all the burdens of the credit squeeze. This has affected households, small businesses, rural industry and manufacturing. Foreign investment has, therefore, received preferential treatment at the expense of the Australian community.
We have seen another example of the Government's attitude toward foreign investment in the last month with its decision to ask Shell to offer 25 per cent of its local interest to Australian investors. The Government has not made clear what it has in mind for Shell. Adequate Australian equity is 51 per cent so that there can be effective local control, not silent partner status, as well as a better participation in earnings. Without the Government's issuing a timetable by which this should be achieved, it appears that the request to Shell is inadequate and probably motivated by a desire to solve what the Government might see as a serious public relations problem, Alternatively it could be a shameless exploitation of nationalising status which will allow Shell to take out 100 per cent equity in local projects without our knowing when it is ever going to achieve 50 per cent local equity.
I turn to the Treasurer's $892m bonanza. The Treasurer's promise Of 12 March of this year in announcing the Government's decision not to proceed with the introduction of anew broadly based tax has now been broken. He sa.idthat the Government was anxious to minimise theinflationilfY consequences of collecting additional revenue and that it did not want to move towards greater reliance on indirect tax without providing a noticeable offset in personal tax reductions. The Prime Minister also must have forgotten'to mention these new sales taxes to the Australian electors before the last election. This means that in a full year $892m in additional sales tax. will come out of the pockets of Australians on virtually every item that they buy. The Government admits that this will add 0.75 percent to inflation. This should be contrasted with the $12m in. a full year which will be taken from our coal exports and which will add nothing to inflation.

This sales tax increase, combined with the Government's utilisation of fiscal drag to maximise its take of personal income tax, probably makes this year's Budget the most regressive in living memory in terms of the distribution of income. It is obvious that people on or below the average wage will spend a greater proportion of their income on items that attract sales tax. The blow is even greater for homemakers. Sales tax on furniture, floor coverings and whitegoods has doubled, going from 2.5 per cent to 5 per cent. They are all major expense items and they are necessities in setting up a home. This is another unnecessary burden which this Government has heaped on top of rising interest rates.
The Prime Minister and the Treasurer think it is politically more palatable to justify the recent interest rate increases by referring to the inflationary potential of wage increases rather than admit that it is a result of their own reaction to the blowout in the money supply caused by the high inflow of foreign capital which they have sought. The continuing issue is whether the latest round of interest rate increases will prove to be high enough. If the finance market can only see higher rates ahead, there will be pressure on the Government to raise interest rates still further so that it can maintain its present monetary policies. The impact of high interest rates on manufacturing is serious enough. It has pushed up the costs of overdrafts and new capital and has worsened the cost sfructure of companies as they require refinancing. This will obviously flow through to the. consumer price index and affect the competitiveness of local industry. But its impact on home owners is devastating.
The people worst affected are those who purchased their homes three to five years ago when interest rates were substantially lower than they are now. Steeply rising housing costs had forced horne buyers to the limit of their borrowing capacity, usually on second but sometimes third mortgages at punitive interest rates. They consideredthemselves lucky if they could even bridge the deposit gap. First it was unemployment that oaused people to lose their homes; now people with jobs just cannot keep up with the rising interest rates. If honourable members take a drive around any.relatively new suburb they will find mortgage sale signs on well kept properties that are three to five years old. These increasing interest burdens have coincided with a more expensive ,phase of life when these people have started families. This is a time when their reasonable expectation would have been that the proportion of their income devoted to mortgage repayments would have started to decline. It is not

936 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No. 1) 1981-82

the 1960s; these people cannot find a second job or work overtime to make up the difference.
In the last couple, of years interest rates have increased by 2 percentage points. This is the exact opposite of the Prime Minister's promise in 1977
that interest rates would drop by 2 percentage points. The conclusion that the Government's policies give priority to foreign investment over home ownership is inescapable. In the present cirsumstances, with skyrocketing housing and rental costs in our largest capital cities, there is a backlog of persons who might have been expected to purchase homes over the last few years. They have suffered a diminished standard of living because of the present economic climate and are forced to continue to seek rental accommodation. In this environment we find that lengthy waiting lists exist for public rental housing and low income home ownership loans. Waiting periods are generally expressed as a number of years. Worse than this, there has been a dramatic increase in homelessness, including young p~ople, much of which involves a need for permanent low price accommodation.
In response, the Government has chosen to cut allocations for welfare housing by more than $20m. Welfare housing advances to the States and Territories have been cut from $285m to $262m. However, this includes $12m for Aboriginal housing, which was previously administered by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. This means that the allocation has been cut to $250m. This represents a decrease of more than 20 per cent in real terms. Instead, a $2m allocation for the start of a program of crisis accommodation for families in distress has been announced. It is obvious that it is the Government that is creating the crisis in housing.
To complete the picture of the Prime Minister's policy of creeping misery, I will make a few observations about the Government's record on social security. While pensions and adult unemployment benefits have been indexed, a vast proportion of people seeking emergency' relief from various agencies are recipients of social security payments. This is because their level of payment is inadequate to meet even basic needs. Many families are having to use emergency relief as an ongoing way of life to supplement pensions and benefits. It should be noted that pensions are diminishing in relation to community income movements. Last year the pension was 23 per cent of average weekly earnings. In 1981-82, after this Budget, it will fall to 22 per cent. The fact that the unemployment benefit is $11.60 a week less than the pension must be seen in the light that 78,000 people in this country have been unemployed for

more than a year and that an additional 55,000 people have been unemployed for between six months and a year.
Unemployment benefit for 18-year-olds again has not been indexed. Many young people who left home in the country to come to the cities to look for work are now living well below the poverty line. There can be no doubt that this Budget would have been rejected by the people if the Prime Minister had gone ahead with his threat to take it to the people. I wish that the Australian Democrats had stuck with us on this issue. They promised, according to Senator Chipp, that they would 'keep the bastards honest'. The bastards in this place happen to be the Government and the Democrats should have voted with the Australian Labor Party so that we would have an election in 1981 when the Prime Minister was doing the things that he intends to do all the time, not making the false problems that he makes at election time.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (9.37)-Budgets, as the Opposition has been at pains to tell us, are about people. They are about the welfare of people, and the welfare of people is strongly influenced by Budget decisions. The choice that exists for a Government as to how it influences that welfare is,to me, the dilemma of today's politics. This Budget and the speeches about it have demonstrated the vast divergencerin viewpoint between the Government, the deliverer of the Budget, and the Opposition with its alternative strategy. Both claim to have the welfare of the population at heart. The Budget before us, at least to a degree, accepts as a major strategy that Australians are resourceful, hard-working and willing to make their own way in the world. It creates conditions for people to succeed by their personal enterprise. It seeks in many directions to remove government from the lives of Australians and to leave them to their own decisions.
The Opposition's alternative, as presented by its leader and re-rendered by its supporters with practically no variation, offers us Government at every turn. When one summarises the Opposition's package it might appear that this is not so. It has pitched its bid particularly high. The Opposition, as in its previous expedition into government, sees the time is right: The coffers have been regenerated by the innovative and yet conservative policies of this government and the country, like a well run business, can stand five years of mismanagement again before it becomes obvious

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 937

to an electorate blinded by handouts. How would the Opposition do this? I will refer to what it has said. It would abandon the proposed sales tax so that the money could go to consumer spending.
Only a month ago consumers of Australia walked the streets with money in their pockets because the cohorts of the Opposition, the Transport Workers Union of Australia, removed the means of delivery. People had money but nothing to buy. What did the Opposition do then to encourage consumer spending? I have been told that there is no real shortage of money in Poland, but in Poland, whether one is rich or poor, one goes without. Money under bad government is worthless. Consumer spending is created by public confidence, not depreciating bits of paper called money. Member's of a Labor government would give us across-the-board cuts in income tax to the tune of 22 per cent, further dipping their fingers into the till to distribute more money to buy the same quantity of goods at high prices. They know that it did not work last time when they spread money around like flies, but then who expects to be right a second time?
At the same time members of the Australian Labor Party would address themselves to the nasties. They would introduce a resource rent tax and drop the $500m investment allowance to ensure a redirection of resources back from the buoyant corporate sector into public programs of assistance fo the individual. Although they do not bother to make it public, for good measure they would also introduce a wealth tax. They will deny that but anyone who has heard their leader speak on the subject, as I have on a talk-back show, has little difficulty reading between the words and recognising the total personal commitment of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) to that course. What are those public programs of as:;istance to the individual? Members of the Labor Party choose to identify one of these as universal health insurance. Insurance indicates to me a user-pay principle. Does the great benefit of their system lie purely in economy of scale-are we to have just one huge insurance system-or is the word 'insurance' in socialist terms used to tell us that the insurer will be the Government? The insurer will be those people who, by their personal effort, pay taxes.
I have always wondered why socialist governments see so much benefit to the public in providing free health services. The greatest contributor to health and well being is food. Why not commence with a universal feeding scheme? Why ask people to pay for food? I am sure that if they were given the choice between free food and free medicine most Australians would take the food. The

Leader of the Opposition in his new-found role as Australia's leader could, as his first daily task, write out our menus. The misfortune is that the utterances of the Opposition are still pitched at convincing the Australian public that there is such a thing as a free lunch. What does the Opposition offer its friends who pay for the election costs; at least, what are the written promises? Is there to be a complete overhaul of the arbitration system and the abolishment of the Industrial Relations Bureau? I do not deny the need to overhaul the arbitration system in the formal sense but, when that promise is coupled with the abolishment of the IRB, it clearly shows the intention in this regard.
The Opposition's present shadow Minister for Industrial Relations, the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), personally supervised the castration of the present Conciliation and Arbitration Act when, as a pay-off for left wing support, he defeated the penal provisions. Does he propose to replace the Act with hypnosis? What sort of legislation does he propose will operate without teeth? This Government has found the key to industrial peace. The howls of the protected industries, which we have neard in the past couple of days, are the proof. Where now does the motor industry stand in priority for a 35-hour working week? The message of this Budget is that workers and manufacturers should get together so that they can make more money, sell goods more cheaply and give other people more money to spend. That is true consumer spending-a dollar that goes further.
We will not legislate our way out of industrial strife. The Leader of the Opposition accused us of persisting with a callous indifference to people's security, livelihood, homes, spending power and future. In 1974-75, under Labor, Australia and Australians had no future. The Commonwealth and industry of a country takes varying periods to dissipate. The most recent example of galloping dissipation appears to be Sweden; that is, if one can believe im article contained in the Economist of London as it was published in the Australian on Monday. The Australian headline was entitled 'Swedish economy freezes over asgovernment spending soars'. Sweden had an outstanding economy which then turned to socialism. The article stated:
Sweden's social conscience has become a millstone.
Total public spending (including transfer payments) now takes two-thirds of gross domestic product and the public sector provides one job in three.
Its deficit, equivalent to 4 per cent of GDP last year, stops politicians making the tax cuts the country needs.

126517/81-R-(31)

938 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

That just might be the message to people who are talking about inflationary budgets and tax cuts. The article continued:
And Sweden's swollen government spending is making most of the country's other problems worse.
During the 1970s, Sweden's public sector increased its share of GDP by a half and its share of total jobs doubled.
Mr Beazley-No wonder they call you a hurricane lantern. You ate not very bright but you hang about.
Mr TUCKEY-The honourable member is getting worried. Would he like me to stop in case he learns something?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! I invite the honourable member for O'Connor to ignore the interjections and address the Chair.
Mr Robert Brown-What letter are you quotingfrom?
Mr TUCKEYI am not stating my own opinions now. I am stating some facts. This is not a letter. The article continued:
The public sector's total deficit rose from 1,400 million crowns ($230 million) in 1978 to 20,000 million crowns in 1980. The forecast for 1981 is 30,000 million crowns.
Mr Robert Brown-What are crowns?
Mr TUCKEY-If the honourable member is too ignorant to know what a crown is in terms of money he should not ask me. I am not here to teach him a lesson. I do not share his ignorance. The article went on to say:
On every count,.Sweden's State-run activities are now hitting the people hard.
Public spending has helped fuel inflation, both directly and through the way it has increased the rigidities of the economy.
Sweden now has one of the highest inflation rates in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) at 14 per cent. Wages are partly inflation-linked.
The OECD, in its annual report on Sweden just published says it expects inflation to come down over the next year. That may be a vain hope.
Later the report stated:
Government borrowing flooding the country's financial market is one reason why Sweden's corporate sector is so thinly capitalised.
Does that not ring a bell? I go on to refer to a couple of other paragraphs. The first states:
True, unemployment at 2 per cent in 1980 has stayed very low by OECD standards.
And, let us admit, by Australian standards. It continued:
The number has been kept down by 'labor market measures' that find public sector jobs for the potentially unemployed.
That is reminiscent of the RED Scheme. The next paragraph states:

Private employers have been partly crowded out of the labor market, says the OECD. Public enterprises now set wage levels for the productive sectors and will drive some companies in them bust.
Of course, that would be a pretty attractive proposition, I would imagine, to certain people here tonight. The article went on to state:
Swedish exporters lost market shares. These losses have not been recouped, even though labor cost competitiveness is back to 1973 levels.
One could continue on with that tale of woe, yet people on the other side of this House tell us that this is the way to go.
Mr Campbell-Sweden has been socialist for 40 years.
Mr TUCKEY-Yes. I made that point earlier in the piece. I said that it takes-various periods to dissipate wealth. Nevertheless, the English have also dissipated theirs. It took them 200, or probably 300, years of colonialism to collect it and it has taken the present socialistic arrangements a very short time to destroy it.
Mr Morris-Margaret will love you.
Mr TUCKEY-Margaret is going all right. She is just telling the English people the truth.
Mr Campbell-Your history is about as good as your driving.
Mr TUCKEY-Do not worry about that. When I see a tree I can run into it. Let me return for a moment to this Government's proposal to broaden its indirect tax base through sales tax. As a member representing a country electorate I will always have a concern that country people who generally pay higher prices could pay more. Nevertheless, I am aware from experience that few wholesalers operate in remote areas. As the present sales tax is applied at wholesale level, it is therefore not applied to the freight cost that is incurred ex-warehouse in the metropolitan area.
Mr Campbell-That is not true.
Mr TUCKEY-I hold a sales tax certificate and the honourable member does not so he should not tell me that he knows a lot about it. Of course it is true. Sales tax is applied at the wholesale level. The invoice that accompanies the goods when they are delivered has the sales tax marked on it and it is not charged on any further amount. The honourable member should check his records. In other places I happen to be a remote area wholesaler and that is exactly what happens in those circumstances.
The Opposition refers to this tax as wealth by stealth. The wholesale tax does not appear on a consumer account in many cases. Personally, I wish it did. I believe that a government should

Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 939

make its taxes obvious and answer for them. But at least we call it a tax. We call it sales tax. The Leader of the Opposition called for a mild deficit. Of course, when the Labor Party was last the government of Australia it operated almost eternally in deficit-in fact, in a very large deficit. What name can we give a deficit other than a tax by stealth? We can call it an expenditure and a commitment for future generations. The deficits of the Whitlam years have measured heavily on the tax burden of present day Australians. If I can expand on that statement: We need only a simple analogy of someone getting a $20,000 personal loan with no repayments for 12 months. That person will live very well for that 12 months and then the trouble will start. Anybody who is fortunate enough, as a government is, to borrow money at one per cent and to tell somebody else how much he will borrow, can very easily become the irresponsible individual in the community and spend beyond the community's ability.
Much has been said of the plight of the home owner and his mortgage interest rates. The institution of home ownership within Australia is, I think, one of our great pillars. I hope that all steps will be taken to maintain it. Nevertheless, to hear some of the more colorful members of the Opposition bemoan the home owner's fate raises some humour with me when I consider the basic attitude of the Opposition to the individual owning anything. I wonder why it is suddenly so sympathetic to home owners. This Budget not only removes the Federal Government from the domestic loan market but also creates a situation whereby, as the predicted surplus materialises, the Government can, if it chooses, go back into the market and buy back its securities, thus introducing the funds it believes the economy can handle and further reducing interest rate pressure.
My previous political experience was in local government. I know well the burden that the present day wealth tax called rates-household rates-imposes on home owners. I imagine that Australian home owners today pay in excess of $1 billion in rates and charges of that nature on their land. The funds allocated in this Budget for a direct expenditure on local government are a direct subsidy to ratepayers. Local government has only the rate as a flexible source of income. In my experience Federal Government grants represented from 20 per cent to 300 per cent of the rate revenue of various local authorities in Western Australia. This grant could otherwise be recouped only by increased rates. I .congratulate' the Government for continuing its policy of supporting local government by allowing it a direct proportion of income tax.

Mr Campbell-Labor started thilt.
Mr TUCKEY-Do not tell me who started it. The Labor Government started it with a lousy $40m.
Mr Campbell-That was Labor policy.
Mr TUCKEY-The Labor Government's policy was all right, provided that one went cap in hand to a mob of people in Canberra and begged for one's money. There were no untied grants from the opposite lot. They lose control. The result is double edged. The money goes to grass roots government, to the people who know best where to spend it and who ensure that the funds go as far as possible. The grant guarantees delivery of grass roots services which could otherwise be provided only by land owners.
Finally, let me refer to overseas investment. The Opposition still lives with the belief that Australia is an economic island. It chooses to blame capital inflow for all our economic ills. It ignores entirely the prosperity that such investment can bring. It proposes controls, similar no doubt to those it proposed--
Mr Campbell-Reagan has put capital inflows on.
Mr TUCKEY-Do not tell me about Reagan. We are in Australia. The Labor Party would impose controls similar, no doubt, to those it imposed previously-controls which, if associated with the other economic measures it espouses, would guarantee the same result as the last one when there was not a slowing down of capital inflow, but a reversal of capital inflow. To use the words of the honourable member for Wills when he wore another hat: 'Capital will go on strike'. No one knows better than he the effect of a strike. Capital needs labour but labour cannot survive without capital. Labour cannot survive on money created by government because only money created by resources and hard work has any value.
Debate (on motion by Mr Duffy) adjourned.
ADJOURNMENT
Health Care Services-Australian Motor Industry-Budget-Zone
Allowances-Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Department of Social Security: Social Workers-Community Youth Support
Scheme-Spelling Reform
Motion (by Mr Thomson) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (9.57)-1 wish to raise a matter in regard to the fifth change to health insurance in as many years. From next

940 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Adjournment

week this Government will bring into being a sysmail service in order to get their pensioner health

tem which will bring enormous hardship and benefit cards. We have people telling us that very

worry to thousands of economically disadvanfew cards at this stage have been issued.

taged Australians. The following question needs to be asked: Who are these people and who will get the so-called health card treatment? There are three groups of such people. One group constitutes those pensioners with medical cards. No doubt we are finding from constituent work in the community that many pensioners do not qualify for a pensioner medical card or for a health care card. The card is also available to migrants and refugees in their first six months in Australia and to people receiving unemployment or special
benefits if their income, other than their benefit, is less than $40 a week if they are single or $68 a week if they are married. Also eligible are people on low incomes who, if they are single earn less than $96 a week or, if they are married, $160 a week, plus $20 for each child. For instance, a married couple with two children could earn $200 a week and with five children, $260 a ~e~k.

These people will face certain problems. Firstly; they have to produce' identific'ation. So they have to produce a birth certificate or a marriage certificate. It cannot be a copy; it must be the original. Secondly, they can apply for a form in order to get their ,card. W,hen they have the form they then have to show the Government their pay slips for the previous four weeks. All this has to be done because we.are creating a second
class service for a large proportion of the Aus-. tralian people. If these people are lucky enough to receive Ii card, it will be lodged for six months. If there is a change in their total income, overtime over any four week period or a pay rise comes through in the system, they are obliged to notify the Department of Social Security and their eligibility may cease. In most cases it will cease. They then have to go through the whole procedure again making application through the mail as no

In the advertising that has gone on in the last services are provided by this Government. Ser-

two or three weeks, in full page advertisements in vices are just not available to work this new health

newspapers right across Australia,. very little has care scheme. Many economically disadvantaged been spent on informing people of their. rights ~o people are being treated as second rate Australian

the health care card. People should check citizehs.

whether they are qualified for the card before they take out insurance because many of the insurance funds are forgetting to tell the people of their rights. How do people go about getting a

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

card? This is where the .difficulty arises jor some MrCARLTON (MacKellar) (10.3)-It is not

three million Australians who will be depending often that I get really upset about something. I

on these cards. If they are eligible, the first thing have been trying to promote reasonable and

they should do is contact their local Pepartment rational debate over a very serious issue that faces

of Social Security office, bU.tif they happen to live the Government over the next few weeks; that is

in an electorate such as mine-the electorate of the question of the future of the Australian motor

McMillan out in the c()un~ry-they find that they industry. To a degree that effort to promote

have only one office. My electorate is big enough reasonable and sensible debate has been success-

to entitle me as a parliamentarian to an extra back ful. lhave spent many days over the last two or

bench allowance. A great service is provided by three month.s visiting motor plants and I intend to

this Government in that my electorate has one continue. this over the coming week or two before.

Department of Social Security office. . '. . the dec.ision, is made, c\iscussing with the

We also have a situation in which officers from the Department of Social Security main office travel "to another town in the electorate, Warragul, on Tuesdays which means that people can go to that office for advice. Other parts of the electorate depend on officers coming from Dan-

manufactu,rers.,--both of automobiles and of parts-their problems and the problems of their . work force and the direction in which this important industry should go in the future. I thought we were having a reasonable discussion about problems shared jointly by all Australians.

denong to a town called Wonthaggi which has a This morning the debate was debased in a inost

similar service but only on a fortnightly basis. unsatisfactory way by the insertion of a joint ad-

There is another problem. which arises for people vertisement in the Australian Press by the manag-

in.the electorate. Disadvantaged people are those ing director of General Motors-Holden's Ltd and

people who do not have sufficient funds. They are Me Len-Townsend the Federal Secretary. of the

declared disadvantaged because they are econ- .. Vehicle Builders Employees Federation. This

omically disadvantaged. They cannot get around advertisement~I presume jointly funded by Gen-

the electorate easily; so they have to rely on the eral Motors and this union-was put in most of

Adjournment

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 941

the Australian newspapers and brings the debate on-this issue back to the kind of primitive level of a few years ago in regard to textiles and a number of other industries. A fear compaign of the most stupid sort is obviously intended by this advertisement. I will quote some of the words used in the advertisement. It states:
The future of the Australian motor vehicle industry is under government review. There are critics of the industry who are suggesting policieS that would destroy it. They are recommending that protection for Australian vehicle manufacturing be dropped. Imported vehicles would then flood Australia, destroying local industry. Without adequate quotas and import tariffs, well over 200,000 jobs in vehicle manufacturing and related industries would be lost.
Who 'they are'-those who are recommending that protection for Australian vehicle manufacturing be dropped-I do not know. The most far reaching recommedation I have seen in this area is that of the Industries Assistance Commission which suggests that after I984-which, after all, is three years away-the present level of protection for fully imported.vehicles be raisedfrom 57+ per cent to 60 per cent and that the protection be reduced gradually over five years to 35 per cent, or double the average rate of protection for manufacturing industry in Australia.Mr Chapman of General Motors and Mr Townsend of the Vehicle Builders Union say that 'they', whoever they are, are recommending that protection for the Australian vehicle industry be dropped. That is a lie. It is not true. This is totally misleading advertising. At the beginning of the text, the advertisement states: ,
372,000 are unemployed today.
I do not dispute that.
Add 200,000 more. That's over t million people
unemployed.
If vehicle manufacturing ceases, it is argued that the unemployed would find work in the mining and service industries.
The suggestion is that if one adds a straight 200,000 people to the present 372,000 people who are unemployed that wiII total half a million unemployed if the lAC recommendations are accepted by the Government. That is sheer nonsense. No economic analyst and no observer of the industry is saying that in Australia today. This advertisement is totally and utterly misleading and it is downright' fraudulent. It attempts to reduce a sensible debate to' a nonsense. Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to protest to the House in the strongest possible terms again&t debasing an important national argument by this sort of absolute bilge.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (10.8) -Two claims made by the coalition parties prior to the 1975,dection and prior to elections subsequently have been that they would form a

government which was committed to small government and that they would form a government which was committed to low tax. The claim has been repeated and apparently the assumption is that if the claim is repeated often enough a sufficiently large proportion of the Australian people will come to accept it.
I will deal very briefly with the two claims mentioned. In relation to small government, probably the most appropriate measure to determine the extent to which any government becomes involved in the economic affairs of the nation is the proportion of the total gross domestic product which is absorbed by total Budget receipts. During the last Budget of the Labor Governmentthat was the Budget for the year 1975-76-total Budget receipts absorbed 25.1 per cent of the gross domestic product. In this current Budget this Government has arranged for the absorption of 27.5 per cent of the gross domestic product as total Budget receipts, the highest percentage ever recorded if the history of this Commonwealtho
If the proportion of gross domestic product going to Budget receipts in 1981-82 had remained equal to the proportion that applied in 1975-76, for this current financial year the private sector in Australia would have been left with an additional $3,556m. As a result of this Budget that will be taken from them. I repeat: The best single measure of the extent to which the Government participates in the economic affairs of the nation is the proportion of the total gross domestic product which is absorbed by Budget receipts, and those figures indicate not only that it has grown since the Government came to office but also that the percentage is the highest it has ever been.
The other claim that has been made is that this is a low tax government. Surely the figures which would justify or refute a claim of this kind would be the proportion of the total gross domestic product which is absorbed by total taxation revenue. Despite the claim that has been made that the Labor Government was a high tax government, the fact remains that in 1975-76, the year of the last Budget for which we were responsible, the proportion of total tax revenue which was absorbed by the Federal Government was 23.2 per cent. For the current financial year the percentage has increased to 25.5 per cent. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) attempted earlier today to manipulate these figures by referring to the Budget deficit in 1975-76 and suggesting that the proportion of total gross domestic product in that year was greater than it was. I remind honourable members of the fact that in 1975-76, although 23.2 per cent of the gross domestic product was absorbed by total tax revenue, that included a national health

942 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Adjournment

scheme which meant that every family in Australia, in terms of today's values, was better off to the extent of about $12 a week. If the same proportion of gross domestic product going to taxes in 1975-76 had remained applicable to 1981-82, for the current financial year income earners throughout the whole of Australia would have been left with an additional $3,420m in their pockets. This is the government which suggests that people should be given the opportunity to determine the way in which they will spend their income. This is precisely the government which has denied them that opportunity.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (10.13)-1 speak tonight in full support of the proposition put during the adjournment debate last night by the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter) on the subject of zone allowances. I speak for the same reasons as the honourable member for Kennedy and for the reason that I have made representations over many years to the treasurers of this Government. These representations were to ensure that on any change of the zone. allowance, equity was returned to those living in the inhospitable climatic parts of our continent where, besides the droughts, dust, floods and flies, costs of production and costs of living have escalated, and living standards have diminished in .comparison with those in the city.
This is why the .majority report is so disappointing. After a year of anticipation, since the report on zone allowances was commissioned, the expectations of those who have been responsible for the devolution of our industries and who develop our basic resources, have been crumpled and completely disregarded. Their report is basically worthless. It is not worthless because their conclusions and recommendations do not agree with what 1 felt would have been the result, but worthless because, upon the collection of so much evidence and in the face of so many obvious facts in the majority report, this evidence and these facts were not used. For instance, in acknowledging that zone allowances were introducedin 1945 and that geographical boundaries were then set, one might have inquired as to whether they were politically or practically set to achieve a purpose.
Paragraphs 2.1 0 and 2.11 on page 3 of the report make assumptions and are unable to determine how boundaries were arrived at at the time of introduction. If the boundaries were practically set the development of industries and the spread of. population since 1945 must, of necessity, have called for some alteration to boundaries one way or the other. But the majority found that there should be no re-alignment of existing boundaries. 1 find this utterly incredible. The fact that a third

category has now been included, disregarding boundaries of any type whatsoever, and setting the criterion of a distance of 250 kilometres from a town with a population of 2,500 or more, is in conflict with the geographic boundaries concept that originally was introduced, So the majority report recommendation is neither one thing nor the other.
The base values retained in zones A and B have remained unchanged since 1958-59 except for the rebate conversion in 1975. There was no effort whatsoever to quantify the real value of the allowance or rebate. It is incomprehensible to suggest that, in an economy thrashed by inflation in the 1970s, with intervening booms and busts, those values have not been affected in any way except for the suggestion that urbanised areas with a population in excess of 25,000 should be downgraded. Obviously, the majority report is superficial and shallow. On the other hand, Mr Slater has tried to do something with the evidence and facts, and in what would not have been an exercise in ease he made a determined effort to bring forward constructive recommendations. 1 congratulate him on his effort. I note that at page 47 of the report Mr Kerr lends weight to the arguments of Mr Slater to an extent that one might consider their findings a majority report.
As member for Dawson 1 understand better than any other representative the conditions of my own electorate,the proper feelings of the people and the necessity' for zone allowances to restore some of the financial disadvantages of a taxation rebate. 1 refer to the new mining developments of the Bowen Basin. The arbitrary boundaries set in 1945 are not realistic for 1981. The unease of the people working in these areas found its outlet in the miners tax strike of 1980. The majority report neglects them in every way. The earners of Australia's primary wealth deserve some consideration.
1speak of an area where there are difficulties of distance, road construction, road maintenance and weather. The cost of telephone rentals in outback Australia is now at a premium of $500 per year. Television .is not bad; it is just non-existent. Insurance policies taken out by people living above the Tropic of Capricorn incur a surcharge because of storm and tempest and matters such as that. Some people in Australiacomplain about water salinity. We just do not have the resources to overcome the problems.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Adjournment

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIYES 943

Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (10.18)- The second question I would like to pursue in

This evening I wish to raise two matters: One rethe few moments available to me this evening is

lating to the portfolio of the Minister for Employthe employment prospect of social workers in the

ment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) and Department of Social Security. Honourable

the other relating to the Department of Social members may recall that the razor gang proposed

Security. I am pleased to see that the Minister for earlier this year that there should be a review of

Employment and Youth Affairs is in the chamber the activities of social workers in the-Department

this evening. He may recall that on 10 June this of Social Security. That review was supposed to

year I raised in this House a question relating to be completed by 31 August, a few days hence. The

research work which Mr Chris Lennings, a psyProfessional Officers Association of Australia-

chologist workingwith the Marrickville comthe industrial organisation which represents social

munity health centre, was attempting to carry out workers in the Commonwealth Public Service-

regarding the activities of young jobless people in has expressed severe criticism of this proposal and

Marrickville in my electorate. I asked the Minishas expressed concern that this may be an attempt

ter why his Departinent refused to allow Mr Lenby the Government to reduce the number of

nings to hand out a survey to the people who had social workers available in the Department of

applied for Commonwealth Employment Service Social Security.

benefits at Marrickville. I asked also whether the

Minister had implemented a secrecy program in I object and other members of this Parliament

his Department.

.object to the fact that in many instances our

As the Minister has demonstrated in the last few days in relation to the Community Youth Support Sche"le, he can make quite loud and .long speeches, but speeches without much content. But one of the interesting statements the Minister made in the rather lengthy, belligerant reply he gave me was:
Let me say that there is no policy of secrecy in this matter at all.

offices become a clearing house for the areas of responsibility that Department of Social Security officers-should be exercising. I do not think that . my staff should have to spend most of their time doing the job that the Department of Social Security should be doing. However, I am advised that there is a number of areas in New South Wales where the Department of Social Security does not have welfare workers at all. I am also

That was in relation to the type of work Mr Lennings was trying to carry out. Some time later on 7 August, the Minister provided me with a reply in which he said that while thespirit of Mr Lenning's research was appreciated the CES must adhere to its long-standing policy of strict confidentiality of client information. He went on to say that the Department was not willing to allow Mr Lennings to peruse its files in relation to his inquiries. I suggest to the Minister that that is a rather short sighted attitude to take and that one would hope that the
Government has based its present policy on the demise of the CYSS program on some sort of research basis.

advised that at present 40 officers of the Department of Social Security in New South Wales do not have any welfare staff at all. In fact, some time ago the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) issued a direction that there should be two social workers in each Department of Social Security office in Australia, but we find that in New South Wales at least 14 offices have no social workers at all-an absolutely deplorable situation. I find even more deplorable the fact that on the 11th of this month I wrote to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) pointing out this matter and asking When that situation would be rectified and I have not even received a reply.

Mr Lennings was attempting to develop a research base and a data base on what young job seekers were attempting to find from the Commonwealth Employment Service. He was refused that chance even though he was a well respected researcher in the Health Commission of New South Wales and had the support of that Health Commission. Indeed, he had the support of the Deputy Director of the Health Commission in his application. I think the Minister might reconsider his approach to the type of support .that one can get from State authorities in developing a data base about the availability of work for young people.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

Order! The honourable member's time has

expired.

.

Mr McLEAN (Perth) (1O.23)-ln recent days a lot has been said in this House on the question of whether the Community Youth Support Scheme should be terminated. I want to speak tonight firstly about the way in which the decision which was reached was administered by the Departllnt of Employment and Youth Affairs. I want to quote from a telegram sent by the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs the day after the Budget was delivered. The telegram states:

944 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Adjournment

The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs has advised a government decision to terminate all CYSS projects from 31st October 1981.
Accordingly. CYSS operations will close from that date.

available f.or the expanded YQuth training pr.ograms W.ould reach the YQuth whQ were using,
the CYSS program. TQday I met with the Minis-
ter fQr Empl.oyment andYQuth Affairs (Mr N. A.

Directors of the Department will meet in Canberra on 20 August and detailed instructions of action to be taken over the next few months will be advised as soon as possible after the meeting.
CYSS guideline clauses 72-77 outline the procedures regarding assets (equipment and furniture) that must be followed by local committees.

Brown) t.o discuss this matter, tQ raise these P.oints with him and t.o emphasise the need t.o ensure that the advantages .of the persQnal appr.oach used by CYSS will nQt be .overlQQked in regard tQ thQse
y.ouths in the new pr.ograms. I think this is avery impQrtant matter indeed. I am pleased that the

You are requested to carry out an immediate stocktake to Minister is in the H.ouse. I want t.o emphasise t.o

ensure your assets register is up to date.

him that the, participants in CYSS, with their

Officers from the beparlment will carry out an indepenquite special needs, sh.ould be given special atten-

dent check of the Registers within the next 10 days.

ti.on and every eff.ort shQuld be made t.oensure

Until further advice is received projects should continue. that they can be satisfact.orily accQmmQdated in

However no extension of commitments should be made.

the new prQgrams. I agree that the Minister has a

I think that is a very insensitive way tQ deal with a very sensitive issue. There was nQt a wQrd .of
thanks in that telegram tQ the many peQple invQlved in these schemes whQ have wQrked in a
very dedicated manner .over a number .of years. I
want tQnight tQ place .on the recQrd .of this Parliament my persQnal thanks tQ thQse whQ did wQrk
.on behalf .of the unemplQyed YQuth in my electQr-
ate in recent years. I will put the names .of SQme .of
the bQdies and peQple .on the recQrd because I think they deserve it-the YQung Men's Christian
AssQciatiQn scheme, Vic WhittQmbe; Centrecare,
GuidQ VQgels; the Bayswater scheme, Mike GQIf, Barbara Lewis, Glad McGQugh, Laura TQlliday;
the Maylands scheme, Ruth Belben, RQb McArdle. I want tQ thank thQse peQple and bQdies and .others, the members .of the variQus cQmmittees .of
management and the many vQlunteers attached tQ the Scheme fQr the wQrk that they havedQne iri

very difficult pr.oblem tQ handle. We all kn.ow that
thispr.obh:m is natiQnally based. There have been
s.ome very gQ.od schemes and there have been SQme failures. It is very difficult tQ establish a nati.onal scheme when that kind .of thing is hap-
pening. I certainly appreciate the eff.orts that the
Minister has made tQ increase the nati.onal funding .of programs fQr unemplQyed y.outh in this
cQuntry, I think it is a very proper pri.ority that we are giving tQ this pr.oblem. But I want tQ empha-
sise t.o the Minister that the unemplQyed y.ouths
inv.olved in these schemes are quite special. We
kn.ow their names, we knQw their addresses, we knQw the c.ommunities in which these schemes
were based, and we knQw the g.o.od w.ork that has been d.one. I want the Minister, if he can, t.o make sure that these unempl.oyed YQuths will be specially dealt with in the new programs which the GQvernment enunciated in the Budget.

recent years. I am just sQrry that a mQre .official Dr EVERINGHAM (CapricQrnia) (10.28)-1

thanks CQuid nQt have been given by the DepartdQ nQt wish t.o detain the H.ouse. TherefQre, I have

ment when advising them .of this decisiQn.

asked permissiQn .of the Minister fQr EmplQyment

Last Friday I met with the variQus representatives .of the CYSS projects in my electQrate. TQ
their credit, they did nQt CQme tQ me tQ talk ab.out their .own jQbs; they came tQ me tQ talk abQut the

and Y.outh Affairs (Mr N. A. BrQwn) tQ incQrpQr-
ate in Hansard the bulk .of my remarks and he has kindlyc.onsented t.o it. I seek leave .of the H.ouse tQ have it incQrpQrated at the end .of my speech.

future .of the YQuth participating in the variQus Mr Deputy SPEAKER (Mr MiJlar)-

CYSS prQjects. They made the PQint, and I agreed Order! The request f.or leave is nQt in .order. It is

with them, that many .of thQse whQ participate in _ not in .order t.o inc.orp.orate the substance .of the

CYSS are a special categQry .of unemplQyed spee,ch.

y.outh-they have been unemplQyed fQr a lQng time. They lack cQnfidence and they are basically
.often alienated from institutiQnally and schQQl based prQgrams. Many .of them have a histQry .of very negative experien<;es with many .of these institutiQns. They will nQt necessarily be satisfactQrily accQmmQdated in broadly based and
buJlt:aucratically administered schemes.

Dr EVERINGHAM-I am referring tQ a statement regarding an impQrtant event that is cQming
up .on l September, a lO-year anniversary. It c.on-
cernss.omething which is imp.ortant t.o all Aus,
tralians, particularly the educati.on .of y.oung Australians, in the InternatiQnal Year .of Disabled
Pers.ons, and that is the questi.on .of spelling' re-
fQrm. It has been calculated that between 5 and

The CYSS members. I met with were c.oncerned 10 percent .of the children wh.o have the g.o.od f.or-

and wanted SQme kind .of assurance that the tune .orIII:isf6rtune t.o speak English suffer frQm

greatly increased funds which have been made the technical prQblems .of English spelling. The

Adjournment

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 945

time for the English language to undergo some of the reforms that have been achieved in other languages is long overdue. Again, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a document prepared as a Press release, in which the spelling reform one spellings are used.

Leave granted.

The document read as follows-

On Tuesday, September I, The Spelling Action Society

(S.A.S.) will be 10 years old. In this short lifetime this move-

ment has hundreds of members around the world, more than

eny previous movement to reform spelling. It has as patrons

two Nobel Prize winners who are also Fellows of the Royal

Society, Sir Mark Oliphant the former South Australian

Governor and Sir Macfarlane Burnet, the 'father of

immunology'.

.

SAS is also unique in that the oldest-established spelling reform movement, patronized by the Duke of Edinburgh, has recognized and promoted SR I as part of its program. SRI or spelling reform one in the SAS program may be defined in the quatrain:
Eny clear short vowel sed as in 'hemorrhage' and 'led' may be red as 'e' insted of a spelling more widespred.

The dozen alternative spellings now current for this simple sound are illustrated in the 12 words of a less rational quatrain:
Grenwich frend ses Thems gest sed hemorrhaging lepard beried meny hefers ded.
Some 10 years ago I asked the then Minister for Education on notice if he would investigate the possibility of approving the use of SR I as an alternative to the standards of such . august authorities as the Oxford or Webster's dictionaries or the Public Service Style Manual. He got opinions from several literati. A few were in favour. Most tcnded to produce the usual superficial objections, such as the need to preserve fossilized spellings to help students of etymology rather than make spelling easier for beginners. Harry Lindgrcn had demolished these specious points in his 1969 Alpha paperback: Spelling Reform: A New Approach. A few language professionals suggested, obviously without having contemplated Lindgren's reasons for choosing SR I, that a better first step in spelling reform would be to replace ph by f, ignoring the fact that this would require exceptions to the rule or a second change away from f in several words including nephew, uphold, sapphire, off, rime and an extra rule for rough, cough etc. The future changes so necessitated would cause difficulties unless first a rule similar to SR I had become well established to distinguish the vowel sounds of rille and rime, and the vowel sounds of Navy and Navvy, and a similar rule was adopted for the v sounds of nephew and of. In other words, the expert writers were not expert in step-by-step reform based on English speech sound units insted of on existing spelling complexities.
In its first decade SR I has been used in publiShed anthologies, a novelette and a government discussion booklet which I issued on community helth policies for the A.C.T. SRI has been adopted as standard by editors of journals, including one on educationalresearch and one organ of a teachers' union. The Sydney Morning Herald's Education Supplement has advocated SR I, and it is used on request by virtually every major daily paper in Australia for letterS to the editor concerning spelling reform.
Governments might well consider authorizing their employees, including teachers, to use SR I as an alternative to more widespred standard spellings. This is not a radical idea since leading dictionaries commonly show alternative spellings for one wordLespectally a word for which Webster, and Americans generally prefer a more logical spelling than one

first standardized by Dr Johnson, the 'father' of dictionary makers. No-one now spells 'debt' the way the French root of the word is spelt: 'dette'. The reason is that the dominant writer of his age, Dr Johnson, decided we ought to put in a 'b' to remind us of the earlier Latin root 'debit-'. Such spelling fossils are as useless as a whipholder on the dashboard of a 1981 model horseless carriage.
Interested Members and Senators should send $5 to join SAS, 40 McKinlay Street, Narrabundah, A.C.T. They will get Lindgren's book, a rubber stamp with the SR 1 rule for use on documents where they use SRI, and 12 issues of the monthly newsletter Spelling Action.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Employment and Youth Affairs) (l0.29)-It is before the time of 10.30 p.m. when I have to ask for the debate to be extended. May I acknowledge the remarks of the honourable' member for Perth (Mr McLean) with respect to the Community Youth Support Scheme and make a few remarks of my own in reply. The first point to be made is that this was a decision by the Government. I think the honourable member said that it was a decision by the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs. Of course, all decisions are decisions of the Government, and this was one such decision. Secondly, the honourable member maintained that no thanks had been ex" pressed in the communication to which he referred to those associated with and working for some CYSS projects. I want to place on record that the Government acknowledges the work done by people who have worked in the CYSS area. We have made it plain on a number of occasions--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., the debate is interrupted.
Mr N. A. BROWN-I require the debate to be
extended.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate may continue until 10.40 p.m.
Mr N. A. BROWN-The Government has maintained all along, of course, that there were good CYSS projects. It follows from that, of course, that a lot of goodpeople took part in those CYSS projects. I think it really has been very unfortunate that their activities have been described by people in the Australian Labor Party as tokenism and as a recycling of young people (Quorum formed). I think it is unfortunate that that sort of comment was made by certain people about CYSS. The Government certainly does not subscribe to those views.
I make two points in conclusion. The first is that special attention will be given to the needs of disadvantaged categories of young people to whom the honourable member refers. The House may be aware that a Press release has been issued

946 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Adjournment

setting out the Government's intentions and plans with respect to the transition period as the CYSS program winds down.
Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, the Minister's time has expired.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Minister may continue for a further minute owing to the premature commencement of his response. There was some slight confusion on the time allocated.
Mr N. A. BROWN-In thecourse of that statement. I said that managers of Commonwealth Employment Service offices would be providing me with information they obtained after they visited the CYSS projects and spoke to project officers and participants. I said that that action, namely the reporting back to me by managers of Commonwealth Employment Service offices on information in special program action that was needed in local areas, might show the need, in the first place, for special training programs for Aboriginals and disabled young people. We will be particularly concerned to know whether that investigation shows the need for special training programs for Aboriginals and disabled young people.
I said also in the statement that special attention would be given to the long term unemployed and disadvantaged young people. I am pleased to say that particular attention will be given to the needs of those groups of young unemployed persons as the honourable member for Perth so properly suggested.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate having concluded, the House stands adjourned until Tuesday, 8 September 1981, at 1.45 p.m., in accordance with the resolution agreed to this day.
ANSWERS (a), (c) and (d)

House adjourned at 10.36 p.m.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 27 August 1981, pursuant to statute:
Christmas Islands Act-
Ordinance-1981-No. 8-Magistrate's Court (Amendment).
Regulations-1981-No. I-Maintenance Orders (Facilities for Enforcement) Ordinance.
Defence Amendment Act-Interim DeterminationsStatutory Rules 1981, Nos. 236, 237, 238, 239, 240.
Ex.cise Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 242. Public Service Act-Determination-198 I-No. 2-Field
survey allowance. Public Works Committee Act-Regulations-Statutory
Rules 1981, No. 241. Seat of Government (Administration) Act-
Ordinance-I 981No. 19-Poisons and Narcotic Drugs (Amendment). No. 20Poisons and Dangerous Drugs (Amendment). Ship Construction Bounty Act-Return for year 1980-81.
REPLIES TO REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 29 April 1981, Dr Theophanous asked Mr Speaker:
Further to the answer given to Senator Evans in Senate Estimates Committee A on 27 April 1981, (Senate Estimates Committees A, Band C Hansard, page 12) by Mr H. Knight, an Officer of the Parliamentary Library, to the effect that the Parliamentary Library had not adopted a deliberate policy of leaving vacant positions unfilled in order to achieve cost savings, (a) what positions fell vacant in 1980-81, and on what dates did they become vacant, (b) what notice was the Library given in each case, (c) on what date was each position advertised and (d) on what date did the successful applicant commence duty in each case.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Positions that fell vacant 1980-81

Position number

Date position became vacant

Date position was advertised

Date successful applicant commenced duty

Legislative Research Specialist, Grade 5 Legislative Research Specialist, Grade 2 Legislative Research Specialist, Grade 2 Clerical Assistant, Grade 3 Legislative Research Specialist, Grade 3 Librarian, Class 2 Clerk, Class 2/3 Clerical Assistant, Grade 3 Librarian, Class I
Clerical Assistant, Grade 2 Clerk, Class 4 Clerk, Class 4 (re-advertised)

7

22.7.80

3.7.80

25.10.80

68

26.7.80

28'.8.80

1.1.81

8

9.8.80

28.8.80

17.3.81

128

29.8.80

3.9.80

19.11.80

130

30.8.80

28.8.80

29.1.81

30

31.7.80

4.9.80

6.11.80

125

11.9.80

4.9.80

3.11.80

50

20.9.80

4.9.80

15.12.80

32

9.10.80

Position 9.10.80

filled

within

Department

103

25.9.80

2.10.80

16.2.81

43

1.11.80

30.10.80 See next entry

43

15.1.81

25.3.81

Repliesfor Detailed Information

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 947'

Positions that fell vacant 1980-81

Position number

Date position became
vacant

Date position was
advertised

Date
successful applicant commenced duty

Assistant Library Officer, Grade I Typist, Grade I Clerical Assistant, Grade 2 Clerical Assistant, Grade I

Head, Legislative Research Specialist
Legislative Research Specialist, Grade 3 Librarian, Class 2 . . . . . . . Legislative Research Specialist, Grade 3 Legislative Research Specialist, Grade 3

Librarian, Class 2 . . . . . . . .
Clerical Assistant, Grade 4 . , . . . Clerical Assistant, Grade 4 (re-advertised) Typist, Grade I Clerical Assistant, Grade 2 Clerical Assistant, Grade 2 Typist, Grade 2 . . . . Word Processing Typist, Grade I

Legislative Research Specialist, Grade 3

Clerical Assistant, Grade 3

'

Clerk, Class 2/3 . . . . . . .

Legislative Research Specialist, Grade 3

Legislative Research Specialist, Grade 2

Legislative Research Specialist, Grade 2

61

4.11.80

20.10.80 5.1.81

106

9.10.80

11.10.80 23.10.80

37

6.11.80

6.11.80

12.1.81

102

7.10.80

Position 8.10.80

filled

within

Department

136

21.10.80 13.11.80 1.6.81

110

20.11.80 3.9.80

22.12.80

83

18.12.80 15.1.81

20.2.81

4

22.12.80 29.1.81

t.b.a.*

III

29.1.81

Position 30.1.81

filled

within

Department

92

20.2.81

2.4.81

t.b.a.*

100

13.2.81

22.1.81

See next entry

100

12.3.81

4.5.81

53

13.2.81

14.2.81

2.3.81

37

13.2.81

19.2.81

t.b.a.*

103

13.2.81

2.10.81

16.2.81

107

21.2.81

17.1.81

29.1.81

55

26.2.81

Position 27.2.81

filled

within

Department

71

26.2.81

19.2.81

t.b.a.*

59

28.2.81

19.3.81

t.b.a.*

31

28.2.81

5.3.81

t.b.a.*

110

5.3.81

2.4.81

t.b.a.*

114

15.1.81

19.2.81

1.6.81

9

18.2.81

19.2.81

t.b.a.*

*(to be arranged).

ANSWER (b) Details of notice are not available as reasons for vacan-
cies differ e.g. resignations, promotions, transfers, expiration of temporary employment periods or other circumstances. Records only relate to commencement of an actual vacancy.
Department of the Parliamentary Library On 26 May 1981, Mr Beazley asked Mr Speaker:
(I) Does the Parliamentary Library produce both basic papers and current Information briefs.
(2) Iho, (a) what are the titles and (b) who are the authors of each paper or brief issued since I January 1977.
(3) Have any papers or briefs been prepared or proposed which have not been released; ifso, in each case (a) what was the subject, (b) who were the authors and (c) why was the paper or brief not released.

(4) Are papers and briefs available for general distribution to Senators and Members; if so, who is responsible for distribution.
(5) Are copies of current papers and briefs held by the Library's Reading Room for distribution to clients; if not, why not; if so, when did the practice commence.
(6) Have representations been made by senior officers of the Parliamentary Library to the Acting Head of the Research Service for a small stock of papers and briefs to be held by the Reading Room for clients who may request them there; if so, when were they made and what decision did the Acting Head of the Research Service make.
(7) What was the reason given for any decision made by the Acting Head of the Research Service.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) and (b)

Basic Papers and Current Issues Briefs issued since I January 1977 are:

(a) Title
Basic Papers-I 977Commentary on the Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry
Medibank-Origins and Development

(b) Authors
R. Panter, Defence, Science and Techno,1ogy Group
S. Reynolds, Education and Welfare Group, Legislative Research Service

948 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Repliesfor Detailed Information

(a) Title

Summary and Discussion of Those Sections of the Second

Report of the Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry

Which Relate to Aboriginals

A History of Benefits Provided by Various

A Summary of Australian Broadcasting (The 'Green Re-

porC)

'The Gregory Thesis'-Some Implications of the Growth of

the Mining Sector

The Jackson Report and Australian Industrial Develop-

ment Policy

.

East Timor-from Portuguese Colonialism to Indonesian

Incorporation

Seas and Submerged Lands Act Case

Significance of Statehood for the Northern Territory

Current Issues Briefs: 1977-

Recent Developments in ASEAN-Australian Relations

1978 Basic Papers:

The Strategic Position in the Indian Ocean

The Place of Major Surface Vessels in the RAN's Force

Structure With Special Reference to the FFG-7

Automobile Emission Control-A Review and Discussion

Self-Regulation for BroadCasters

Medibank-Origins and Development (updated version of

1977 paper)

Schools Commission Report for the 1979-81 Triennium

Commonwealth Activity in Education Since World War II

The Application of a Resources Tax to the Australian

Mining and Petroleum Sector

Proposals for Freedom of Information Legislation in

Australia

Members of parliament and the Question of Pecuniary

Interests

Current Issues Briefs: 1978-

The Arrival of Refugee Craft and the Problem of Coastal

Surveillance and Territorial Sovereignty

A Note on the Recurrent Funding of Schools and the Tar-

get Resource Standards

Basic Papers-1979-

Computers: An Introductory Study

Children in Australia: Background Notes for the Year of

the Child

Medibank-Origins and Development (updated version of

the 1978 paper)

Australian and the Indo-China Refugee Crisis

The Revolution in Iran: its Origins and Significance, its

course and consequences Nationally and Internationally

Current Issues Briefs-I 979-

The Current Crisis in Tehran

The Sino-Vietnamese Conflict

Basic Papers-1980Australian Health Insurance Arrangements 1969-80: the roles of public and private health insurance Commonwealth Social Security Cash benefits since Federation: A Chronology of Major Events Commonwealth Social Security Cash benefits since Federation: A Chronology of major events to November 1980 International Year of Disabled Persons (IYDP) 1981.
World Parity for Domestically Produced Crude Oil Plant Variety Rights
Oil Pricing Arrangements and Estimates of Levy Receipts, 1980-1995
Public Funding of Elections and Political Parties

The Freedom of Information Bill: A Synopsis of the Senate Constitutional and Legal Affairs Committee's Comments and Recommendations
Comlllonwealth Electoral Divisions-Comparisons of selected characteristics of the popUlation, 1976 census of population and housing

(b) Authors D. Bennett, Education and Welfare Group
M. White and others, Education and Welfare Group D. Bennett, Education and Welfare Group
Finance, Industry, Trade and Development Group members
D. Lundberg, 1978 Parliamentary Political SCience Fellow (attached to FITDGroup)
J. Dunn, Foreign Affairs Group
K. Inglis, Law and Government (Special Duties) K. Inglis, Law and Government (Special Duties)
F. Frost, Foreign Affairs Group
G. Brown, Defence, Science and Technology Group D. Woolner, Defence, Science and Technology Group
R. Panter, Defence, Science and Technology Group D. Bennett, Education and Welfare Group S. Reynolds, Education and Welfare Group
K. Jackson, Education and Welfare Group P. Nicoll, Education and Welfare Group G. Weir, Finance, Industry, Trade and Development Group
C. Fogarty, Law and Government Group
J. Walter, 1978 Political Science Fellow attached to Law and Government Group
D. Woolner, Defence, Science and Technology Group
K. Jackson and T. W. Lawton, Education and Welfare Group
G. Cooper, Office of the Parliamentary Librarian D. Bennett, Education and Welfare Group
S. Reynolds, Education and Welfare Group
F. Frost, Foreign Affairs Group J. Verrier, Foreign Affairs Group
J. Verrier, Foreign Affairs Group J. Funston, 1979 Parliamentary Political Science Fellow
attached to Foreign Affairs Group
S. Reynolds, Education and Welfare Group
M. White and others, Education and Welfare Group
Group members, Education and Welfare Group
C. Larmour and J. Angley Education and Welfare Group D. Richardson, FITD Group J. Smith and R. Webb, FITD Group D. Richardson, FITD Group
J. Uhr, 1980-81 Political Science Fellow attached to Law and Government Group
B. Herd, Law and Government Group
Statistics Group members

Repliesfor Detailed Information-

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 949

(a) Title

Federal Elections 1980. Analysis of the outcome in the

House of Representatives and in the Senate

Current Issues Briefs-I 980-

Soviet Actions in Afghanistan: Australia's Defence Re-

sponses

.

,-

The 35 Hour Week

The Change of Government in Papua New Guinea

The Kampuchean Conflict: International Situation and Re-

gionallmplications

Directions of United States Foreign Policy under President

Reagan

.

Iran-Iraq War. Regional and international Significance
Recent Decision of the High Court on the Constitutional Validity of the Wheat Stabilisation Scheme: Uebergang
and others v. Australian Wheat Board Stastics of Unemployment in Australia Australia's Trade with USSR and other centrally planned
European countries Basic Papers-1981 (to 31 May)-
The Global Balance between the Superpowers
Commonwealth Involvement in Education
Aboriginal Land Rights in the Northern Territory Australian Health insurance Arrangements: the roles of
public and private health insurance New technology in the Media (I): Communications Tech-
nology and the public
New technology in the Media (11): Cable Television
Shorter Working Hours-Some Issues Involved The Labour Crisis in Poland: A Chronology and Anatomy
of the Free Labour Movement
The French Pacific Territories-A Regional Prospective Current issues Briefs-I 98 I (to 31 May)-
The Boeing B-52 Stratofortress-A Brief History and Basic
Description The Middle East Conflict and the proposed Sinai
Peacekeeping Force: Australian Military Participation The Middle East Conflict and the proposed Sinai
Peacekeeping Force 2,4-D, 2,4,5-T and Agent Orange in Australia

(3) Yes. I do not consider it in order to publish details of rejected drafts.
(4) Yes. Since March 1980, general distribution has been the responsibility of the Library's Publications Officer. Before that date, distribution was the responsibility of individual Research Groups.

(b) Authors Statistics Group members
G. Brown, Defence, Science and Technology Group
J. Williams, FITD Group J. Verrier, Foreign AlfairsGroup F. Frost, Foreign Alfairs Group
J. Verrier, Foreign Alfairs Group
J. Verrier, Foreign Alfairs Group D. Creed, Law and Government Group
Statistics Group members Statistics Group members
G. Brown and J. Templeman, Defence Group K. Jackson, Education and Welfare Group D. Bennett, Education and Welfare Group S. Reynolds, Education and Welfare Group
D. Fraser, Education and Welfare Group
D. Fraser, Education and Welfare Group A. Harding, FITD Group J. McCulloch, Foreign Alfairs Group
U. Doyle, Foreign Alfairs Group
D. Woolner, Defence Group
D. Anderson, Defence Group
J. Verrier, Foreign Alfairs Group
N. J. Daly, (Consultant) Science, Technology and Environment (5) No. For over ten years it has been departmental policy
not to allow any research papers to be circulated without the knowledge of the relevant senior subject specialist. This ensures that changes in facts or circumstances since a paper Was written are brought to the notice of readers.
(6) Such a suggestion was made and rejected for the reason set out in (5) above.
(7) See (5) above.

950 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Uranium
(Question No. 401)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) Is the government able to terminate all mining and sales of uranium, permanenty, indefinitely or for a specific period, as recommended by the Fox Report; if so, would the Government be liable to compensation claims for the action.
(2) What was the specific nature of the doubts concerning the transfer of the Government's interest in the Ranger project to Energy Resources of Australia that necessitated the insertion of sub-section 41 (2AA) in the Atomic Energy Act 1953.
(3) Could the Government be implicated, in any way, as party to commercial contracts for sale of uranium arising from the sub-section 41 (2AA) amendment to the Atomic Energy Act 1953.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Under Standing Orders, questions should not ask Ministers for legal opinion. I am advised that any answer to this question would require expression of opinion on a matter of law.
(2) In the course of finalising some aspects of the commercial documentation relating to the formation of Energy Resources of Australia Ltd (ERA), legal counsel, acting for some of the Australian commercial parties involved, queried whether the arrangements for the continuing operation of the Ranger project envisaged between the Commonwealth and

ERA as reflected in the divestment documentation would be 'on behalf of the Commonwealth' within the meaning 6f section 41 of the Atomic Energy Act and the Authority which was to be assigned to ERA. The Government examined the matter and decided that the Atomic Energy Act should be amended to put the matter beyond doubt, so that operations at Ranger clearly will continue to be 'on behalf of the Commonwealth'. The amendment was inserted in the Act as sub-section 41 (2AA).
(3) No.
Export Earnings
(Question No. 402)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Trade and Re~ sources, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) What was the value of Australia's total export earnings in each year from 1960-61 to 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of these export earnings was contributed to each year by the export of (a) coal (b) bauxite (c) aluminium and (d) bauxite and aluminium.
(3) What revenue was raised by the Commonwealth Government in each year from (a) coal export duty (b) tax paid by companies engaged in the coal industry, excluding those members of company groups not engaged in the coal industry and (c) tax paid by companies engaged in the aluminium and bauxite industries, excluding those members of company groups not engaged in the bauxite and aluminium industries.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1)-
AUSTRALIAN EXPORTS OF COAL, BAUXITE AND UNWROUGHT ALUMINIUM AND ALLOYS AND TOTAL .EXPORTS, 1960-61 TO 1979-80

Total exports Coal-

Bauxite-

Unwrought aluminium and alloys-

Period

SAm (fob)

1,000 Tonne

SAm (fob)

Tonne

SAm (fob)

Tonne

SAm (fob)

1960-61 1961-62 1962-63 1963-64 1964-65 1965-66 1966-67 1967_68
1968-69 1969-70 1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80(p)

1,938 2,155 2,152 2,782 2,651 2,721 3,024 3,045 3,374 4,137 4,376 4,893 6,214 6,914 8,726 9,640 11,652 12,270 14,243 18,887

*1,919 *3,525 *2,719 *3,867 6,160 7,777 9,033 10,282 14,036 17,623 18,936 21,826 25,766 27,838 32,652 30,260 34,432 37,862 39,085 42,556

*15 *27 *22 *32
51 63 72 85 117 164 194 238
291 348 721 1,063 1,282 1,482 1,524 1,677

NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP

NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP
Nl"P NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP NFP

15 72 1,871 5,271 22,314 19,079 19,116 7,047 8,522 50,522 79,846 96,239 81,462 46,492 64,065 69,074 75,533 75,921 81,111 55,048

Neg. Neg.
I 2
9 8 9 3 4 23 36 39 31 20 38 44 60 69 82 68

Note: * Includes briquettes of coal and lignite.

Answers to Questions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 951

NFP-Not for publication. (p)-Preliminary figures and are subject to revision. Neg.-Negligible (under $25,000).
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics Publications Catalogue Nos 1301.0,5403.0, 5409.0 and 5410.0.

(2)-
PROPORTION OF COAL AND UNWROUGHT ALUMINIUM AND ALLOY EXPORT EARNINGS
TO TOTAL EXPORT EARNINGS

Period

Unwrought aluminium Coal and alloys

1960-61 1961-62
1962-63 1963-64 1964-65 1965-66 1966-67 1967-68 1968-69 1969-70 1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80(p)

% 0.77 1.25
1.02 1.15 1.92 2.32 2.38 2.79 3.47 3.96 4.43 4.86 4.68 5.03 8.26 11.03 11.00 12.08 10.70 8.89

% Neg. Neg. 0.05 0.07 0.34 0.29 0.30 0.10 0.12 0.56 0.82 0.80 0.50 0.29 0.44 0.46 0.51 0.56 0.58 0.36

Note: Neg.-Negligible trade.
(3) (a)-
REVENUE RAISED BY THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT FROM THE COAL EXPORT DUTY
$Am 1975-76-112 (Year of introduction) 1976-77-121 1977-78-100 1978-79-94 1979-80-91 1980-81-56 (to 31 March 1981) 1980-81-90 (Budget Estimate for full year)
3 (b) and (c) The Commissioner for Taxation does not publish information in sufficient detail to enable these questions to be answered owing to the secrecy provisions of Section 16 of the Income Tax Act.
The only break-up of taxation paid by the mining industry is:
(i) metallic and fuel minerals and services to mining (ii) construction materials and other non-metallic
minerals.
The most recently published information in this format is contained in Part A of Budget Paper No. 18 of 1980-81 (Parliamentary Paper No. 130 of 1980) showing statistics for the 1978-79 ta"x year.

Exports of Coal and Aluminium
(Question No. 403)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Trade and Re. sources, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:

(I) For the commodities of (a) coal and (b) aluminium what were the (i) volumes and (ii) values of exports from each State and from Australia as a whole (A) in total and (B) to each country or region of destination in each year from 1960-61 to 1979-80.
(2) What are the projected (a) volumes and (b) values for each year to 1989-90.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Australian Statistician has supplied the following information:
Table I-Exports of coal by State for the years 1960-61 to 1979-80 inclusive.
Table 2-Exports of coal by country of consignment for the years 1960-61 to 1979-80 inclusive.
Table 3-Exports of aluminium and alloys, unworked, for the years 1960-61 to 1979-80 inclusive (by State for the years 1960-61 to 1968-69 thereafter not available for publication) .
Table 4-Exports of aluminium and alloys, unworked, by country of consignment for the years 1960-61 to 1979-80 inclusive.
Figures in the tables have been rounded and discrepancies may therefore occur between sums of component items and totals.
Statistics on coal, and aluminium and alloys unworked, on a country by State basis have not been provided because:
(i) records containing data for years prior to 1966-67 on a . State \>y country basis are no longer available;
(ii) from 1969-70 State details of the export of aluminium and alloys, unworked, are subject to confidentiality provisions and are therefore unavailable; and
(iii) data for the years 1966-67 to 1979-80 on a State by country basis, other than those outlined in (ii) above, are not readily available.

952 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Tablet EXPORTS OF COAL: BY STATE, 1960-61 TO 1979-80

NSW

Vic.

Qld

WA

Australia*

Quantity

Value (fob) Quantity

Value (fob) Quantity

Value (fob) Quantity

Value (fob) Quantity

Value (fob)

1960-61 1961-62 1962-63 1963-64

'000 tons 1,840 3,180 2,449 3,005

A'OOO 7,506 12,456 10,171 12,518

'000 tons A'ooo

'000

tons A'OOO

48

176

290 1,155

228

999

801 3,712

'000 tons A'OOO

'000 tons 1,888
3,470
2,677 3,806

A'OOO 7,682 13,611
11,171 16,231

1964-65 1965-66 1966-67 1967-68 1968-69 1969-70 1970-71 1971-72

'000 tons 4,875 6,005
7,100 7,892 9,838 11,784 11,813 12,485

$A'ooo 40,552 48,616 56,985
63,713 83,130 111,252 121,917 138,039

'000 tons $A'ooo
4

'000 tons 1,188 1,648 1,703 2,307 3,960 5,558
6,823 8,994

$A'OOO 10,664 14,511 14,821 21,334 33,681 53,061 71,598
99,531

'000 tons $A'OOO

I

4

2

17

I

7

3

2

17

I

10

3

23

'000 tons 6,063 7,654 8,805 10,200 13,800 17,345 18,637
21,481

$A'OOO 51,216 63,132 71,824
85,054 116,818
164,330 193,525
237,592

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

'000 tonnes 11,262 12,414 15,209 13,800 15,906 17,685 19,788 21,568

$A'ooo 130,997 153,741 285,806 437,023 532,293 633,576 709,023 753,351

'000 tonnes $A'ooo
I 3

'000.
tonnes 14,504 15,414 17,443 15,424 18,526 20,177 19,296 21,000

$A'OOO 159,751 173,600 374,714 586,432 749,649 848,195 814,930 921,694

'000 tonnes
1
II

$A'OOO 5
107

'000 tonnes $A'OOO 25,766 290,752 27,838 327,448 32,652 660,520 29,224 1,023,455
34,432 1,281,944
37,862 1,481,773 39,085 1,523,953
42,566 1,675,044

* No exports were recorded for SA, Tas. and NT.
fob~Free on board . . .~Rounded to zero.

Table 2 (a) EXPORTS OF COAL: BY COUNTRY OF CONSIGNMENT, 1960-61 TO 1979-80

1960-61

1961-62

1962-63

1963-64

1964-65

Burma Sri Lanka
Fiji France Gilbert & Ellice
Islands Hong Kong Japan Korea, Republic of Malaysia
Netherlands New Caledonia New Zealand Pakistan Singapore Other

'000 A'ooo

tons

fob

7

31

1 2 1,700 18 9
117 5
30

3 7 6,858 97 38
495 22 133

'000 A'ooo

tons

fob

9

34

4

15

3,270 36 12
54 9 73 3

12,819 129 42
224 39 300 9 I

'000 A'OOO

tons

fob

30

101

7

26

4

13

2,472 74 8 10 48 3 13 7

10,371 261 29 56 189 II 89 24

'000 A'OOO

tons

fob

17

62

5

23

6

32

II 3,531
70 6 9
131
18 2 I

34 15,194
233 21 51 502
69 6 4

'000 $A'OOO

tons

fob*

12

87

8

63

23 5,665
32 3

198 48,082
195 21

210 1,720

101

776

10

72

Total

1,888 7,682 3,470

* From 1964-65 value is expressed in $'000.
fob~Free on board. . .~Rounded to zero.

13,611

2,677 11,171

3,806 16,231

6,063 51,216

Answers to Questions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 953

Table2(b) EXPORTS OF COAL: BY COUNTRY OF CONSIGNMENT, 1960-61 TO 1979-80

1965-66

1966767

1967-68

1968-69

1969-70

Sri Lanka China-Taiwan
Province only Fiji
German Democratic Republic
Germany, Federal Republic of
Hong Kong Italy Japan Korea, Republic of Malaysia Mozambique Netherlands New Caledonia New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea Portugal Singapore Thailand Other

'000 SA'OOO

tons

fob

II

77

31

255

2

12

64
7,199 33 10

448
59,476 235 82

236 1,941

26

237

19

154

18

161

3

33

2

20

'000 $A'OOO

tons

fob

12

85

19

145

3

21

8,397
57 6

68,622
410 56

218 1,740

30

252

62

473

3

18

'ODD SA'OOO

tons

fob

7

45

108

558

4

31

15

102

9,856 82,618

II

106

9

89

183 1,454

5

43

'ODD $A'OOO

tons

fob

5

35

108

666

I

II

13,433 113,935

20

189

233 1,980

'ODD $A'OOO

tons

fob

22

201

21

195

24

246

518 10 117
16,260 2

5,042 73
1,547 153,566
15

154 1,359 171 1,677

24

233

21

168

8

3

7

Total

7,654 63,132 8,805 71,824 10,200 85,054 13,800 116,818 17,345 164,330

fob-Free on board, , ,-Rounded to zero,

Table 2 (c) EXPORTS OF COAL: BY COUNTRY OF CONSIGNMENT, 1960-61 TO 1979-80

1970-71

1971-72

1972-73

1973-74

1974-75

Argentina
Belgium/ Luxembourg
Brazil Burma Sri Lanka China-Taiwan
Province only Egypt, Arab Repub-
Iicof Fiji France Greece German Democratic
Republic Germany, Federal
Republic of Italy Japan Korea, Republic of Netherlands New Caledonia Pakistan Spain
UK USA

'000 SA '000

tons f,o,b,

51

517

150 1,538

11

122

33

351

2

15

46

473

95 1,098

20

225

506 4,630 119 1,752 15,942 165,668

715 6,587

286 3,138

73

804

531 5,828

'000 SNOOO

'000 SA'OOO

tons f,o,b, tonnes* f,o,b,

117 1,675

34

466

12

141

II

175

361 4,429

16

185

289 3,460

119 1,413 565 5,927

'000 $A'OOO tonnes f,o,b,
286 2,930

'DOD SA '000 tonnes f,o,b,
73 3,280
206 4,054 126 3,716 65 2,710

262 2,791

294 3,727

139.' 1,975

2

2L:*:'", .]2..

183

111

933

717 13,838

524 4,643

643 13,902

170 1,727 565 7,190 17,904 197,786 600 7,310 129 1,652 97 1;305 1,544 14,585

84 579 23,081 94 652
11

664 6,809 260,254 1,031 7,330
158

75 1,019 127 -'\,519

78 997 23,635 665 781

1,071 10,054 282,736 7,989 8,256

399 4,640

40

523

530 1,404 24,320
654 1,076

7,380 33,015 501,806 14,012 21,197

1,978 28,884 265 3,700

954 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Other TOTAL

1970-71

'000 $A'OOO

tons r.o.b.

57

779

18,637 193,525

1971-72

1972-73

'000 $A'OOO

'000 $A'OOO

tons r.o.b. tonnesr.o.b.

10

120

13

21,481 237,592 25,766 290,752

1973-74

'000 tonnes
58

$A'OOO
r.o.b. 860

27,838 327,448

1974-75

'000
tonnes 149

$A'OOO r.o.b. 3,141

32,652 660,520

- From 1972-73 quantity is expressed in '000 tonnes. f.o.b.-Free on board.
-Rounded to zero.

Table 2 (d) EXPORTS OF COAL: BY COUNTRY OF CONSIGNMENT, 1960-61 TO 1979-80

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

Argentina Belgium/
Luxembourg Brazil Burma China-Taiwan
Province only Denmark Egypt, Arab Repub-
licor Fiji France Greece Germany, Federal
Republic or Italy
Jap~n
Korea, Republic or Mexico Netherlands Pakistan Phillipines Romania Spain Thailand UK USA Other

'000 $A'OOO tonnes r.o.b.

119 4,424

9

389

72 1,768

29

411

17

335

989 31,156

155 5,849

47 836 22,630 641

727 27,352 847,821 21,971

463 11,699

326 11,916 2,638 51,267
254 6,370

'000 tonnes
74

$A'OOO f.o.b. 2,674

256 9,755

185 6,749

13 1,435
101

320 42,469
3,377

257 5,524 1,109 . 40,540 26,866 1,045,708 1,100 40,204

694 23,556

10

267

243 10,432 1,969 45,486
118 4,885

'000 $A'OOO tonnes r.o.b.
274 9,886 41 1,816

818 32,546

49

863

17 1,763
251

374 56,418
7,629

896 19,629

1,108 42,485

26,427 1,107,491

1,158 47,202

10

449

1,957 58,321

35

650

619 24,221

525 20,891

1,344 571

35,661 15,240
2

'000 $A'OOO tonnes f.o.b.
289 10,443 123 5,328

1,378 426

50,477 9,145

29 1,958
295

671 59,857 9,264

573 12,499 1,175 45,818 25,722 1,084,304 1,783 73,108
89 3,629 1,650 46,362

463 16,763 509 18,484

1,807 523 293

51,921 14,900 10,980

'000 $A'OOO tonnes r.o.b.
287 10,718 52 2,305

1,897 457

59,302 11,015

116 17
1,927 197

4,778 364
60,503 6,252

863 21,896 1,125 44,486 28,560 1,200,582 2,289 91,200

703 23,418

190 593
16 2,456
83 739

7,149 23,318
599 75,149
2,752 29,259

Total

29,224 1,023,455 34,4321,281,944 37,862 1,481,773 39,085 1,523,953 42,566 1,675,044

f.o.b.-Free on board. -Rounded to zero.

Answers to Questions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 955

Year 1960--61

Table 3 EXPORTS OF ALLUMINIUM AND ALLOYS, UNWORKED: BY STATE, 1960-6\ TO \979-80

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

Australia

Quan~ily Value Quantily Value Quanlily Value Quanlily Value Quanlily Value Quantity Value QuanlilY Value

A'OOO ewl r,o.h.

A'OOO ewl r.o.h.

 A'000 ewl r.o.h.

A'OOO ewl r.o.h.

A'OOO c~l r.o.h.

A'OOO ewl r.o.h.

A'OOO ewl Lo.h.

296

296

1961-62

I 376

12

48

1424

12

1962-63

616

15 I 113

II

13

35084 394 36826 421

1963-64 1964-65

4236

52 7204

78

ewl SA'OOO

ewl SA '000

5033

139 125519 2725

ewl SA'OOO 4'

ewl SA'OOO

92312 881 103756 1011

ewl SA'OOO

ewl SA '000

ewl SA'OOO

308668 6552 439224 9416

1965-66

14622 397 280530 5773

140

4

635

II

79625 1924 375555 8 109

1966-67

21048

604 235302 5351

189

12

475

119263 2766 376277 8743

1967-68

22732 649 79860 1806

351

618

35154 852 138715 3321

1968-69 1969-70

53719 1607 57409 I 370

128

2646

56

618

10 53220 1340 167740 4385

'OOOlh

III 381 22972

1070--71

176 030 36012

1971-72

212171 38557

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80
r.o.h.-Free on board . . -Rounded to zero

Slate details not available for publication

'000 kg 81 462 30621 46492 20347 64065 37536 69074 44009 75533 60084 75921 69720 81 III 82323 57201 70832

956 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Table4(a)
EXPORTS OF ALUMINIUM AND ALLOYS, UNWORKED: BY COUNTRY OF CONSIGNMENT, 1960-61 TO 1979-80

1960-61

1961-62

1962-63

1963-64

1964-65

 A'000

ewt

r.o.b.

A'OOO

ewt

r.o.b.

A'OOO

ewt

r.o.b.

A'OOO

ewt

r.o.b.

A'OOO ewt f.o.b.*

Germany, Federal Re-

public or

116

Hong Kong

Ireland

Israel

Netherlands

New Zealand

129

Philippines

New Caledonia

United Kingdom

USA

Other

51

10014

95

223

6 10 157

115 60296

1352

16103

352

432

II

62278

1329

4 1098

6

2761

33 23654

595

202

5 1002

8 2169

54

85

I

25872

295 79221

755 106575

2208

10218

110

167638

3510

241

6

311

5

601

78

4

Total

296

6

1424

12 36826

421 103756

1011 439224

9416

* From 1964-65 value is expressed in $A'OOO
..r.o.b.-Free on board - Rounded tei zero
Table 4 (b) EXPORTS OF ALUMINIUM AND ALLOYS, UNWORKED: BY COUNTRY OF CONSIGNMENT, 1960-61 TO
1977-80

1965-66

1966-67

1967-68

1968-69

1969-70

Burma Canada China-exe\.
Taiwan Province
Germany, Federal Republic of
Greece Hong Kong
India Indonesia Iran Israel Japan Korea, Republic of Malaysia Nepal
Netherlands New Zealand Norway
Pakistan Papua New Guinea Philippines Singapore
South Africa Sweden Tanzania Thailand United Kingdom
USA Venezuela

ewt 8,050
37,549
2,898 14,363
284 50,887 15,535
13606
79,111 151,758
653

SA'OOO f.o.b. 200
984
66 329
13 1,047
384
336
1,667 3,039
26

SA'OOO ewt f.o.b.

48,495 75,162
533
5,301 77,403 22,163
1,068
41,922 ?9,624

1,123 1,700
21
121 1,739
514 36
822 740

225

14

18827

459

3,819

113

41,534

941

9,707

380

SA '000 ewt f.ei:b.

41,798 5,356 533
3,639 13,963 6,549
1,007 1,626
16,231

1,014 121 18
81 '295 151
32 66
384

38786

926

2,666

91

3,045

69

3,5,16

72

SA '000

SA'OOO

ewt

f.o.b. 'OOOlb*

f.o.b.

950

213

1,999 61,883
2,219 8,770 21,523 1,113
32,409
31406 909
2,210 2,820

45 1,663
74 205 508
37
873
782 24
73 85

1,095
1,121 8,741
207 329 879 70,837
127
1,152 6,433
602 32
3015 215
2163 113
1,294 366
10,992 695

231
256 1,950
73 73 205 13,474
35
261 1,581
129 10
689 55
508 28
303 95 2,556 236

Answers to Questions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 957

1965-66

.1966-67

1967-68

1968-69

1969-70

Other

$A'OOO

cwt r.o.b.

861

19

$A'OOO

cwt r.o.b.

494

18

$A'OOO cwt r.o.b.

$A'OOO

$A'OOO

cwt Lo.b. 'OOOlb* f.o.b.

479

16

25

10

Total

375,555 8,109 376,277 8,743 138,715 3,321 167,740 4,385 111,381 22,972

- From 1969-70 the quantity is expressed in '000 lb. f.o.b.-Free on board.
Table 4 (c) EXPORTS OF ALUMINIUM AND ALLOYS, UNWORKED: BY COUNTRY OF CONSIGNMENT, 1960-1961 TO
1979-80

Aluminium and allOYS, unworked

1970-71

1971-72

1972-73

1973-74

1974-75

Argentina Brazil China-
excl. Taiwan Province Taiwan Province only German Democratic Republic Hong Kong Indonesia Israel Japan Korea, Republic or Malaysia Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Philippines Singapore South Arrica Sweden Tanzania Thailand United Kingdom USA Other

'000 lb. 355
1,436
2,206 773
12,512 12,057 1,526 1,238 111,765
91 8,689
270 27 3,588 159 2,384 22 7,147 903 8,000 599 284

SA'OOO Lo.b. 73 278
411 159 2,311 2,821 557 278 21,545 28 2,088 58
9 854
39 561
4 1,682
209 1,802
156 90

'000 lb.
58,117 1,443
14,866 175 470
90,429 599
3,416 13,390
86 2,741
31 484 8,297 2,856 331
80 14,361

SA'OOO r.o.b. '000 kg-

9,054 281
3,177 62 87
16,253 130 527
3,230 32 577 12 79
1,865 595 80 27
2,491

6,006 24
4,595 3,703
446 533 46,999 390 2,524 1,907 30 2,544 108
3,082 1,956
I 15 6,599

$A'OOO r.o.b.
1,919 8
1,503 1,646
247 203 17,225 161 839 993 21 972 42 1,332 873
I II 2,624

SA '000 '000 kg Lo.b.

44

22

328

184

2,510 1,787
16 31,948
39 149
8 851 54 4,625
5

1,056 872 7
13,584 22 103 I 512
37 1,997
2

1,706 2,323
3 97

739 1,113
3 95

'000 kg
2,350 576
52,317 189 202
1,212 10 10
3,643 4 15 10
2,866 16
543 103

$A'OOO f.o.b.
1,433 445
29,971 156 118
1,007 8 10
2,275 3 14 8
1,649 4
314 122

Total

176,030 36,012 212,171 38,557 81,462 30,621 46,492 20,347 64,065 37,536

- From 1972-73 the quantity is expressed in '000 kg. Lo.b.-Freeon board.
Table 4 (d) EXPORTS OF ALUMINIUM AND ALLOYS, UNWORKED: BY COUNTRY OF CONSIGNMENT, 1960-61 TO
1979-80

Aluminium and alloys, unworked China-
excl. Taiwan Province Taiwan Province only Hong Kong Indonesia Israel

1975-76 SA'Ooo '000 kg r.o.b.

5,006 1,428 1,798 1,125
729

2,950 877
1,265 885 304

1976-77
$A'OOO '000 kg r.o.h.

3,002 3,273
554 889
10

2,011 i,162
470 848
9

1977-78
$A'OOO '000 kg r.o.b.

7,024 903 807
1,029

6,355 882 828
1,085

1978-79
. $A'OOO '000 kg Lo.b.

11,868 332
1,653 2,347

12,828 363
2,127 2,646

1979-80
$A;OOO '000 kg Lo.b.

9,981 13,586

412

587

2,472 , 3,686

1,130 ,.1;856

958 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Answers to Question~

Aluminium and alloys, unworked

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

Japan
Korea, Republic of Malaysia
New Zealand Pakistan Philippines Singapore
South Africa Tanzania Thailand
United Kingdom USA
Other

'000 kg
50,330 1,938
124
372 37 4,468
226

SA'Ooo
f.o.b. 32,013 2,0\0
123 236
34 2,907
167

482 2,765

3\0 1,819

160

89

24

31

'000 kg 56,029
84 212 200 35 7,172 300
3,754 41 29 32

SA '000 f.o.b.
44,639 112 224 218 36
5,940 248
3,195 5
38 40

SA'OOO '000 kg F.o.b. 56,503 50,191

159
112 26 6,493
541 51

178
146 42 6,547
544 37

2,085 2,158

26

36

161

239

SA'OOO '000 kg f.o.b. 50,607 48,504

224 213
9 7,873
772 26

313 259 15 8,514
885 22

2,967 8

3,447 8

274

383

SA '000 '000 kg f.o.b. 28,817 30,898

1,047 '
377 20 8,902 1,624 9

1;559 632
37 12,172
2,273 18

2,105 3,036

221

380

Total

69,074 44,009 75,533 60,084 75,921 69,270 81,111 82,323 57,201 70,832

F.o.b.-Free on board.
(2) Projections of coal and aluminium exports from 1980-81 to 1989-90 are as follows:
COAL Several bodies have made projections of Australian coal exports in the current decade. These projections vary according to the forecasting methods used and individual perceptions:

1985

1990

International Energy Agency (1978)
World Coal Study (1980) Joint Coal Board (1980)

57 78 75-1 \0

90 \05 \15-180

The Department of Trade and Resources has recently
completed a preliminary study of likely international demand for Australian coal and estimates the most likely ranges of export coal demand as follows (million tonnes):

1985

1990

Metallurgical coal Thermal coal
Total

48-55
30-40 78-95

50-60
50-70 100-130

Australian coal exports will be demand related; with reasonable notice of demand, production capacity is normally put in place sufficient to meet this demand. .
Based on these ranges of demand and at current prices export values are estimated at S3,500 million-S4,300 million in 1985, and $4,400 million-S5,7oo million in 1990.
ALUMINIUM

Year

Quantity

Value at current
prices

1980-81 1981-82
1982-83 1983-84
1984-85 1985-86 1986-87

('000 tonnes) 60 120 220 570 880 970
1,200

(SA million) 90 180 330 850
1,320 1,450 1,800

Year

Quantity

Value at
current prices

1987-88 1988-89 1989-90

('000 tonnes) 1,470
1,670
1,740

(SA million) 2,210 2,510 2,6\0

Note-Figures for period 1980-81 to 1985-86 are based on smelter projects which are either under construction or firmly committed. Figures for the period 1986-87 to 1989-90 are estimates based on the possible expansion of the Gladstone, Portland and Bundaberg smelters, and the possible construction of asmelter in the south west of Western Australia. The timing of these projects has not been announced nor has their construction been firmly committed.
Value at current prices is derived from the Alcan producer price which, for this purpose, is regarded as the best, readily available indicator. The current Alcan price is US$I,750, but this'is known to be subject to discounting.

Attorney-General's Department: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons

(Question No, 470)

Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:

( I) [n view of the fact that 1981 is designated' as the Inter-
national Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has the Attorney-General's Department made to assist disabled persons. '

(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a)

increased employment of disabled pel'sonsand (b) improved

access for disabled persons to, any' building or other facility

occupied by the Attorney-General's Department; if so, what

are the details.

(3) What budgetary allocations were mad~ in 1980/81 to

facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in the

Attorney-General's Department.

'

Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Answers to Questions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 959

(I) to (3) I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Prime Minister to Parliamentary Question No. 458 (Hansard,IOJune 1981).
Funding of Private Schools
(Question No. 700)
Mr Dawkins asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 4 March 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that, in 1976 (a) 6% of private schools received more finance from State and Federal Government grants than they spent on education and (b) 56% of private schools received more than 80% of their expenditure from State and Federal grants.
(2) How many private schools receive more than (a) 80% and (b) 100% of their expenditure from State and Federal Government sources in each State since 1976.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The figures quoted in part I (a) and (b) appear in the April 1978 Schools Commission Report for the triennium 1979-81 and were based on 1976 data. In assessing school expenditure for these purposes, no allowance has been made for the payment of interest or repayment of principal in respect of loans for capital purposes, nor for the costs of making provision for future commitments or for expenditure on such capital items as furniture and equipment. All of these costs must be met, at least in part, from a school's cash income.
Surveys conducted by the Commission indicated that, in 1977, some 7% of non-government schools spent less on the provision of recurrent resources than they received from State and Commonwealth Government recurrent grants, while 55% of non-government schools received recurrent grants from Government sources totalling more than 80% of their recurrent expenditure. The equivalent proportions in 1979 were 6% and 58% respectively. Comparable figures are not available for other years.
If debt servicing is taken into account, the great majority of non-government schools (that is those in the Catholic sector) provide on average more than one-third of total expenditure from their own efforts, including the estimated value of contributed services; the remaining two-thirds being provided in the form of grants from Commonwealth and State Governments. These schools have on average recurrent resource levels about 30 per cent below those of the average governmentschool.
Other non-government schools receive on average less than one-third of their recurrent expenditure in the form of Government grants.
After taking into account debt servicing and the other factors mentioned above, the majority of the remaining schools which appear to spend less on the provision of recurrent resources than they receive from State and Commonwealth recurrent grants are systemic schools. School systems receive block payments of grants in respect of all the schools in the system and every effort is made to ensure that system aggregate data reported to the Commonwealth Schools Commission are accurate.
However, the nature of systemic arrangements is such as to preclude exact allocations to each school. Services are often provided on a system-wide basis (e.g. remedial and advisory teachers) and systems often consolidate school fees, cope with bad debts, and pay salaries and associated costs, at a central level. In some instances, this has led to inconsistencies between income and expenditure figures as reported by individual schools. These inconsistencies balance out over the system

and no system has received in any year more Government grants than it spent in providing recurrent resources.
There remains a very small number of instances since 1976 in which a school has actually received more recurrent funds from Government sources than it spent in a particular year. Such instances have been confined to aboriginal community schools in which substantial enrolment variations from year to year may create surpluses through unexpected increases in enrolments and hence in grants paid on a per capita basis. Adjustments are made in subsequent years to take account of such surpluses.
In my statement to Parliament on 4 June I announced that the Government has accepted the Commonwealth Schools Commission's recommendation that, from 1982 onwards, the total disposable income available to a school from private sources will be considered by the Commission in its assessment of schools or systems for subsidy proposes. By relating income to expenditure, the Commission believes that a better appreciation of a school's overall financial situation can be obtained.

Overseas Travel: Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 1448)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Fourteen officers of the Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) The total cost of travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances etc. was $46,846.

Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 1526)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) How many officers and employees of his Department have their house telephone rentals and/or charges:

(a) fully;or (b) partially

paid by his Department.

(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expendi-

ture in 1 9 7 9 - 8 0 . '

..

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) There are 13 officers whose rentals and charges are fully paid by the Department and 67 officers whose services are partially reimbursed.

(2) The cost to this Department during 1979-80 was $23,685.74.

Non-Systemic Schools
(Question No, 2612)
Mr Dawkins asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 10 June 1981 :

960 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Answers to Questions

( I) Did the Schools Commission's Report for 1982-84 state, at paragraph 12.30, that 38 per cent of non-systemic schools spent less than 75 per cent of their available income, after they had serviced all debts, on the provision of recurrent resources for students; if so, how was the remaining income used and was any of it derived from public sources.
(2) Was any of the financial assistance provided from public sources spent on purposes other than the purposes for which it was granted.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The figures quoted in Part (I) appear in the March 1981 Commonwealth Schools Commission 'Report for the Triennium 1982-84,' at paragraph 12.30.
The Commission indicated earlier in the same paragraph that in using the term 'available income' it was referring to income from private sources only. Such income comprises tuitiQn fees, other receipts from students, church or parish grants, and other cash income from private sources for recurrent purposes; grants or donations for capital purposes from parish, parent organisations, building funds or bequests; proceeds from the sale of fixed assets; other capital cash receipts from private sources; and the value of contributed services of teachers and other professional staff.
In addition to meeting the cost of providing recurrent resources over and above those financed from Government grants, and meeting the cost of servicing all of the school debt, the income available to a school from private sources may be used in making provision for future commitments (for example, provision for future building projects), in meeting the cost of capital items not funded from government sources, in the reduction of working overdrafts, and, if the school is a boarding school, in financing any net deficit on the boarding operation.
I would point out that non-government schools are free to apply their income from private sources as they see fit. The Government has, however, accepted the Commonwealth Schools Commission's recommendation that, in future, the total disposable income available to a school from private sources should be considered by the Commission in making assessments for subsidy purposes. It is expected that this will help ensure that decisions regarding the level of Commonwealth funding to be granted to schools and systems will accurately rellect their overall financial situation. However, no non-government school will receive less than the basic Commonwealth grant of 20 per cent of average government schools standard costs.
(2) The accountability requirements attached to grants made by the Commonwealth Government to non-government schools and systems under States Grants (Schools Assistance) Acts have been satisfied in all cases; the funds were applied to the purpose for which they were granted. Accountability for funds granted by State Governments is the responsibility of the State Government concerned.
Australian Broadcasting Commission: Industrial Disputes
(Question No. 2620)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
What was the saving in wages and salaries following industrial disputes at the Australian Broadcasting Commission in each year from 1975-76 and what is the estimated saving for 1980-81 ?

Mr Sinclair-Savings in wages and salaries by the Australian Broadcasting Commission as the result of industrial disputes were:
(a) 1975-76.,-$1,331 (b) 1976-77-nil. (c) 1977-78-nil. (d) 1978-79-:,$301,000 (e) 1979-80-nil. (f) 1980-81-$1,041.
These figures were obtained from the Commonwealth Bureau of Statistics forms, which are prepared by the Industrial Department of the ABC.

Ayalon Airfield, Victoria: Land Purchases
(Question No. 794)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Transport upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(I) Has he initiated action for the acquisition of land east of Avalon Airfield at Lara, Victoria.
(2) If so, is this acquisition part of initial planning for the construction of an east-west runway at Avalon Airfield.
(3) Will this proposal involve low-level lIight operations over high density urban areas; if so, will local residents be given a proper opportunity to express their views on the proposal.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows;
(I) no.
(2) See answer provided to Question No. 795 (Hansard P. 3478, of 10 June 1981) by the Minister for Administrative Services.
(3) In the event of a proposal being developed in the future to construct 'and east-west runway at Avalon I understand local residents would have an opportunity to express their views pursuant to normal procedures required by the Environmental Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act 1974 and in the context of public enquiries by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works.

Expenditure Commitments: Department of Veterans' Affairs

(Question No. 1280)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by the Department of Veterans' Affairs in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c)
for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.

Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Yes.

(a) One.

(b) Mr John Evans.

(c) Mr Evans was employed for the purpose of discussions

with the Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Departmental

officers concerning the possible long-term effects of herbicides

on humans.

'

(d) $400.

Answers to Questions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 961

, The Department also employs, on a continuing basis, outside visiting medical officers who are contracted on a sessional basis to treat patients in Departmental institutions. However, medical officers employed under these arrangements do not come within the generally accepted meaning of the term -consultant'.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department or Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1436)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by the Department of Veterans' Affairs in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by the Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of the Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in the Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by the Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.

Tea Services: Department or Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1618)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many (a) Full-time and (b) part-time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in the Department in 1979-80,
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question: '
(I) and (2) The number of full-time and part-time staff employed in tea making and distribution in the Department of Veterans' Affairs and the cost' in 1979-80 of this service are as follow:

Number of full'time staff Number of part-time staff Cost of salaries Other charges

Head Office

Other Offices

2 $22,288
Nil

2 5 $51,353 $32,250

Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) to (3) I refer you to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 1414 (Hansard, 5 June 1981). There was no expenditure by the Department of Veterans'
Affairs on Commonwealth sponsored international conferences in Australia in 1979-80.

(4) Expenditure by the Department of Veterans' Affairs on

official entertainment outside Australia in 1979-80 was

~~~

.

,

Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department or Transport
(Question 1558)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

(I) How many (a) cars. (b) commercial ,vehicles !Ind (c) trucks were being operated by his Department, excll\ding vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services,
as at 30 June 1980,

(2) How many of these vehicles had .been (a) converted to

LPG usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG

usage.

'

(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; ifso, what are the details.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable

member's question is as follows: "

.

I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1563 (Hansard, 10 June 1981) provided by the Minister for Administrative Services.

The figure of $32,250 listed as 'other charges' For 'other offices' is the cost of the provision of beverage services by the Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd (CACS) met by the Department of Veterans' Affairs, For further information on the provision of CACS services I would refer you to the answer provided to Question No. 1615 by the Minister For Administrative Services (Weekly Hansard,lOJune 1981).
It should also be noted that the figures listed above do not include the cost of providing tea services to staff working in Repatriation hospitals. Arrangements for the provision of such services vary From place to place but, in most instances, tea services are either available in the hospital caFeteria or are provided through the ward food services pantry. In some hospital areas, a tea to desk service is provided to staff as part of the normal rounds made by food services staff to patients, In many instances, staff organise and operate tea clubs. Tea services in Repatriation hospitals are provided for non-staff as well as staff use and it is not practicable to determine the separate cost of providing such services to staff.

Patients or Artificial Limbs Factory and , Repatriation General Hospital

(Question No. 1839)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Vetyrans'. Affairs,.upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

How many patients of each (a) artificial limbs factory and (b) Repatriation General Hospital during 1979-80 wer~ (i)
eligible veterans, (ii) members of Armed Forces; (iii) Families of either of those referred', to in parts (i) and (ii)' and, (iv)
civilians.

Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans'

Affairs has provided the following answer to the

honourable member's question:

'

962 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(a) Information in the form indicated in the question is not readily obtainable from records of patient statistics for Re-
patriation Artificial Limb and Appliance Centres. Production data is available and this information is set out in Table A.

(b) It is also not practicable to provide information about patients of Repatriation General Hospitals in the form requested. Available details are shown at Table B.

Table A
REPATRIATION ARTIFICIAL LIMB AND APPLIANCE CENTRES PRODUCTION-I JULY 1979-30 JUNE 1980

Legs

Arms Appliances Footwear

Repairs

New South WalesRepatriation beneficiaries
Other Victoria-
Repatriation beneficiaries Other QueenslandRepatriation beneficiaries Other South AustraliaRepatriation beneficiaries
Other Western Australia-
Repatriation beneficiaries
Other Tasmania-
Repatriation beneficiaries
Other Northern Territory-
Repatriation beneficiaries
Other Total

133 754
64 856
61 414
23 366
38 237
13 102
39 3,100

2

220

2,124

4,688

63

60

264

1,814

3

242

1,831

5,897

92

63

237

3,564

6

t:l7

685

2,772

42

33

113

1,803

,

71

327

1,679

47

74

70

1,396

36

160

894

39

28

39

849

I

68

126

780

15

28

33

640

9

25

44

3

415

310

1,104

6,021

27,216

NOTE: Repatriation Beneficiaries include eligible veterans, war Widows and dependants of certain veterans.

Other includes civilians, members of the Armed Forces, non-~ntitled veterans, and members of families of both eligible

veterans and of members of the Armed Forces.

'

TableD

NUMBERS OF PATIENTS TREATED AT REPATRIATION GENERAL HOSPITALS~I JULY
1979-30 JUNE 1980

Repatriation general hospital

Members Repatriation of armed beneficiaries forces Civilians

Concord, N.S.W. Heidelberg, Vic. Greenslopes, Qld Daw Park, S.A. Hollywood, WA. Hobart, Tas.

13,502
10,348 7,635 5,433 5,695 1,702

428

8,002

495

3,719

67

3,404

264

698

267

2,222

48

256

Total

44,315

1,569 18,301

, (2) How many officers of his Department are expected to attend the meeting.

,(3) .What is the expected cost of their attendance at the

meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel

and other expenses.

.

(4) What other expenses does he expect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct .of, the meeting.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I refer to the Prime Minister's reply which appeared in Hansard on 10 June, 1981, to Question No. 2162 directed to him by the honourable member. In relation to my own Department:

NOTE: RepatriationBeneficiaries include,eligible veterans, war widows, and eligible dependants of deceased veterans.
Civilians include community patients and. families of veterans and members of the Armed Forces.
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of Ttansport
(Question No. 2176)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(I) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division a~d (c)
4th Division officers in his Departrnent .are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commoilwealth' Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne. '

(I) Two 2nd Division officers and four 3rd Division officers have been engaged part-time in preparation for the meeting. No 4th Division officers are involved.
(2) It is expected that up to eight officers will attend as liaison officers' of' provide assistance to Delegations. Additional officers have been requested by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet to attend as support staff. Such officers have yet to be nominated.
(3)' The cost to my Department of the attendance at the meeting of the officers nominated in (2) is their normal salary entitlement,expected to be less than $11,000.
(4) To date; estimated expenses of $1,400 have been incurred due to attendance by officers o.f my Department at preparatory meetings for the CHOGM. Additional expenditure for'this purpose is expected to be about $750.

Answers to Questions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 963

Qantas Service to South Africa
(Question No. 2323)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(I) Has Qantas applied for approval to operate a service to South Africa'.
(2) If so, when is it anticipated that the Government will formally approve or disapprove the application.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Qantas has been advised that it is the Government's firm view the Company should not resume services to South Afdca.
Artificial Limbs and Appliances
(Question No. 2346)
Dr Jenkins asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(I) What categories of artificial limbs and appliances issued by the Department of Veterans' Affairs are (a) produced by the Department or other Government organisations or (b) contracted out for private manufacture.
(2) What are the numbers and value of artificial limbs and appliances in each category from each source.
(3)What (a) categories and (b) numbers in each category are to be concerned in the decision to increase contracting out to private manufacture (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1850).
(4) What is the difference in cost between private manufacture and Government manufacture of each category.
(5) What savings does the Government expect from the changed proportion of manufacture.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The Repatriation Artificial Limb and Appliance Centres (R.A.L.A.Cs) manufacture a full range of artificial limbs and appliances. No other Government organisation manufactures or issues on behalf of the Department of Veterans' Affairs. The commercial limb contractors, which tend to service specific geographic regions, are expected to manufacture any limb for Which they receive a prescription. Appliance manufacture is not currently open to contract.
(2) Details of limb and appliance manufacture for the 1979-80 financial year, were:
LIMBS

R.A.L.A.C Production Con tractors

Number
3,410 1,022

Value
S2.8m SO.8m

APPLIANCES
The R.A.L.A.Cs manufactured 1,104 appliances valued at SO.03m.
(3) The decision to increase contracting outfoiprivate manufacture is expected to appiy to all categories of limbs and appliances now manufactured. The initial impact is likely to occur in dllcentralised areas, ,with the Department already having received expressions of interest in respe<;t of Canberra

and Wollongong. In the metropolitan areas, an increase in contracted manufacture is dependent upon the private sector's ability to increase its production capacity. No estimate of actual numbers is currently available.
(4) Available 'information suggests that basic cost structures are similar although the private sector, for return on capital investment, adds a profit margin not applicable to Departmental Costs.
(5) There will be some contraction of Departmental staff involved in manufacture but at this stage financial savings are not expected from the production redistribution. The advantages will be greater patient access and a more responsive, decentralised prosthetic/orthotic service.

Operating Theatres at Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park

(Question No. 2370)

Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice,on 2 June 1981:

( I) Is it a fact that the Specialist Advisory Committee has written to the Deputy Commissioner in South Australia on a
number of occasions expressing its concern about the operating theatres a1 the Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park.

(2) Is it also a fact that the Specialist Advisory Committee
has expressed concern about the future of the Hospital if a decision is not made soon about replacing the operating theatres, in view of the time lag of at least 3 years between a decision to
build and completion of the project.

(3) Has the Committee also expressed its concern that the Hospital will have difficulty in continuing to provide services to veterans and continue itS'role as a teaching hospital if the theatre complex is not built.

(4) If the p:oposed cuts in the Public Service are applied to the Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park, will at least one service currently provided to veterans have to be
discontinued.

(5) Further to the Minister's answer to my Question No.
\030, confirming that the operating theatres need to be urgently replaced (Hansard, 26 May 1981, pages 2595-6), can the Minister intimate when these theatres are to be rebuilt and when construction will commence.

Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans'

Affairs has provided the following answer to the

honourable mC?mber's question:

'

( 1) The Specialist' Advisory Committee wrote to the Deputy Commissioner, Department of Veterans' Affairs, South Australia, in April 1980 and again in April 1981 expressing concern about the operating theatres at the Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park.

(2) The letters from, the Committee exprCSlied concern about the future of the Hospital if a decision on replacement of the operating theatres is not made soon but did not specifically mention the time lag between a decision to build and completion of the project.

(3) The CommiUeehas expressed its, concern in relation to the service provided to veterans but has made 'no mention of the future teaching role of the Hospital.

(4) The areas where staff reductions are to'occtir in the De-

partment of Veterans' Affairs have not,yet been.decided. The

Deputy Commissioner, South Australia, will determine the

staff reSources to be allocated to patticuhir services, within the

ceiling available to him.

-

''

.(5) I am unable to provide I;Iny details ~bout a possible date

of commencement of the proposed project. The Government

964 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Answers to Questions

considered a number of proposals for capital expenditure in the context of the current Budget and decided to give further consideration to Repatriation General Hospitals later this year.
Greenslopes Repatriation Hospital, Queensland
(Question No. 2374)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 28 May) 981:
(1) Is it a fact that staff employed in the pathology laboratory of the Greenslopes Repatriation Hospital, Queensland, are, re~uired to work permanent overtime.
(2) If so, (a) is the necessity for permanent overtime a cause of recent staff resignations in that laboratory, (b) in what other sections of the hospital is permanent overtime worked, (c) was permanent overtime introduced to combat the imposition of staff ceilings and (d) will the transfer of staff following the closure of the Rose!l1ount Repatriation Hospital, Queensland, ameliorate the overtime situation at Greenslopes.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:'
(I) No.
(2) (a) Refer to (1).
(b) Overtime is worked on a regular basis at the Repatriation General Hospital, Greenslopeo, in the following areas:
A regular rostered overtime shift is worked by the Transport Officers (Clerical Assistants, Grade 3) each Saturday morning between 8.00 'a.m. and noon to arrange transport for hospital patients.
In the Accounts Section, two clerks (a paying officer and a witnessing officer) are required to work on an overtime basis each payday to pay staff completing early shifts.
Overtime is worked every four weeks by two clerks, a clerical assistant and an accounting machinist, to process the payment of fees to visiting specialists. Payments are made to 120 specialists involved in servicing all the clinics at the Repatriation General Hospital, Greenslopes.
(c) No.
(d) The transfer of staff following the closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital will have no effect on overtime worked at the Repatriation General Hospital, Greenslopes.
Veterans' Affairs: Pensions
(Question No, 2407)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) In assessing a'Yeteran's claim for pension, is a distinction made between (a) assessment and (b) entitlement claims.
(2) What ,is the stafldard procedure adopted in respect of both categories.
Mr Thomson-The Minister, for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.

(2) When a claim for acceptance of a disability as servicerelated is received, arrangements are made for the medical investigation of the condition claimed and all available relevant medical evidence and service records are obUlined.
When investigation of the claim is complete,' all the evidence is submitted in the first instance to a Repa\riation Board for determination. If the claim is rejected by the Board there exists a right of appeal to the Repatriation Commission. If the appeal is unsuccessful, the applicant may then apply to the Repatriation Review Tribunal for a revieYl of the Commission's decision.
If the applicant elects to appeal or apply for a review he or she may submit additional evidence which, together with all the other evidence, is made available to the determining authority. The applicant may also attend a Tribunal hearing in person and be assisted by an advocate.
Where a claim for acceptance of a disability is successful at Board level, the Board may make a determination on assessment at the same time. If the claim is successful at Commission or Tribunal hivel, further medical opinion is normally obtained on assessment and the case referred to a Board for determi'riation. If the claimant is dissatisfied with the decision on assessment he or she may apply to the Repatriation Review Tribunal for a review of that decision on assessment within three months of receipt of notification of that decision.
Where a veteran has an accepted'disability(ies) and considers that the incapacity has deteriorated since last assessed, an application may be made at any time for increase in the rate of pension. In these circumstances, further medical evidence is sought and the assessment of incapacity reviewed by a Repatriation Board. A right to apply to the Repatriation Review Tribunal for review of a Board determination as above also exists in these circumstances. The applicant may also submit further evidence in the same way as for an entitlement case, and attend a Tribunal hearing in person.
In all cases the applicant is advised of the decision and the reasons for it. .

Rockhampton Airport, Queensland
(Question No. 2421)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
Will he provide to Rockhampton City councillors the revenues and costs of Rockhampton Airport, Queensland and estimated savings on maintenance if local ownership by the Council was arranged.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I have asked my Department to provide this information to Rockhampton City Council. This information was last provided to Council in 1974, and a few weeks will be required to bring the information up to date.

Company Operations Overseas: Government

Assistance

'

(Question No. 2507)

Mr Uren asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:

(I) Which companies previously' operating in Australia
have received AustraHan Government assistance to establish operations overseas.

(2) In each case, what (a) was the total value of assistance

provided and (b) what were the countries in which the oper-

ations were established.

.

Answers to Questions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 965

(3) Which of these companies have ceased operations in Australia since the provision of assistance.
(4) Which of these companies now export goods and services to Australia.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Australian Government provides no financial assistance to Australian firms proposing to invest overseas. An overseas Investment Feasibility Study Fund, introduced in 1974 to assist Australian firms to explore investment opportunities abroad was terminated in 1976.
The Department of Trade and Resources provides information on request to Australian firms on opportunities for investment and conditions applying to foreign investment in overseas countries.
The Export Finance and Insurance Corporation, a Oovernment Statutory Authority, provides insurance cover against certain non-commercial risks for investments by Australian firms overseas.
(2), (3) and (4) See answer to question (I).

Australian National Line: Stevedoring
(Question No. 2599)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) On what date was the Australian National Line (ANL) first permitted to perform its own stevedoring with its own labour and at what places.
(2) How many employees were involved and in what categories oflabour.
(3) What subsequent additions have been made to this service, how many employees were involved, in what categories of labour and at what places.
(4) Why did ANL not perform this service for itself earlier.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (4) Under the provisions of the Australian Coastal Shipping Agreement, ANL was required to employ companies engaged in stevedoring or the handling of cargo to perform its stevedoring requirements. The Agreement expired on 30 September 1976 and ANL commenced stevedoring activities in November 1977 with the formation of ANL Cargo Operations Pty. Ltd.

(2) The number of people employed by ANL in terminal duties in November 1977 was as follows:

Terminals

Supts.

Foremen Maintenance Watchmen

Cairns Townsville
Mackay Port Alma
Brisbane Mort Bay (Sydney)
Port Kembla Bell Bay
Burnie Devonport Webb Dock (Melbourne)
Adelaide

2

I

3

3

8

10

3

12

2

8

3

2

3

.1

3

3

5

18

38

10

12

2

5

Totals

42

78

17

24

(3) The number of people currently employed by ANL at its terminals is as follows:

Clerks 2 2 5 2
11

WWF 8 14
110 72
236
440

Terminals
Cairns Townsville Mackay Brisbane Port Botany Port Kembla Bell Bay Burnie Devonport Webb Dock Adelaide
Totals

Supts.
I I I 3 24 3 2 4 .2 20 3
64

Foremen Maintenance

1

2

I

3

45

26

13

3

4

5

4

39

14

5

122

44

Watchmen
17 13 30

Clerks 1 2 2 8 3
16

WWF 13 21
261 82
259
636

Australian Trading Ports
(Question No. 2602)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:

Further to his answer to part (1) of Question No. 1081 (Hansard, 26 May 1981, page 2599), is he able to say
(a) Of the eight ports which have ceased trading, (i) what were their main trades, (ii) were they export or import; and

966 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(iii) were they coastal or overseas; and (b) Of the eighteen new ports,
(i) what are their main trades, (ii) are they export or import; and (iii) are they coastal or overseas.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is given in the table attached.
In my answer to part (2) of Question No. 1081, the throughput of Exmouth GulF in 1979-80 was shown as 1,053 thousand ttlOnes. Subsequent checks have shown that the correct figure is 13 thousand tonnes.
MAIN TRADES

Overseas

Coastal

Port

Loaded

Discharged

Loaded

Discharged

OLD PORTS New South Wales---'
Coifs Harbour Richfl\ond River South AustraliaEdithburgh'" Farquhar Jetty''' Port Augusta
Stenhouse Bay Wardang Island'" TasmaniaStrahan
NEW PORTS Victoria-
Westernport
QueenslandCape Flattery Hay Point Mourilyan (Innisfail) Quintell Beach Weipa
South AustraliaBallast Head Klein Point'" Port Giles'" Port Stanvac Proper Bay'"
Western Australia-- Barrow Island Dampier Exmouth Gulf
TasmaniaFlinders Island
Port Latta Northern Territory-
Gove
Groote Eylandt

Timber Timber

Molasses, Raw Sugar
Grain, Salt Limestone, Gypsum Copper Concentrates,
Salt Gypsum Lime/shell sand
Pyrites ore, copper

Petroleum products, Crude oil, Petroleum

Steel, LPG

products

Silica Sands Coal Raw sugar, molasses

Bauxite Gypsum

Petroleum products

Wheat, Barley Petroleum products

Crude oil

Iron ore, salt

Petroleum products

Iron ore pellets Bauxite, alumina
Manganese

Limestone, Fuel, caustic soda, general cargo
Petroleum products

Crude oil, Petroleum Petroleum products,

products, Steel,

Steel

.

LPG,Zinc

Molasses Bauxite

General cargo General cargo

Gypsum Limestone, Gypsum

Petroleum products Lime/shell sand

Crude oil, Naptha

Crude oil

Livestock, wool, general cargo

Petroleum products
Livestock, general cargo, petroleum products, superphosphate
Furnace oil

Manganese

General cargo

(I) Edithburgh grain trade now exported through Port Giles. (2) Farquhar Jetty trade now handled at Klein Point. (3) Wardang Island trade now handled at Proper Bay..

Answers to Questions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 967

Australian National Railways
(Question No. 2607)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(1) What were the (a) labour operating costs, (b) nonlabour operating costs, excluding capital servicing costs, (c) capital servicing costs and (d) capital expenditure of the Australian National Railways Commission for each year from 1972-73 and what are the estimated figures for 1980-81.

(2) Of the total operating costs, excluding capital servicing costs, what percentage was paid to the private sector.
(3) What percentage of capital expenditure was paid to the private sector.
(4) -What was the import component of the (a) noncapital servicing operating costs and (b) capital expenditure.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Australian National Railways Commission has provided the information in the following table:

(a) Labour operating costs (b) Non-labour operating costs-
Fuel Other costs (Materials and Incidentials) Depreciation and Obsolescence Insurance Long Service Leave Superannuation
TOTAL (c) Capital Servicing (interest)
(d) Total expenditure
(e) Capital expenditure

1977-78
109,582
5,447 45,786 13,266
2,927 4,843 10,168
82,437 3,777
195,796
40,300

1978-79 $'000
110,256
8,025 45,858 13,757
4,153 5,170 13,407
90,370 4,112
204,738
49,000

1979-80
118,605
13,975 49,254 13,464
4,606 5,036 13,626
99,961 4,233
222,799
50,600

1980-81 (est)
128,100
20,000 53,700 14,000 4,100 5,400 14,000
111,200 4,900
244,200
37,100

As 1977-78 was the first year of consolidated accounts of the former Commonwealth Railways, South Australian Railways (country lines) and the Tasmanian Government Railways, information for the years 1972-73 to 1976-77 is not available. In addition, the ratio of labour and non-labour for 1977-78 is estimated and is based on the ratio for 1978-79 as the precise figures are not known for that year, as the Commission did not assume full control of the transferred systems until I March 1978.
(2) The percentage of total operating costs, excluding capital servicing costs, paid to the private sector is not readily identifiable. However the Commission has advised that 100 per cent of fuel costs and an estimated 98 per cent of materials costs and 44 per cent of incidental expenditure are paid to the private sector.
(3) The percentage of capital expenditure paid to the private sector is as follows:
1977-78-89 per cent 1978-79-90 per cent 1979-80-91 per cent 1980-81-88 per cent
(4) There has been no import component of (a) noncapital servicing operating costs, and (b) capital expenditure for the years 1977-78 to 1980-81. However, while there have been no significant individual items imported, various purchases of equipment and stores from Australian companies would contain some components that would have been, of necessity, imported. This proportion is not known.
Consultancy Services
(Question No. 2628)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:

' ( 1) What was the precise nature of the consultancy services being provided by Beca Carter, Hollings and Ferfler Pty Ltd at a cost of $126,250 under contract reference G FD 127 referred to on page 44 of the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette No. G 16 of 21 April 1981.
(2) Why was it found necessary to employ outside consultants rather than Departmental officers for the tasks involved.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The decisions by the domestic carriers to introduce wide body jets on their routes brought forward the need to examine the broad options available for the development of Melbourne Airport. To facilitate this, the consultant was commissioned to study and report on the current and long term requirements for terminal facilities, car parking and associated road systems as well as long-term runway development strategy.
(2) The collection of data for this study, and the analysis involved, required the short-term services of a large number of specialists who are not available within my Department.
Allied War Veterans' Pensions
(Question No. 2644)
Mr Young asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, onlO June1981:
(I) How, many applications for Allied War,veterans' pensions were (a) received and (b) granted in 1980 and during the period 1January to 9 June '!981.

968 REPRESENTATIVES 27 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) What was the country of birth and nationality of these applicants or in what armed forces have they served in each war.
(3) How many of the applicants served with (a) regular, (b) irregular or (c) partisan forces, by nationality in each case.
(4) How many partisans, and from what countries, were granted the Allied War veterans' pension during the same period as that referred to in part (I).
(5) How many persons are presently waiting for their pensions to be granted, by nationality, and what is the average waiting period between application and the granting of the pension.
(6) What sum was spent during the period referred to in part (I) on the Allied War veterans' pensions.
(7) What is the situation in relation to the payment of this pension to those who served with (a) the Greek partisans, (b) the Italian army, (c) Yugoslav'partisans, (d) Russian soldiers and partisans, (e) Vietnamese, (f) Kampucheans under the Pol Pot regime and (g) Afghanistan freedom fighters.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) The number of applications in 1980 from Allied veterans for service pension was 1,200. A further 338 applications were received from I January to 9 June 1981.
(b) In 1980,920 Allied veterans were granted service pensions and from I January to 9 June 1981 the number was 262.
(2) Statistics are not compiled on service pension applications on the basis of country of birth of applicant. Figures on applications, according to the nationality of the forces with which the applicant served, are provided in the following table for the period 7 February 1980 to 9 June 1981. All appl~ cations were in respect of World War" service, except for one Russian World War 1case.

Country

Applications

7 February 1980t09June 1981

Belgium

4

Czechoslovakia

15

Egypt

2

Finland

3

France

14

Greece

338

Italy

5

Netherlands

471

Norway

3

Poland

329

Russia

I

USA

171

USSR

12

Yugoslavia

170

Total

1,538

(3) Statistics are not readily available on the nature of the service in the Allied Forces with which applicants served. The Repatriation Act 1920 requires that, to qualify for service pension, Allied veterans must have served in forces which were not 'irregular forces'.
(4) It is not known how many former partisans have been granted service pension.
(5) As at 9 June 1981 the number of applications undetermined was 97. The following table gives the distribution of outstanding applications according to the nationality of the forces with which the applicant served.

Number of applications

Country

undetermined as at 9 June 1981

--~----------------------~-----

Czechoslovakia

2

France

I

Greece

20

Netherlands

26

Poland

16

USA

5

USSR

2

Yugoslavia

25

Total

97

The average time between application and dispatch of notification for all service pension applications, regardless of whether or not pension is granted, is 49 days. A sepa{ate figure for Allied veterans' pensions is not available.
(6) A precise figure for the amount spent on service pensions to Allied veterans is not available but it is estimated that, for the period 7 February 1980 to 9 June 1981, an amount in the vicinity of $2.7m was paid in service pensions to Allied veterans and $1.6m in service pensions to their wives and widows.
(7) The general position with regard to the service pension eligibility of the forces in question is given below. Caution is needed in applying the information in particular cases as eligibility also depends on other factors.
(a) Former Greek partisans are ineligible for pension as they are considered to have comprised 'irregular' Allied Forces. However, Greek partisans who had prior service with the country's regular armed forces between the date of invasion, 28 October 1940, and the date of capitulation, 31 May 1941, may qualify for pension.
(b) Former members of the Italian Army in World War II would be eligible for pension if they served only in the period 8 September 1943 to the end of the European war on 8 May 1945. The Italian armistice with the Allies was signed on 8 September 1943 and from thatdate some Italian Forces fought with the Allies. Service with the Italian Army prior to 8 September 1943 would disqualify a veteran from pension on the grounds of service with a force which was at war with Australia at the time. Soldiers of the Italian Army in World War I would be eligible for pension, provided they did not also serve in the Italian Forces in World War II prior to 8 September 1943.
(c) Former Yugoslav partisans under Marshal Tito's command are eligible if they served on or after 22 December 1941, the date on which the Ist Proletarian Shock Brigade was proclaimed.
(d) Russian soldiers of World War II are eligible for pension if they served in one of the following periods:
(i) 21 June 1941, the start of the German offensive, to 8 May 1945; and
(ii) 8 August 1945, the date the USSR declared war on Japan, to 14 August 1945, the date the Japanese accepted surrender terms.
Russian soldiers of World War 1 are also eligible for pension.
The partisan movement in the USSR comprised 'irregular' Allied Forces and, thus, its followers do not qualify for pension.
(e) South Vietnamese servicemen who served during the Vietnam conflict would be eligible, but it is emphasised that, like other Allied veterans, they would have to meet the qualification often years Australian residency.

Answers to Questions

27 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 969

(f)-(g) Applicants for service pension on the basis indicated in part (7) (f)-(g) of the question would be ineligible.
The comments about eligibility in part (7) (b) to (e) are made subject to the veterans meeting all the other legisl\ltive criteria.

Natural Disaster Relief
(Question No. 2762)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:

By what sum was the 1980-81 estimate for natural disaster relief assistance to the States lower than the actual expenditure for that year.

Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's queStion:

$68,258,468.

Ansett l,'ransport Industries Ltd

Mr Hunt-On 27 May 1981 (Hansard, page

2663), Mr Campbell asked me a question without

notice cencerning money alleged to be owing tp

the Department of Transport by Ansett

Transport Industries.

.

The following is the answer to the honourable member's question:
F~lIowing a review of rentals of domestic and international
terminals, Ansett Transport Industries in 1975-76 took writs out of the High Court and the Supreme 'Court of Victoria challenging the validity of the resulting increases. '

The Company has since made regular but partial payments 'without prejudice'to its legal position. Rental arrears did not at any stage approach $8m.

The matter has now been resolved and Ansett's rentals for terminals throughout Australia are fully paid at the rlltes'currently fixed by my Department. These, of course, reflect the Government's policy offull cost recovery of airport terminals.

While in the past lease agreements did not provide for payment of interest on arrears of rentals, this matter has now been rectified following consultations with the industry in the Aviation Industry Advisory Council.

Taxation Deductions
Mr Howard-On 26 February 1981 (Hansard, page 233), the honourable member for Barton asked me a question without notice about the effect on Commonwealth taxation reveQue of State and local government charges and imposts. The question was raised in the context of reports that the Sydney City Council was contemplating some form of levy, to be borne by developers, the proceeds of which would go to welfare housing. I undertook to see if I could obtain an assessment of the revenue effect.
As a matter of strict nomenclature, I note that where State and local government charges and imposts are properly paid by a business as business outgoings, and so are deductible under Section 51 (I) of the Income Tax Assessment Act, the payments are costs which are netted off gross income to arrive at assessable income. It is only in respect of concessions, such as the investment allowance or the 20 per cent loading on depreciation rates, that in the strict sense revenue costs or losses on any level of profits can be said to occur.
Nevertheless, State charges and imposts can and do affect Commonwealth revenue which would, Qbviously, be much higher, other things being equal, if those charges and imposts did not have to be paid and charged as business costs. I
However to measure the effect is not a simple matter because the available data on State and local government charges and imposts are not readily dissectable between payments by businesses and payments by private persons or exempt bodies. As well, some charges and imposts borne by private persons (private rates for example) can attract an income tax rebate where the taxpayer's total concessional expenditure exceeds $1590.
Against that background, and as a broad indicator only, I note that, in 1978-79, State and local governments collected $425 million by way of 'business' taxes (liquor taxes, road taxes, fire brigade contributions and business franchises); $1,529 million by way of pay-roll tax; and $3,296 million by way of other taxes borne by households and by businesses. The whole of the 'business' taxes, most of the pay-roll tax and a substantial proportion of the other taxes would be tax deductible. The additional revenue that would have resulted if those amounts had not been allowed as outgoings properly deductible under Section 51 (I) would probably have been in excess of $1 ,0OOm. I note also that State governments receive certain royalty payments from businesses. Along with land rent, these amounted to about $305m in 1978-79. There would be some further impact on Commonwealth revenues from that.


