House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 121, 1981 Tuesday, 10 March 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 549

Tuesday, 10 March 1981

Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.

PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:

Metric System
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
That the plan to obliterate the traditional weights and measures of this country is causing and will cause widespread inconvenience, confusion, expense and distress.
That there is no certainty that any significant benefits or indeed any benefits at all will follow the use of the new weights and measures.
That the traditional weights and measures are eminently satisfactory.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Metric Conversion Act be repealed, and that the Government take urgent steps to cause the traditional and familiar units to be restored to those areas where the greatest inconvenience and distress are occurring, that is to say, in meteorology, in road distances, in sport, in the building and allied trades, in the printing trade, and in retail trade.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann, Mr Duffy and Mr Scholes.
Petitions received.

Metric System

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the' undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-

That the plan to obliterate the traditional weights and measures of this country does not have the support of the people;

That the change is causing and will continue to cause, widespread, serious and costly problems; -

That the compulsory tactics being used to force the change are a violation of all democratic principles.

Your petitioners therefore pray:

That the Metric Conversion Act be repealed to ensure that the people are free to utilize whichever system they prefer and
so enable the return to imperial weights and measures wherever the people so desire;

That weather reporting be as it was prior to the passing of

the Metric Conversion Act;

-

That the Australian Government take urgent steps to cause the traditional mile units to be restored to our highways;

That the Australian Government request the State Govern-
ments to procure that the imperial and metric systems be taught together in schools.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Good luck and Mr Lusher.

Petitions received.

Funding ofChildren's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at leastthe real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 budget, and further, that annual budget allocations in the area of childrens services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mountford and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That merchant seamen have in the p~stserved in
theatres ofwar; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the 'Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (I920) Section lOO (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
by Mr Humphreys and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Human Rights In Romania
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Romania~ Government is committing genocide against the three million strong native born Hungarian population in Romania, as defined in Articles II. and III. oLthe United Nations Convention on the Crime of Genocide, which facts are well documented in the reports of the Amnesty International, the Minority Rights Group, the ,International League of Jurists, etc.
That the Article' IV. of the Convention states that: 'Persons committing genocide or any other acts enumerated in Article III. shall be punished, whether they are constitutionally responsible rulers, public officials or private individuals.'
That the Article VIII. of the Convention states: 'Any contracting party may call upon the competent organs of the United Nations to take such actions under the Charter of the United Nations as they consider appropriate for the prevention and suppression of acts of genocide or any of the other acts enumerated in Article III.'
As Australia is a Contracting Party to the Convention on the Crime of Genocide, and that the Joint Committee for Foreign Affairs and Defence has already established precedents by having investigated Human Rights violations in other countries.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
1. That the Joint Committee for Foreign Affairs and Defence take up an investigation into the alleged genocide

550 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Petitions

activities of the Romanian Government against its three million native born Hungarians in Romania; and
2. Thatif such investigation should establish that Romania has been engaged in acts of genocide against its Hungarian minorities to call upon the competent organs of the United Nations to take such action under the Charter of the United Nations as they consider appropriate for the prevention and suppression of acts of genocide or any other acts enumerated in the United Nations Convention on the Crime of Genocide.
by Mr Carlton.
Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(l) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Determination No. 503 of 1980
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That the Government's move in attempting to disallow Determination 503 of 1980 which was granted by the full bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has (a) placed in jeopardy the future viability of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission,
(b) and has created a dangerous precedent for trade unions in general, by refusing to accept the umpire's decision
2. That the Government has acted in complicity with the Public Service Board in attempting to disallow Determination 503 of 1980 and is thereby attempting to deny Government employees a fair hearing on matters related to redundancy and retrenchment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will (a) reject any moves to disallow Determination 503 of 1980 and to exclude arbitral jurisdiction over any aspect of redundancy redeployment, retrenchment and retirement
(b) repeal existing powers to disallow arbitration determinations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the prospect of the proposed Plant Breeders' Rights legislation. The reasons are as follows:
(1) We believe it will restrict free growing and exchange or sale of non-chemically treated seeds.
(2) We believe it will cause a decline in the genetic diversity of plants as evidenced in Europe following implementation of similar legislation there.
(3) We believe that prolonged public debate is necessary as is a referendum before a final decision is made.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take positive action as soon as possible to arrest the implementation of such legislation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.
Travelling Post Office Service
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the Australian Postal Commission's decision to phase out the Travelling Post Office (T.P.O.) inN.S.W.
The T.P.O. service has given the country people ofN.S.W. a reliable and efficient service for many years. To replace this service with a road system would be a backward step which we believe would result in long delays in mail going to and from country Centres. .
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition to retain the T.P.O. service in N.S.W.

Petitions

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 551

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lusher.
Petition received.
Pornographic Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representativesiil Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we the undersigned, having great concern at the way in which children are now being used in the production ofpornography call upon the Government to introduce immediate legislation:
I. to prevent the sexual exploitation of children by way of photography for commercial purposes;
2. to penalise parents/guardians who knowingly allow their children to be used in the production of such pornographic or obscene material depicting children;
3. to make specifically illegal the importation, publication, distribution and sale of such pornographic child-abuse material in any form whatsoever such as magazines, novels, papers or films;
4. to take immediate police action to confiscate and destroy all child pornography in Australia and urgent appropriate legal action against all those involved or profiting from this sordid exploitation of children.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will protect all children and immediately prohibit pornographic child-abuse materials, publications or films.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr O'Keefe.
Petition received.
Confidential Medical Records
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely concerned by the invasion of privacy caused by Government agents seizing patients' medical records.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, should-
Legislate to protect the private and confidential nature of medical records from scrutiny except on the express and informed consent of the patient or an order from a presidingjudge.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Airline Services
To the Honourable the Sp~aker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting Western Australia and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an

Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley and Mr McLean.
Petitions received.
Intractable Waste Disposal Unit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Honourable petition of the undersigned employees at Government Aircraft Factory, Avalon Airfield respectfully showetli:
Strong opposition to the building of an intractable waste disposal unit in the Geelong District and in particular the Avalon Airfield Area, because the proposed buffer zone includes a working community of 500 employees within t kilometre of the hangar work areas. Also the failure of the EPA to consult with the employees representatives and the possible failure to debate the feasibility of such a unit within the Parliaments both State and Federal.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will intercede on our behalf to prevent any damage to life or limbmental or physical.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howe and Mr Scholes.
Petitions received.
Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respectfully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney'S 047 telephone zone is not only inconvenient but is affecting families, business concerns and employment in the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free.
Petition received.
Oxley Park Post Office
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respectfully showeth:
That the Oxley Park Post Office has served the people of the district well for sixteen years and that its closure would significantly disadvantage local people,' especially aged pensioners living in the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the post office facility at Oxley Park be retained.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free.
Petition received.
Child Care Funding
To the Honourable the Speaker of t,he House of Represeritatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respectfullyshoweth:

552 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Petitions

That we urgently seek from the Federal Government funding for the equipping and maintaining of a neighbourhood children's centre in the existing building provided by the NSW Housing Commission.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government give immediate and considerate attention to our request.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrFree.
Petition received.
Proposed Biennial Review of Pilots
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of the undersigned members of the general aviation industry respectfully showeth that the proposal for a biennial review of pilots should be rejected on the grounds of economic and social-inconvenience when factors such as the vast distances separating citizens living in remote areas of Australia and the proposed operational control are taken into consideration.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the proposal for a biennial review of pilots be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hunt.
Petition received.
Australian Broadcasting Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia assembled. The Petition of certain concerned citizens of Brewarrina and District in the State of New South Wales respectfully sheweth:
(i) That we the citizens of Brewarrina are only currently able to receive the transmission of the Australian Broadcasting Commission's television transmission of the transmission point at Mt Oxley, Bourke.
(ii) That we are most dissatisfied with the programme content in the said Commission's television transmission, in that:
(a) the number of programmes which the said Commission repeats on its television transmission is excessive;
(b) the lack of motion pictures televised on the said Commission's television; and when and if motion pictures are televised, they are shown at irregular intervals and are only in black and white indicating that they were made well in excess of 20 years past;
(c) the lack of sporting progranuI1es which attract wide public interest, for example cricket and tennis; and
(d) the said Commission's indifference to public opinion when programming.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House call upon the Government to allocate funds from the Consolidated Revenue Fund, far in addition to funds currently allocated, and for such funds to be appropriated to the Australian Broadcasting Commission for the purposes of increasing the programme standard (for example, so that the said Commission may be able to buy rights to major sporting events and for purposes of hiring films for televising, such films not being in excess of 10 years old). And in addition your Petitioners humbly pray that action will be taken by the Government through the Australian Broadcasting Commission, to remove and replace the present incumbent who carries out the functions of programming on the television of the Australian Eroadcasting Commission.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hunt.
Petition received.
Aboriginal Community College, North Adelaide
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of the undersigned members of the community of South Australia respectfully showeth:
That the severe budget cut this financial year of $80,000 below the amount needed to maintain the current level of operations, will drastically reduce the effectiveness of the Aboriginal Community College, North Adelaide, South Australia.
That despite ministerial assurances that the College's level of operations would be maintained, the budget cuts will cause the first reduction of student numbers since 1976.
That despite policies of self-management for Aboriginal people, the Aboriginal management of the College and of the Pre-Vocational Training Unit is considered to be under threat.
That the College is no~ at this time being adequately involved in discussions which concern the evaluation report and the future of this College.
That the indicated take over of the Pre-Vocational Training Unit by the Department of Further Education is contrary to the wishes of the Aboriginal people.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will:
Advise your department to allocate additional funds to the College for the current financial year to allow maintenance of the level of operations that have applied since 1976.
Assure the College that it will be fully invoived in discussions over the evaluation report and its recommendations before any decisions are taken on the future funding and management of the College, and instruct your department's officers accordingly.
Advise the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs that it is desirable to extend funding of the Pre-Vocational Training Unit for a further year to allow full discussions and negotiations to take place on its future administrative and financial arrangements.
Ensure that the future of the Aboriginal Community College is guaranteed by a permanent source of funding and the effective retention of its management and control by members of the Aboriginal community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.-
by Mr Hurford.
Petition received.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I inform the House that the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) left Australia yesterday to attend a meeting of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific in Bangkok. The Minister for Education (Mr Fife) will act as Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs until Mr Moore's return on 15 March.

Questions Without Notice

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 553

COMMUNIST CHINA-TASMANIA RELATIONSHIP Notice or Motion
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House expresses dismay and caution at the creation by the Premier of Tasmania of a sister state relationship between the Fujian province of Communist China and the State of Tasmania.
NATURAL DISASTERS Notice orMotion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(1) notes the recent statement by the Prime Minister that he will renegotiate the natural disaster assistance arrangements with the State Premiers at the next Premiers Conference;
(2) protests at this Government's failure to honour its 1976 promise made in this Parliament to introduce a natural disaster insurance scheme; and
(3) calls on the Prime Minister to include in any discussions proposals for such a scheme.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
B52BOMBERS Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Will the Minister for Foreign Affairs assure the House that the Government will not enter into any arrangements with the United States for the staging of B52 bombers in Australia or through Australian territory unless the United States Government agrees that all such flights will not have nuclear weapons on board? Will the Minister also assure the House that this issue will not be obscured by the device of characterising such flights as 'surveillance missions'? Will the Minister also assure the House that the Australian Government will have the power of veto in respect of such flights? Mr STREET-I am sure that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition is aware that this question was discussed in detail during my recent visit to the United States. I said over there and I repeat in this House that I am very satisfied with the progress that has been made in the negotiations. I briefly reported that to the Prime Minister this morning. The Government will consider this question as a matter or urgency. A statement obviously cannot be made today because there has not been sufficient time. I expect the Government to be in a position to make a full statement very shortly.

DEREGULATION OF AMERICAN AIRLINE INDUSTRY
Mr SHACK-Did the Minister for Transport in a speech at the weekend quote from the Airline Newsletter in order to criticise deregulation of the American airline industry? Is it a fact that articles and journals criticising deregulation come from airline operators and that an equal number applauding deregulation come from informed airline consumer groups? Can the Minister explain why he opted for the view of the industry rather than that of the consumers? Is his option Government policy?
Mr HUNT-I think the honourable member for Tangney should have a fair knowledge of Government policy in respect of the two-airline system. Prior to the last election it was announced that the Government would support a two-airline system, and that policy has been adopted by this Government consistently over a period of years. It was against that background that I was authorised to proceed to negotiate a new two-airline agreement. It is true that I have quoted from the Airline Newsletter which is rather revealing. I have no doubt that the statistics taken from this article are correct. If the honourable member has any other source of information I would be pleased if he would let me know. The newsletter advises that two-thirds of American cities on the air map receive less service since deregulation. The United States Department of Transportation figures show that 268, or 66 per cent, of the 465 certificated airports offered fewer seats in March 1980 compared with March 1978, despite a 22 per cent increase in domestic travel in that period. Forty-one per cent of these airports received fewer flights. Over 150 cities have entirely lost the ~ervices of the CAB-certificated airlines that they had before deregulation.
The downgraded services that these cities now receive are characterised by extremely high cost, a soaring subsidy bill and compromises in safety. Where commuter services have replaced regional or trunk carriers, equipment standards have suffered, fares per mile are two or three times those charged by regional or trunk carriers for comparable distances, taxpayers are footing an enormous subsidy bill several times what the deregulationists promised it would be and safety has been downgraded significantly. The accident rate for commuters is more than five times as great as it is for the certificated airlines using the index most favourable to the commuters. The cut throat $99 coast to coast or similar fares have trebled and quadrupled since deregulation.

554 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

INTEREST RATES Mr MILTON-I refer the Treasurer to recent decisions of the Commonwealth Bank, the Commercial Bank of Australia and the Bank of New South Wales to increase the interest rate charged on large overdrafts by 0.75 per cent to 14.25 per , cent. Has the Treasurer been made aware of , pressure from the banks for a further rise of up to one per cent in the interest rate on overdrafts of less than $100,000 and on home loans? Is the Treasurer concerned at the prospect of a further round of 'interest rate increases? As these last large overdraft interest rate increases have been justified by the banks' higher cost of borrowing, does the Treasurer acknowledge that the Government's decision to remove restrictions on bank deposit rates has made a further round of interest rate increases more likely?
Mr HOWARD-Let me take the last part of the honourable gentleman's question first. I believe that the Government's decision taken last December to free deposit rates from official controls was a sensible long term economic decision and will make a greater contribution in the longer term to a more realistic set of circumstances in Australian financial markets. I believe that those who argue that governments are better able to pick the level of interest rates than the pressure of market forces are in the long term proved to be mistaken. As the House will know, I have never made it a practice to predict the future level of interest rates. We have to recognise that there are very considerable demands for funds in the community at present because of, amongst other things, the rate of private sector development. If governments, both Commonwealth and State, want to make a contribution towards reducing pressure on interest rates they should stop talking about arbitrary Government regulations and continue to contain and further reduce the size of their own borrowing requirements.
GREAT BARRIER REEF: CROWN OF THORNS STARFISH
Mr BRAITHWAITE-My question is directed to the Minister for Science and Technology. The Minister will be aware of the concern felt by north Queenslanders for the Great Barrier Reef and the threat posed to that great national asset by the crown of thorns starfish. Will the Minister advise what progress can be reported on research by the authorities on the crown of thorns? "
Mr THOMSON-I share the concern of the honourable member for Dawson for the effect of the crown of thorns starfish on the Great Barrier Reef. It is a very difficult problem. Research has

been going on for at least 10 years and we still need to know a great deal more about the life cycle and habits of the crown of thorns starfish. All the expert advice that we have had so far seems to indicate that the crown of thorns starfish is not a threat to the reef as a whole although, of course, it is a threat to particular regions of the reef. There is also some expert opinion to the effect that this is a natural phenomenon and that it has occurred quite frequently in the past.
There has been some very interesting research in Guam by United States scientists. My colleague, the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, has asked that results of that research be made available. Research is continuing. Research is being done by both the Australian Institute of Marine Science and the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority. My personal experience of this phenomenon is that reefs which were devastated 10 years ago have now regenerated to the extent that it is not possible to see that crown of thorns starfish have been there. It is not possible to say that the affected reefs are exactly the same as they were 10 years ago as we did not know much about them at that time.
PENSIONERS: TAXATION Mr LEO McLEAY-I draw the Treasurer's attention to the fact that this week is Senior Citizens' Week in his home State of New South Wales. I remind him that pensioners who now earn the $20 a week allowed by the Social Services Act before their pension' fringe benefits are affected will be required to pay over $100 income tax this year and, indeed, some may be required to pay provisional tax. I ask the Treasurer: Will the Government introduce retrospective legislation to raise the tax exempt threshold to $4,500 per annum so as not to penalise further those Australians who have toiled to make this country what it is today?
Mr HOWARD-I am aware of the senior citizens' activities in New South Wales at present. The honourable gentleman knows as well as I do that the customary time for matters of that nature to be looked at is when the Budget is being put together later in the year. I can assure the honourable gentleman that that proposition, no doubt along with a large number of other propositions, will be put to the Government. In fact, last week I received a delegation from the national pensioner body which spent some three-quarters of an hour with me putting certain proposals as it saw them for changes which might be of benefit to pensioners throughout Australia. They are matters which will naturally be taken into account when the Budget is being put together.

Questions Without Notice

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 555

I take the opportunity to remind the honourable gentleman that the number of people who now might be paying income tax for the first time as a result of changes in the combination of the tax free threshold and the amount of permissible earnings and who would in turn be obliged to.pay provisional tax would be very slight indeed. Perhaps the honourable gentleman has forgotten that in the Budget before last the minimum amount of non-salary income on which provisional tax was required to be paid was lifted from $400 to $1,000. As a consequence the number of people in that category would be very small indeed.
HOME SAVINGS GRANT SCHEME Mr EWEN CAMERON - Is the Minister for Housing and Construction aware of recent criticism of the Home Savings Grant Scheme voiced by some sections of the building industry? Can he inform the House what steps he is taking to ensure that the Scheme remains of value to first home buyers? Mr McVEIGH - Yes, I am aware of the somewhat veiled criticisms of the Home Savings Grant Scheme by certain sections of the building industry in Australia. But I am delighted at the veiled support conveyed in the question asked by the Honourable member for Indi. Some of the facts are worth reiterating. Since the Scheme was introduced in 1964 some 567,000 Australian first home buyers have been assisted by the allocation of $364m. More importantly, since the new Scheme was implemented some four years ago 181,000 Australian home buyers have been assisted in the sum of$186m. I emphasise that I am referring to the new scheme. I sat in this House on 16 April 1975 when the then Minister for Housing and Construction, the honourable Les Johnson, brought in legislation to do away with the Home Savings Grant Scheme. That legislation, denying Australian first home buyers the Home Savings Grant Scheme, was assented to by the Governor-General on 4 June of that year. The scheme is effective. Indicative of the support it is receiving in Australia is that the number of applications this year, on an Australia-wide basis, is 20 per cent higher than last year. The increase in Victoria-I know this will please the honourable member for Indi-was 40 per cent. Obviously, the commitment of the Government last year in the election campaign to widen the scheme has received the approval of the Australian people. We note that for the first time assistance has been given to families. It is a commitment of this Government to assist families. Even with a very minimum saving, families with one child can get a

grant of $500 and families with two children can get a grant of $1,000. That assistance is very important to those families.
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the Minister to bring his answer to a conclusion.
Mr McVEIGH-I conclude on this point: The Government has widened the scheme to allow people to get a grant provided the purchase price of a house is under $70,000. This has helped people in Sydney where, unfortunately, home prices are high due to the inability of the New South Wales Government to contain land costs. The scheme also assists people in outback Australia who face difficulties on account of transport costs.
PROGRAMS FOR INTELLECTUALLY HANDICAPPED CHILDREN
Dr JENKINS-My question is addressed to the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security. When will the Schonell report on Australia's 17 early intervention programs for in- ~enectually handicapped children be completed? Is it a fact that failure to complete this report is preventing funding for these programs, including the Education Program for Infants and Children at the Preston Institute of Technology in the Scullin electorate; beyond 31 March this year? In these circumstances are the projects to close?
Mr HUNT-I do not have the answer at my disposal. I will get it from the Minister as early as I can and convey the information that the honourable member requires as-soon as possible.
TAXATION: TRANSFER PRICING Mr BAUME-I draw the Treasurer's attention to reports that aluminium companies, in particular the Aluswisse company, have either avoided or paid minimal company tax in Australia arising from artificial transfer prices. What are the facts of this matter? What are the Treasurer's intentions in this respect? Mr HOWARD-I cannot inform the honourable member for Macarthur of the precise taxation position of the company to which he referred. As with individuals, the taxation affairs of companies in Australia are subject to the secrecy provisions of the taxation law and those details are not available to me. By way of a general response to the question, I inform the House that the Government, particularly as a consequence of the decision of the High Court some months ago in the Commonwealth Aluminium Corporation case, has been considering amendments to section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act which deals with the practice of tf?nsfer pricing. We will be able to advance those amendments further

556 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

when preparation of new section 260 has been completed. It is thought at this stage that much of the new section 260 may cover ground that might otherwise have been covered by the new section 136.
I remind the honourable gentleman that it is not tax avoidance or abnormal in any way for certain mining companies to have the benefit of tax concessions in the early years of their operations. As the House will know, this Government introduced in 1976-quite properly in my view-a number of taxation incentives which were designed to encourage greater investment in the mining. industry in Australia. Naturally, the application of those incentives would have an effect upon the taxable income of the individual companies. Those incentives have been very beneficial in encouraging investment in the mining industry and the Government makes no apology for them. Of course, at the same time it wishes to make clear that it will look very carefully at the law insofar as it relates to transfer pricing because quite obviously that is a practice which ought to be effectively curbed by the income tax law. Where there are deficiencies in that regard we will take action to remedy them.
SOCIAL SECURITY-APPEALS TRIBUNAL
Mr SCOTT-My question is directed to the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security. In view of the statement by the former Minister for Social Security, Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle, last September that when Social Security Appeals Tribunals heard appeals against a medical decision a doctor would be included on the tribunal, and the present Minister's statement of 5 March this year, almost six months later, that he regrets the delay in setting up tribunals which include a doctor, I ask: Will the Minister advise how many invalid pensioners have since September 1980 gone before tribunals which have not included a doctor? Will such invalid pensioners have an opportunity to go before a tribunal which includes a doctor? If not, why not? How many appellants have been refused an invalid pension, having gone before a tribunal which did not include a doctor? How many invalid pensioners have had their appeals delayed because of the failure to appoint doctors to the Social Security Appeals Tribunals?
Mr HUNT-The honourable member raises a very important question but, of course, I do not have that sort of detail at my disposal. I will ensure that the Minister provides the information that the honourable gentleman has sought.

HIGH TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRIES: VENTURE CAPITAL
Mr FISHER-Has the Minister for Science and Technology seen recent Press reports which have accused Australian financiers of failing to provide venture capital for high technology industries? Is the substance of the articles true? If so, what is being done about them?
Mr THOMSON-I have seen the Press reports and I am very concerned about the problem of raising venture capital for high technology industries. There is no doubt that as Australia goes into the next century it will need increasingly to invest in high technology. At the moment this is difficult because many banks and financial institutions do not understand the requirements of the new very high technology industries.
About ten days ago my Department organised a forum in Melbourne, attended by bankers, financiers and representatives of industry, to discuss the matter. The forum was called 'Creating high technology industries: Roles for the financial market' and the aim was to discuss practical steps to accelerate the commercial application of high technology in Australia by Australians. The forum was a great success, but it did show that there was still a great gap in understanding between industry and financial institutions.
Last week, and again this morning, I discussed the matter with Sir Ian McLennan, the President of the Academy of Technological Science and I requested that the Academy organise a symposium, attended by bankers and industry, to discuss this problem in an attempt to bring about more understanding throughout the community.
Mr Hurford-Will you invite the shadow Minister next time?
Mr THOMSON-I assure the honourable member that the shadow Minister will be invited. It is a very important matter. Sir Ian, as well as being the President of the Academy, is the Chairman of the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd, so a number of bankers should be present. No doubt it will take some time to organise, but it will be well organised and should be a success. I can assure all these very exciting new firms, which are mostly composed of young men with great ideas, that the Government is aware of the problems and will do its best to help.
ALUMINIUM COMPANIES: COST OF ELECTRICITY
Mr HAYDEN-I refer the Prime Minister to the statement of the Minister for National Development and Energy that the Government has no information on what State instrumentalities are

Questions Without Notice

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 557

charging the aluminium companies for energy and that it is not a matter of concern for the Commonwealth. Is the Prime Minister aware of comments by the Treasury in its submission to the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources that there is evidence that 'some authorities' general pricing practices may not be consistent with efficient resource allocation, or with maximising the benefits to Australians of expanding the aluminium industry and other resource-based activities'? In the light of these comments will the Prime Minister reconsider this important issue, or does he endorse the view that it is not a matter of concern for the Commonwealth that scarce and expensive resources requiring Loan Council approval are being recreantly squandered to subsidise the profits of foreign corporations?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I have not seen a transcript of what was said at that Senate inquiry. Obviously I have seen Press reports but my understanding is that the transcript will not be available until Thursday or Friday of this week. Therefore, there are only Press reports available and I would prefer to look at the actual text of the documents. I find the thrust of the honountble gentleman's question intriguing because I seem to remember that in the past there have been certain arguments about world parity pricing for oil. The Government has argued that because oil is a scarce resource and because we have to import a significant part of our requirements world parity pricing--
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I wish to raise a point of order and correct the Prime Minister. It is not a matter of the transcript being available; a submission is generally available and I thought it would have been drawn to his attention.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-On many occasions the Leader of the Opposition raises as points of order matters which he well knows are not points of order. He does it to interrupt Question Time because he cannot take the answers. If I want to answer questions in relation to what anyone might have said it is not only a matter of what is in the original document but also a matter of the transcript of the questions and answers.
Mr Hayden-You don't read them, or at least you don't understand them.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I ask the Leader of the Opposition to remain silent. lie has asked his question and I ask .him to listen to the answer in silence.

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Over the last 18 months or so we have had discussions about world parity pricing for oil. We have argued that because oil is in short supply around the world and because Australia has to import supplies of oil to make up a deficiency in Australian productionfor certain categories of oil all our requirements have to be imported-world parity pricing as applied by the Government should be applied. We have argued that in the course of elections. I would have thought that trying to apply the same principle to another commodity such as coal, in which there is a surplus of production in Australia-much more than we need for our own purposes; a very significant surplus for exports to' help meet the requirements of energy short countries-is quite another matter. If States wish to gain some advantages for their own industries, and hence employment, by providing electricity cheaper than would be the. case if world parity pricing were applied to the coal which was used to make electricity in those States, I believe that is il prerogative of the State governments and it is something which successive State governments, as I understand it, have done. It is odd to find the honourable gentleman suggesting that world parity pricing or something akin to it should be applied to coal used by electricity commissions in this country. Let him take up that argument with Mr Wran, as well as with Mr Hamer.
INTEREST RATES
Mr DONALD CAMERON-My question of the Treasurer is supplementary to a question asked earlier about interest rates. Does the Government believe supply and demand have a bearing on interest rate levels in a free market? Has the Treasurer established what percentage of the money demand is being created by speculators and others seeking investment solely for capital gains tax free profit? How much of the interest rate can be directly attributed to the speculator boil, and is the Government considering a moderate form of capital gains tax to take the pressure off money demand and bring about a more equitable sharing of the tax burden?
Mr HOWARD-I am afraid that I am not able to-give a precise quantitative description of how much of any given level of demand for funds is due to speculative activity. Some honourable members on the other side of the House may not agree with me but I regard a certain degree of speculation as being a proper and legitimate part of the market process. The idea that every kind of speCUlation is horrid and something at which people ought to throw up their hands is an unrealistic notion. I would have thought that the

558 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

Government's position on the introduction of a capital gains tax had been made fairly clear. The precise answer to the last part of the question is no.
DRUG OFFENDERS Mr KENT-Has the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs agreed to consider tougher action against drug offenders, including deportation? If so, will the Minister consider also the deportation of Central Intelligence Agency agents connected with drug running operations of the Nugan Hand bank? Mr MACPHEE-Last year in this Parliament I tabled a statement of Government policy regarding the deportation of drug offenders. That policy ,has been applying for the past 12 months and will continue to apply. Certainly if any of the people to whom the honourable member has referred exist and if they are found guilty by the Australian courts of those offences they will come within the policy guidelines and will be treated accordingly.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE Mr TUCKEY-Is the Minister for Defence aware of threats of boycott made against the Royal Australian Air Force? Is the Minister also aware of the provisions of section 30K of the Crimes Act which makes such a threat of boycott of person or property subject to a penalty of one year's imprisonment? If so, has the Minister any plans to invoke this section in the circumstances mentioned? Mr Leo McLeay-He is too busy trying to gaol Bob Katter. Mr KILLEN-We would need a lot of rope for the honourable member for Grayndler. I excuse myself from offering a legal opinion. The honourable member for O'Connor may well find it too expensive. My attention has been drawn to statements attributed to one trade union leader. I would not seek to trespass into the field of my friend, the Minister for Industrial Relations. Clearly, any attempt which was made to impair or to reduce the operational capability of the Royal Australian Air Force would have to be viewed with the utmost seriousness by the government of the day, irrespective of its political complexion. I would like to think that certainly from this side of politics there would be a proper response.
EAST TIMOR Mr HOWE-I address my question to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I preface it with some information. On 6 October the Portuguese representative at the United Nations presented to

the Secretary-General a communique of Lisbon's Council of Ministers concerning East Timor. According to the communique the Portuguese Government, bearing in mind its constitutional commitment to self-determination for East Timor, will seek consultation with various bodies and governments, including the Australian Government, to seek a solution to the East Timor problem. Has the Government been approached by the Portuguese Government for consultations on the matter of self-determination for East Timor? If so, when did those consultations occur and what matters were discussed? If not, does the Australian Government intend to participate in ,consultations with the Portuguese Government with a view to ensuring a proper decolonisation of East Timor in which th~ East Timorese may determine their own future?
Mr STREET-I am aware of the document to which the honourable member refers. Through diplomatic channels approaches were made to Australia to be involved in the sorts of discussions to which the honourable member referred. The Australian Government does not feel it can play any role in that process.
FAMILY ALLOWANCE Mr LES JOHNSON-My question is directed to the Treasurer. Has the failure to raise the family allowance in the last five years to make up for inflation meant that a mother of two children now receiving $36.90 a month has been penalised to the extent of $19.70 a month, and should be receiving $56.60 a month? Is it also the case that families with three children have lost $33.60 a month, families with four children $47.50, and families with five children $63.65? Is any action contemplated to restore in real terms the family allowance to its 1976 value? Mr HOWARD-I thank the honourable member for Hughes for those calculations. I will have them analysed and if there is anything in them that deserves further comment or correction I will let the honourable gentleman know. I am sure he has put them together in a conscientious and objective fashion. I remind him that the family allowance, of course, is not the sole criterion of the overall living standards of Australian families. I remind him of the enormous strides that this Government has taken in improving economic conditions in Australia and of how wrong the predictions of members of the Opposition, including those of the honourable member for Hughes, have proved to be about Australia's economic conditions. I remind him of the incalculable contributions to the living standards of Australian families made by the very successful assault upon

Questions Without Notice

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 559

inflation by this Government over the last five years.
ALUMINIUM COMPANIES: COST OF ELECTRICITY
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister a question supplementary to the last question I asked him. Has he had the opportunity to consider an article on the pricing of electricity to Alcoa of Australia Ltd at Portland which has been drawn together by Dr Swan of the Australian National University? Has he noted in that article the economic assessment of the provision of energy to Alcoa from Loy Yang at well below cost? Dr Swan further said that this implies a subsidy of $84m a year or $2,522m over the 30-year life of the smelter. How does the Prime Minister justify the squandering of scarce public infrastructural capital, approval for which is provided by the Australian Loan Council in which he participates?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The States are responsible for certain matters-whether it is the Victorian Government in Victoria or Mr Wran and his Government in New South Wales in relation to refineries in the Hunter River area.
COMMONWEALTH OF NATIONS Mr N. A. BROWN-I ask the Prime Minister whether there is now any value to Australia in its remaining a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. Is it fair or accurate to describe the Commonwealth as an anachronistic institution and a talking shop of dubious value? What is an accurate description of the modern Commonwealth today? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The reference to the Commonwealth of Nations as an anachronism or a talking shop, which was mentioned in the question, might well have been relevant to the Commonwealth 20 or 30 years ago. It was a very old fashioned view, and that is probably the kindest thing that can be said of it. If it were a Commonwealth of five white nations it would be an anachronism, it would be irrelevant to today's world in terms of being able to solve problems or to help to come to a meeting of minds on matters of some importance, not only to the Commonwealth but also to the wider international community. The Commonwealth-whether it be in negotiations for the Common Fund, in the general North-South issues or in coming to a common view at Gleneagles about the problems of apartheid-has been able to achieve a notable meeting of the minds, not least at the last Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in relation to the settlement in Zimbabwe.

Indeed, if the Commonwealth is a talking shop, a waste of time, an anachronism, it is a re~ markable thing that so many Prime Ministers have been prepared to give up so much of their time to take part in that waste of time. Prime Ministers-not in any order of precedence, priority or importance-such as Pierre Trudeau, Margaret Thatcher and her predecessors, Indira Gandhi and her predecessors, Harry Lee from Singapore and many others, have always participated in Commonwealth Heads of Govern~ ment meetings. Did I hear a member of the Opposition say that is a great list? Did some honourable member suggest that was not a list of significant Commonwealth Prime Ministers? It would be a strange view in support of the Leader of the Opposition if that were to find credence on the back bench of the Australian Labor Party Opposition. These Prime Ministers and others from Africa and nearly every other continent in which there are Commonwealth countries-and in the Caribbean-have found it worth their while to participate in Commonwealth conferences.
It is not a question now of the Commonwealth having to assert what it is. The Commonwealth is happy to be defined in terms of its achievements and its contributions in resolving problems in a difficult and sometimes hostile world. I do not believe any other major international organisation has the same kind of harmonious record and record of achievement as has the Commonwealth. The only conclusion that can be drawn from the remarks made by the Leader of the Opposition last week is that he knows he will never be called upon to represent Australia at any Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting.
SOUTH AFRICAN AIRWAYS Mr CAMPBELL-I direct a question to the Treasurer. Is it a fact that South African Airways enjoys complete sales tax exemption under Schedule I, item 72A, of the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act? Is it true that neither Qahtas Airways Ltd nor British Airways enjoys such exemptions? Is it not anomalous that the country should be affording such support to a competing airline? Is it not inconsistent with the Government's foreign policy that such support should be afforded to a racist regime in South Africa? What remedy does the Government propose to the situation?
Mr HOWARD-I do not know the full circumstances of the matter. Before commenting further I will find out the circumstances and inform the House in response to the honourable gentleman's question.

560 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

AUSTRALIAN TOURISM: GROWTH PATTERN
Mr JULL-The Minister for Industry and Commerce would be aware of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development report during the weekend of the growth pattern in Australian tourism. Does he have figures to indicate how many international visitors came to Australia in 1980? Is the growth pattern referred to by the OECD continuing or are the oil price and the rapidly increasing price of international air tickets in and out of Australia having their effect?
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-I have seen the comments by OECD on the prospective growth patterns for the number of tourists coming to Australia. I can say with very considerable confidence that those figures are well supported by the figures we have of the number of tourists who came to Australia in 1980. The number ,was just under 900,000. I anticipate, with a degree of confidence, that that number will increase to, one million during 1981 and that the spending pattern in Australia will be approximately $l,OOOm.
It is fair to say to the House that this Government has done more for the tourist industry than any government in federal history. The House is very much aware of the diverse number of programs that certainly have underpinned the very strong recovery which the industry has made in recent years. If one tracks the number of tourists coming to Australia during the latest period for which figures are available; that is, from January to November of last year, then~ was an increase of some 13 per cent. By way of comparison, for the judgment of the House, the increase in the number of persons travelling abroad was some 2.2 per cent.
In summary, the industry can have very significant confidence in its prospects for the whole of the 1980s and beyond. As I mentioned in this House on an earlier occasion, this industry is as important as Australia's automotive industry, in terms of the contribution it makes to the gross domestic product, and is not far behind the contribution made by Australian energy and mineral industries. I thank the honourable gentleman for his question.
AUSTRALIAN FILM INDUSTRY Dr KLUGMAN-My question is directed to the Treasurer. What is the estimated cost to Treasury in loss of revenue during the next three years of the extremely generous tax concessions for investment in Australian films announced in December 1980 and promised during the 1980

election campaign? Is it true that $60m worth is already in the pipeline? Is it true that in gratitude the Film and Television Producers Association of Australia is producing a documentary hagiography of Messrs Ellicott and Howard?
Mr HOWARD-The cost estimate which was given to me at the time the decision was made by the Government prior to the general election was less than $1Om on an annual basis. At this stage I have not received any information which revises that estimate. I agree with the honourabl~ gentleman that it is a generous concession. I remind him and other members of the House that the Australian film industry has experienced a remarkable degree of growth and has won very wide respect and acclaim around the world. That ought to be a source of satisfaction to the honourable members on both sides of the House as it is an illustration of the way in which excellence can belong to a number of people in Australia.
I do not know whether the figure of $60m is in the pipeline. I do not imagine that people in the Australian Taxation Office would know that either, or indeed that they would be in a position to tell me whether in fact they did know. I have to inform the honourable gentleman that, as will be apparent when the legislation is introduced into this Parliament, which I hope will occur during the current session, the legislation will contain as many safeguards against abuse and tax avoidance as are consistent with the nature of the concession. I can assure the honourable gentleman, and through him sound a warning to those people who might see in this new concession an opportunity for abuse and extensive tax avoidance practices, that if such abuse does arise the Government will not hesitate to take action to respond to it. As to the final part of the honourable gentleman's question, I am flattered by the suggestion but I know nothing about it.
TRANS-AUSTRALIA AIRLINES Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) -Pursuant to section 40 of the Australian National Airlines Act 1945, I present the annual report of Trans-Australia Airlines for 1979-80. Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
ANSETT TRANSPORT INDUSTRIES LTD Mr HUNT (Gwydir~Minister for Transport)
-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual financial report relating to the operation of air services by Ansett Transport Industries Ltd.

Personal Explanations

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 561

Motion (byMrSinclair)'proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
TRANS-TASMAN SHIPPING Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-For the information of honourable members, I present a report published by the Bureau of Transport Economics concerning TransTasman shipping for 1980. Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN MANUFACTURING COUNCIL
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH (Flinders~Minister for Industry and Commerce)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Australian Manufacturing Council's annual report for 1979-80.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect)-Mr Speaker, I seek leave to make a personal explanation. Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman claims to have been misrepresented he may proceed. Dr KLUGMAN-At page 1 of today's Sydney Morning Herald an article by Dennis Shanahan states:
More than 20 Federal parliamentarians are expected to attend a reception at the Soviet Embassy tomorrow night, but the Embassy has refused to supply any details of the dinner.
The reception, for the members of the Senate and joint House. committees on foreign affairs and defence, was planned some time ago.
As the article states that more than 20 parliamentarians were involved and there are only 21 members of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, the implication is that all members of the Joint Committee, firstly, have been invited and, secondly, will attend. I have received. no such invitation. That might be because I was a member of the sub-committee which inquired into human rights in the Union of Soviet Socialist RepUblics. Had I been invited I would have accepted, as I am happy to argue with anybody.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes)-l claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman wish to make a personalexplanation.
Mr LE8 JOHNSON-Yes. Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.

Mr LES JOHNSON-Thank you, Mr Speaker. During Question Time the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) told the House that I, as the Labor Minister for Housing and Construction, had proposed to wind down the Home Savings Grant Scheme. His misrepresentation is the result of his failure to indicate that I had concurrently announced that the' scheme was being replaced by a better scheme involving tax deductibility of mortgage interest payments. He also failed to mention that that scheme was in fact introduced by the then Labor Government and, unlike the Home Savings Grant Scheme, it provided benefits not only to first home buyers but also to all people purchasing homes..
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member is now debating the matter. He will resume his seat.
Mr BURR (Wilmot)-Mr Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman should indicate to me in advance his intention to make a personal explanation. I ask him to do so in future. Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr BURR-Yes, I do. Mr SPEAKER-Does he wish to make a personal explanation? Mr BURR-Yes, I do. Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed. Mr BURR-Mr Speaker, Senator McLaren, in a speech in the Senate on 5 March, quoted from a speech I had made in the House on 25 February. The quotations from my speech that Senator McLaren used were taken quite out of context. They were presented in such a way as to mislead the Senate and the Parliament, and they were not reflective of the thrust of my speech. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. I indicate to the honourable gentleman that in making a personal explanation he is entitled to state the misrepresentation and state the correction. He is not entitled to debate the matter. Mr BURR-One brief quotation that Senator McLaren used from my speech was:
Parliament is dominated by the all pervading party political interests and by the selfish ambition to have and to exercise power.
Senator McLaren went on to try to implicate that part of my speech with the events oflate 1975. He indicated that I was referring to those events. In fact, I had no such thing in mind. What I was trying to point out and what the whole tenor of my speech intended to convey was that the structures

562 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Personal Explanations

of Parliament are not adequate to give Parliament the scrutiny it needs over the Executive Government and the Public Service. I think that recent events demonstrate the point I was trying to make.
Senator McLaren also used part of a quotation-I will not refer to the whole of the quotation-to imply that I was criticising the Liberal Party for exercising discipline and control over members of the party in this Parliament. As I said, the quotation used by Senator McLaren was taken out of context. I went on in my speech to criticise the discipline over members of the Australian Labor Party. My purpose for pointing out these things was to show that members on both sides of the House do not have the opportunity to represent their constituents in a full way because of the discipline that is exercised by both parties. It was not a purposeful criticism of either party. I wanted to point out--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is now debating the issue.
BROADCAST OF PROCEEDINGS Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Grayndler indicated that he wished my indulgence to raise a point with me. Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler)-:-Mr Speaker, I understand that the Joint Statutory Committee on the Broadcasting of Parliamentary Proceedings has made a report recommending that the adjournment debate of both this House and the Senate be broadcast. Mr Barry Jones-We recommended that in 1978. Mr LEO McLEAY-That is quite correct. It recommended that the adjournment debate be broadcast on the nights that the proceedings of the House in question were being broadcast. As this is one of the few chances that ordinary members now have to put their points of view in this Parliament I ask you, sir: What progress has been made in the arrangements to have that report implemented? When will the adjournment debate of this House be broadcast? Mr SPEAKER-The first point I make to the .honourable gentleman is that on the dissolution of the Thirty-first Parliament there was no report before this House. It would be necessary for the Joint Committee on the Broadcasting of Parliamentary Proceedings to consider the matter afresh. In fact, more than that issue was in the report of the Broadcasting Committee in the last Parliament. For instance, there was a recommendation from the Broadcasting Committee that excerpts of proceedings in this House be used for

transmission through radio stations, as is done, for example, in the House of Commons. Other matters were also raised. I will be calling a meeting of the Broadcasting Committee on which the honourable gentleman's party is represented. That matter and any other matters which any honourable member wishes to bring to my attention can be raised.
AUSTRALIA'S MINERAL RESOURCES: TAXATION
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The failure of the Government to guarantee the Australian community an equitable share in the exploitation of Australia's mineral i:esources by its negligent disregard for the need to establish a Resources Rent Tax or another appropriate profits relateP taxing mechanism.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (3.l6)-It is very interesting that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) would not come into the House to defend this issue for the Government. This is a resources tax issue. It is abQut taxation. But the Treasurer, who has been very much in the news over the last couple of days for his carpeting of his permanent head, would not come into the House to debate the matter. I think the obvious conclusion one can draw is that he will not contest the issue because he believes in it, as do the Department of the Treasury and the Secretary of the Treasury. In fact, most elements in. the Liberal Party believe that there is a case for a resources rent tax but they are hamstrung by the hamfisted behaviour of the robber barons from the National Country Party represented in this place today by the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) who has decided to put--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is not entitled to use those words about a member of the House. I ask him to withdraw.
Mr KEATING-I withdraw those words, Mr Speaker, to save time. The National Country Party will put its dead hand on the debate once again. The Opposition proposes this matter of public importance because of the Government's failure to guarantee that all Australians share in . the exploitation of our mineral wealth. Never has a government faced such a prospect and such a

Australia's Mineral Resources: Taxation

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 563

challenge as those presented by the development prospects for Australia and yet so miserably squibbed it as has the Fraser Government. The Government luxuriates in this mindless, useless rhetoric about a resources tax endangering investment decisions while the States laugh all the way to the bank. The headline on page 1 of today's Australian Financial Review states: 'BP Wins Great Coal Rush', referring to the Winchester South lease in Queensland. We find that one of the conditions for the granting of that lease is that an extra levy on coal shipments of $1 a tonne, escalating to $4 a tonne, will go to the Queensland Government.
On the front page of the same newspaper it is stated: 'NT's hungry eye on Gove'. We find that the Northern Territory's Chief Minister, Mr Everingham, has said that the Northern Territory Government was looking at the Canadian Alberta scheme as a means of taking a percentage of company profits from the Gove bauxite mine in the Northern Territory. In other words, the Northern Territory Government will have a resources rent tax of its own. Presumably, the wealth of the Northern Territory belongs to the people of the Territory and not to the people of the Commonwealth. These State Ministers have a nerve in developing taxes of this kind. Of course, they are doing this simply because the Commonwealth has negligently vacated the field.
A similar situation applies in Queensland. The Queensland Premier and the Queensland Government have their special kind of resources rent tax. They charge exhorbitant rail freights as a way of extracting an economic rent on the resources which the Queensland Government is handing out. Everingham even had the temerity to say today jn the Press that the Northern Territory does not have railways. He is lamenting the fact that he cannot have a resources rent tax on the railways. It is obvious that everyone except the Commonwealth is in on the act simply because there is enough profitability to impose charges over and above company tax and to cream off the excess to the benefit of the public. While all that goes on the Treasurer and the Government sit on their hands. They are not worried about the national interest. They want to let the wealth accrue to corporations. They turn a. blind eye to the plundering of the States so that there will be no equitable or adequate sharing of the wealth. The States try to fiddle at the edges to find some extra areas in which to raise revenue for themselves.
What is the Government's rationale for its inaction? It says that a risk element is involved in a mining venture. Would anyone argue that there is any risk in the Winchester area? Does anybody

believe that there is no coal there? One hundred companies have applied in a scandalous competition-it is scandalous in the way in which it has been determined-for the rights to leases in that area. If that coal is mined and if prices explode in line with general energy prices, are we to say that because of the risk involved that the wealth belongs to the lucky corporation which is chosen or are we to say that the wealth belongs to the Commonwealth of the Australian people? Obviously it belongs to the Australian people. Certainly the corporations are entitled to a commercial return. No one has ever argued that they should not be. But there is also a return that shOUld accrue to the Commonwealth and not to Queensland, the Northern Territory, New South Wales or any other State. We are a federation. Some States are resource rich while others are resource poor. Are we to argue that only the resource-rich States should take the prizes and the resource-poor States should have a declining standard of living and should not have the revenues available to them that they would have if the States collected the taxes and shared them equitably amongst the public? There must be a reward for risk when there is a genuine risk, but in this case, when there are large coal tracts, the risk is not there. Everyone in the geology business knows that the tracts exist. They have been delineated and defined and there is no essential risk.
The difference between a mining company and any other company is that the State awards to such a company a State asset to exploit. The State does not give a manufacturing company an asset to exploit. Those companies have to use their own commercial acumen. In the mineral industry it is a different case. A State asset is awarded to a company to exploit for its benefit and, as should be the case, for the benefit of the nation as well so that the public of Australia can share in it. But the Government will have none of that. It will sit back while the States get in for their cut with railway schemes, half baked resource taxes and any additional revenue from areas of development that they can get their hands on.
We have read in the newspapers that the Treasurer has carpeted his permanent head, Mr Stone, for daring to suggest that there was an opportunity to pick up further revenue from a resources rent tax. All the Secretary of the Treasury did was to acknowledge a view put by an Opposition senator. What did the Treasurer want his permanent head to say? Did he want him to say that there was no such opportunity to pick up additional revenue in excess of company tax? Was he to sit there mute, to deny the undeniable and obvious? In fact, he was not canvassing support.

564 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Australia's Mineral Resources: Taxation

The Treasurer, not his permanent head, should have been carpeted by Parliament for mounting a Press campaign against his permanent head with out justification, for seeking to deny Parliament legitimate advice on an urgent and topical question, for his contempt of Parliament and its right to information and to question the Executive and its officers and, finally and most importantly, for his failure to guarantee that all Australians share in the development of Australia's resources.
The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said recently during the election campaign and after wards that the Government would guarantee that all Australian families share in the benefit from Australia's mineral exploitation. We on this side of the House ask how that will occur. Whenever a redistributive mechanism such as a resources rent tax is discussed, the Government pooh-poohs it and says that it will not have such a mechanism. One may legitimately ask the Government how the Prime Minister intends to fulfil his commit ment that all Australians will share in the so called resources bonanza. Obviously, this is again empty rhetoric while the corporations which fill the slush f!lnds of the political parties opposite are exempted from the kind of impost which a resources rent tax would apply.
The Treasurer is not here, so I cannot debate it with him. He is very quick at Question Time with his slick, glib replies; he has a big mouth. But he will not slap down the Leader of the Country Party and make certain that the taxation laws of Australia guarantee a fair return to all Australians so that they may benefit from our natural resources. The real opponents of a resources rent tax are the free marketeers of the Country Party, or should we say the free racketeers of the Country Party-the people who all the time are trying to develop avenues for slush funds to guarantee that the mining and resources indus tries stay well within their grip.
One has only to consider the debate that is now taking place between the Department of National Development and Energy and the Department of Trade and Resources, so that the Deputy Prime Minister can not only keep his foot on resources policy but also on energy policy. He wants to con trol uranium and uranium safeguards policy so he is sitting right at the apex of the most prestigious, wealth-generating, dynamic element of the ecoq omy. If the Liberal Party lets the'Country Party get away with that its members are sillier than I think they are.
Let me deal now with the position of the Treasury and make its position clear. In

November 1979 Mr Stone was asked by Senator Tate, in the course of an inquiry:
Are you saying then that a resource rent tax is compatible with allowing market forces to make decisions and with com mercial judgments on exploration, development, extraction projects and so on and that it is just a question of setting a level?
Mr Stone replied:
I believe so. Indeed I think that some of the major resource companies believe so too.
This came from the most market-oriented depart ment of government in this country. It is a depart ment which is always preaching the virtues of the market. Yet what it said then, in the person of the Secretary, was that a resources rent tax was com patible with market forces.
In another submission, in a report on resource development made in May of last year, the De partment said:
The possibility of exceptionally large profits flowing from some resource projects (particularly in the energy area) suggests too that there could be pressures to reconsider the case for a properly designed resources rent tax on highly pro fitable projects.
That is about as far as any department could go, as strongly as it could put the matter. It is fairly strong stuff:
. . . suggests too that there could be pressures to recon sider the case for a properly designed resources rent tax.
So we know where the Department of the Treasury stands. Again, the Interdepartmental Committee on Economic Strategy, which com prises not just Treasury representatives but also representatives of all of the other economic and development departments of the Government, stated last June:
It is also suggested that with potentially very profitable re source projects it may be desirable at some time in the future to consider further the appropriate taxation of 'above-normal' profits or the 'rent' involved.
There it is-from the major interdepartmental committee of the development and economic de partments of the Government. Of course, every major economist in the country says the same thing.
In the United Kingdom, Norway, Canada, Papua New Guinea and the United States wherever one looks one sees such a tax imposed. Indeed, in 1977 the Deputy Prime Minister, in an uncharacteristic burst of candour, said:
Where it seem obvious there might be extensive profits we will be looking at a possible resource tax to trim some of that off so it goes back to the public sector.
We heard some roars then, but they soon faded away. I will not weary the House by quoting what Mr Viner said at the LNG symposium in Califor nia a couple of years ago, but he argued very

Australia's Mineral Resources: Taxation

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 565

cogently then for a resources rent tax, implying into the debate today to discuss this issue instead

that it would not interfere with market forces.

of giving slick, glib answers at Question Time and

We have a very large primary export sector and a large extractive industry. It is incumbent upon the Government to guarantee that Australians share in it. What we have now is a hotch-potch of royalties, freight rates and levies which are inequitable, inefficient, but, more importantly, distort

running away from the real debates which are brought on around substantial issues such as this. 1 hope that for the first time in a long while honourable members will hear some sense from the Deputy Prime Minister and not the National Country Party jingoism we normally experience.

investment decisions and fail to collect an adMr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable

equate return for the Australian people. Of member's time has expired.

course, industries producing certain commodities do not always make extraordinary profits. I refer for instance to the coal industry on the South Coast of New South Wales, which in the last few years has experienced poor prices. I doubt very much that any of them would pay a resources rent tax. In fact, if I were a shareholder in a public company, I would regard it as an accolade for the management if it were able to push the company over the threshold to the point where it could pay a resource rent tax, as proof of performance in being able to generate adequate rates of return and profit.

Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (3.32)-It is an undeniable fact that the resurgence of the Australian economy today and the optimism and hope of this country lie around the prospects of resource development-the development of our minerals. Since this Government came to office in 1975 it has instituted policies to encourage resource development and to develop an air of confidence in the Australian community and for the overseas investor. There is an attitude of sour grapes in the Australian Labor Party because the Government is succeeding. Members of the Labor Party take

So, there is no jingoism on this side of the House every opportunity to denigrate the Australian

about the matter. We do not want to kill the goose mining industry or to find reason to criticise the

that laid the golden egg or come up with punitive Government's policies. The honourable member

taxes which discourage and distort investment but for Blaxland (Mr Keating) bases his claim that

we want an adequate share of the wealth for Austhe Australian people receive little benefit from

tralians. Australian resources are being mined and the development of the mining industry on the ar-

we have a right to collect a rent on resources gument that the mining industries are making, or

which are depleting, which are non-renewable, are likely to make, great profits. He ignores' the

and which belong to the Australian public. They fact that if they do make profits then we collect

are not there for the private interests. I suppose more taxes. The fact of the matter is that the

the BP company is entitled under our investment Labor Party is all too ready to ignore the enor-

laws to apply for a lease such as that at Winchesmous contribution that the mining industry is

ter, but BP is half owned by the British Governmaking to this country. During the period that the

ment. Is the Australian Government saying that Labor Party was in office it deliberately

agencies of foreign governments can come here denigrated and discredited the mining industry in

and mine our resources but not attract an econthis country to lay the ground for bringing for-

omic rent for the Australian people? That is the . ward its policies to nationalise those industries.

effect of its inaction and lethargy in not establishing a' resource rent tax. To go on with the brouhaha we saw when the Secretary to the Treasury was carpeted for daring to suggest that an option of a resource rent tax is viable when there is an excess over company tax available for collectionof course is a piece of blatant hypocrisy by the Government.

The mining industries make a very substantial contribution to our community through taxes, royalties and other charges. The Australian Mining Industry Council recently commissioned a survey covering 81 mining companies. 1 cannot vouch for the accuracy of the results of the sqrvey but I have no reason to question them. The survey showed that those 81 mining companies paid a

There are low cost deposits in this country to be total of $1,013m to governments in 1979-80. The

mined and at times they will attract very high Federal Government received $712m in tax and

prices. The public is entitled to share in the $76m from the coal export levy. To listen to the

benefits of those deposits and we on this side of Labor Party one would think the industry did not

the House, if in government, would establish one pay any tax at all. The State governments

of these taxes immediately, but after discussion received $225m in that year in royalties and other

and consultation with the industry. It is incumpayments. According to the survey, government

bent upon the Government to do that and it is a charges and taxes represented almost 56 per cent

great shame that the Treasurer would not come of the companies' pre-tax operating profits. That

Australia's Mineral Resources: Taxation

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 567

first requirement in this process of encouraging people to involve themselves is to establish the situation in which development can be an attractive proposition.
I believe this Government has created the opportunities and that Australians will now start investing in these developments. It is happening already. In the last two years a number of resource companies have raised more than $1 billion on the Australian capital market. When the new company called Energy Resources of Australiathat is the old Ranger uranium company-was floated, its share issue was massively oversubscribed. This is the sort of thing that must happen if Australians want to have an increased share of the benefits of resource development. The Government, through its foreign investment policy, seeks to encourage the greatest possible Australian participation in development by requiring projects to have, as a general rule, at least 50 per cent Australian ownership, or 75 per cent Australian ownership in the case of uranium projects. It provides an incentive for developers to make opportunities available to Australians to invest in such companies. Ten years ago the Government set up the Australian Industry Development Corporation. Its role is to secure the greatest practicable participation by Australians in the development of their own country's resources.
The Australian Resources Development Bank was set up in 1967 by the trading banks with government support to help Australian companies playa more active role in resource development. The Campbell Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System is charged with making recommendations to ensure that the capital market will be able to meet the demands of the 1980s. One of the major areas the inquiry is looking at is how to ensure that adequate capital is directed to resource development. Honourable members will note that there has been considerable effort by the Government to make possible and to encourage investment in resource development by Australian people. But there are limits to what a government can do. In the end, it is for individuals to make the choices and the judgments, to assess-the risks and the likely rewards. I hope that many Australians will decide that they want to be part of the existing scene and the prospects for greater development in this area. But talk about a resource rent tax and interference by the alternative government, the Labor Party, certainly will discourage people from wanting to take such a risk.
It is clear that the main faCtor underpinning our present growth and expansion is the prospect of resource development. The reasons for this, of

course, are known by everybody. Rising oil costs, the economic advantages of resource developments on a large scale in Australia, the political climate and the economic policies that are presented by this Government are all part of the process of getting developments going in this country. A good deal of credit for Australia's brighter economic circumstances must go to the Government for its continuing and persistent policies in these areas. If honourable members opposite talk in terms of wanting to bring in a resource tax they will set back that program. It has taken a great deal of effort to get confidence where we want it.
Certainly, morale in the mining industry and confidence in this country was at a very low ebb in 1975 when we took office. This was because of the undue interference by government threatening to make enterprises unattractive. That situation has been changed. We are now seeing progress. This Government's policy of giving depreciation allowances on the cash flow situation of resource developments has helped considerably. We have changed many of the export controls which were inappropriate. We have returned to private enterprise mining projects which the Labor Party had socialised, such as the Wambo coal project, the Mareeba tin project, the Cooper Basin project and the Ranger uranium project in the Northern Territory. By getting out of all those. areas it was a sound indication to the world and to Australians that these high risk enterprises can best be undertaken by private enterprise. If there are profits, if there are rewards to be obtained by those companies, the Commonwealth Government and State governments get a very healthy return from them. Indeed today they are getting a very healthy return from these projects by any international standards.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (3.47)-1 think the contribution which was just made by the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) highlights better than any other statement. I have heard the absurdity of the situation in which the Government finds itself, not only in connection with the question of a resources rent tax but also with the general question of taxation in Australia at present. I noticed that the Deputy Prime Minister looked to some of his colleagues sitting on the Government benches for confirmation of some of the points that he was making. That confirmation was not forthcoming.
Government supporters interjecting~
Mr ROBERT BROWN-I was paying them a compliment. If they choose not to accept it, that is a decision for them to make. Implicit in the point I was making was a compliment to honourable

568 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Australia's Mineral Resources: Taxation

members opposite to the effect that what they I want to make special reference to the fact that

should be doing-perhaps they were doing the significance and the practical value of a re-

this-is recognising the fact that the policy sources rent tax has been completely misunder-

adopted by the National Country Party in constood and misconstrued, perhaps quite delibera-

nection with a resource development tax is contely, by both the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the

trary to the interests of those people in the comDeputy Prime Minister. The Deputy Prime Min-

munity which the National Country Party ister was trying to make a point today which he

purports to represent. Resource development in made last Sunday at his party's national confer-

Australia will be responsible for the development ence. The point he was attempting to make is that

of a great number of problems and a great number the imposition of a resources rent tax would have

of pressures. Many of those problems will devolve the effect of discouraging capital investment in re-

on to the agricultural sector of the Australian source development, particularly in risk areas.

community. We can take as a pattern the apThe simple fact is that a resources rent tax is the

proach to this question which has been undermost coherent, effective, efficient and equitable

taken in. the Province of Alberta in Canada. It form of taxing profits on resource development, .

imposed a resource rental tax. I remind members because it makes it possible to do away with what

of the NaJional Country Party that the amount of the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keat-

tax revenue that has been generated as a result of ing) referred to as a hotchpotch of royalties,

the introduction of that tax in Alberta in Canada taxes, charges and rates of various kinds. A re-

has been, in a very large measure, redirected sources rent tax would not necessarily go on top of

towards the provision of very low interest loans. those; it could in fact replace them.

This has made it possible for the rural sector in Alberta to adjust to the changing structural situation which prevails as a result of thosedevelopments.

As the name implied, a resources rent tax is a tax on supernormal profits. So the capacity of the developing company to pay that tax would be determined by the profits it is making at the time the

tax is imposed. This is unlike the situation at

That is not happening in Australia. In fact the Government and, in particular, the Deputy Prime Minister and all those people who have been speaking for the Government, have been chopping off the options which are available to them. They are hedging themselves into a corner and they will find in the future that it will be necessary for them to repudiate the position which they have adopted. Members of the National Country Party want to make sure that they are going to be in a position in their electorates to be able to justify the position that the Government is adopting on this issue. When members of the rural community are under pressures and difficulties and when the national Government should be in a position to help those people overcome the problems they will face, members of the National Country Party had better be ready with their answers to explain why they do not have the financial capacity to make that assistance available because at the moment they have no answers. There is no doubt that the National Country Party has sold out the interests of those people. It

present in which perhaps a high cost but low profit producer is required to pay the same royalties, rates, duties and levies as the high profit makers. That is the rationale behind the suggestion of the Opposition that the most equitable system of taxing development profits is by way of a resources rent tax. There is no doubt that the determination of the Opposition in connection with this question reflects the growing concern on the part of the electorate generally, the people of Australia, who are becoming increasingly aware that the direction resource development is taking is such that the profits and the benefits will be reaped by multinational companies operating in Australia. The result we want to see, a broad spread of the benefits over the whole of the Australian community, is not being achieved. But it will be achieved because we have made it perfectly clear that when we are given the opportunity to determine policies in these important areas the nature of the policy that we adopt will be of the kind that has already been indicated. We will be given that opportunity after 1983.

is no longer the National Country Party of I remind all the Government members that

Australia; it should be called the National Mining they are in government only as a result of the mis-

Party or the Multinational Party of Australia, as guided political judgments made by fewer than

that is the role the party is adopting. The people 7,000 out of a total of 9 million electors in October

who have supported the National Country Party last year. Fewer than 7,000 electors were respon-

in the past, and those who still support it, will sible for the decision to give this Government the

have this emphasised to them with increasing clarmargin of seats that it now enjoys. The people of

ityas time progresses.

Australia are looking for a greater responsiveness

Australia's Mineral Resources: Taxation

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 569

from the Government in connection with these very important matters.

I referred earlier to the arrangement which has been adopted in Alberta, Canada. During the first three years of the operation of the resources rent tax there it brought in $12,000m to the provincial Government in Alberta. At the end of that first three-year period the Government still had $5,000m, which meant that $7,000m had been applied. That $7,000m did not, as the Deputy Prime Minister is trying to suggest, impede or discourage the extent and nature of resource development in Alberta. Market forces were still there, the incentive was still there, the profits were still there and the public sector got the benefit which should have accrued to it. The Government in Alberta applied the $7,000m to provincial development projects, which provided long-term social and economic benefits for the people of that province. It also provided, I think, about 12 per cent of the total in loans to the Canadian Government. It also undertook investments which were aimed at strengthening and diversifying Alberta's economy. I have already referred to some of those investments. It also made possible the provision of low interest loans to help the types of adjustments which were necessary within the rural sector. That situation is being ignored in Australia.

The honourable member for Blaxland referred to the position which had been adopted by some of the members of the Government on previous occasions. Let me refer to a statement made by the Deputy Prime Minister in answer to a question without notice in Hansard, in September 1977. He said:

There are good and sound reasons for looking at a secondary tax or a resources tax . . .

In particular reference to the uranium industry he

went on to add:

.

There are good and wise reasons for looking at the uranium industry in this respect as it is unique and its potential profitability could be very substantial.

Those are the same types of inconsistencies which were applied to statements which have been made by spokesmen for the Government ever since. I am particularly concerned about the implications of this matter, but I think it is important that we bear in mind the fact that because the Commonwealth Government has been so negligent as to leave a vacuum in this area, we have situations of the kind which exist in Queensland. Queensland is applying higher rail freights in order to scoop the cream off the resources boom. The Northern Territory Government is .in the process of renegotiating a royalty arrangement for the bauxite deposits in Gove. We have other examples of State governments which are going to step in to

fill the vacuum. This Government has a national responsibility to make sure that the benefits of resource development are spread over the whole of the Australian community. If this Government is reluctant to do it, the government which is elected after 1983 will accept those responsibilities.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (3.58)-ln introducing this matter today the Opposition is obscuring the real issues facing Australia. It has raised a smoke-screen on a day and at a time when people around Australia are marching and protesting against the wave of strikes in this country. It is worth reminding the House and the people of Australia that those who sit opposite, the members of the Australian Labor Party, sit in this House as prisoners of the union movement because the Australian Labor Party in Opposition--
Opposition members interjecting-Mr SHIPTON-Listen to them rise to the 'bait. The Australian Labor Party is the parliamentary wing of the union movement. Let the members deny it. Let us have that point established. The members of that party raised that smoke-screen. It is a real sham because, from its bringing on this matter of public importance, one would believe that the Labor Party is in favour of development. It is trying to fool the people of Australia that it is in favour of development, but can any honourable member tell me any project that the Opposition is in favour of? I have been a member of this House for five years, and the only development projects I believe the Opposition is interested in involve reafforestation, the housing industry and solar energy. They are all worthwhile. But the members of the Labor Party here speak with forked tongues. They say that they are in favour of development, but trying to find an individual project that they are in favour of is a different story altogether. I challenge the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating)-Mr Keating-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. Mr SHIPTON-He is trying to waste my time.
Mr Keating---:I claim to have been misrepresented by that statement. I will not only name but document dozens of projects on which I have had correspondence with consortiums--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Blaxland will.resume his seat. He must seek the indulgence of the Chair to make a personal explanation if he claims to have

570 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Australia's Mineral Resources: Taxation

been misrepresented. In the middle of another honourable member's speech is not the time to seek to make that explanation.
Mr SHIPTON-I am sorry that the honourable member for Blaxland feels so aggrieved by and is so vulnerable to the point I make. I challenge him as to whether he agrees with the Premier of New South Wales about royalties paid to New South Wales by mining companies. Is he happy with the prices paid for power by mining companies in New South Wales? He cannot come to this House and, on the one hand, say that we need a resources tax and, on the other hand, say that there are not enough royalties or revenue paid. He is assuming that New South Wales is not getting sufficient royalties or prices for the power generated. The honourable member comes into this House and talks about robber barons and free racketeers. I want the Australian Labor Party to be positive and confident about Australia, not negative.
The honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown) spoke of the Province of Alberta in Canada and its ability to raise revenue. He said that the States in Australia cannot scrape the cream off resources development. That is an incredible statement. I do not think the Labor Party has ever heard of the oil levy, the coal levy and the revenue being created for Australia from the oil and gas from Bass Strait, which benefits all Australians. The Opposition' speakers did not mention the oil levy. I will mention it because it has struck a raw nerve. The Opposition is inconsistent in what it says. In Australia the Constitution provides that ownership and control of mineral development is a matter for the States. In fact the honourable member for Blaxland has destroyed his own argument. I have challenged him to say whether he is in favour of royalties paid to States, particularly to New South Wales. He cannot on the one hand advocate increased Commonwealth taxation-which incidentally he has not defined-and on the other hand adopt a negative position on royalties. He must know-I give him credit for some intelligence-that a royalty paid to a State is a tax deduction for federal purposes. There is that inconsistency in his argument.
The Opposition has failed also to take note of the logical fact that the higher the profit of a corporation the higher the tax paid and the higher the benefit to the total community.
Mr Keating-Only company tax.
Mr SHIPTON-The honourable member is interjecting again, taking up my time. I am flattered that he feels it is worth taking up my time. He is against profits and against the creation

of wealth for the benefit of the total Australian community. He has failed to take account of the fact that wages, taxes and profits work their way from these developments through to the total community. There is a flow-on effect. Support and manufacturing industries will grow ap.d develop. Downstream benefits will be enormous.
Recently I drove across Victoria from Lakes Entrance in the east to Mortlake in the west. I drove through the Latrobe Valley. There is prosperity everywhere. Trucks and heavy equipment were on the road. Around the city of Traralgon there were signs of new factories, machine shops and businesses based on the brown coal resource development. The town of Mortlake in the west of Victoria is prosperous. The first pylons for the new power development for the Alcoa project at Portland are being built. People are everywhere. Money is being spent in the grocery shops and even the odd pub throughout the town. There is a flow-on effect from this development right throughout the community. Sub-contractors and builders are to be found benefiting. Generally, prosperity is increasing in Australia. I was pleased and delighted with the attitude of the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner). He said that the major resource development projects will generate substantial additional employment opportunities over the next 10 years. He spoke of 60,000 new, direct jobs by 1985. There are many more indirect jobs about which I have spoken. The skills and demand program which is in place is working well and is a credit to the Government.
Let us look at the contributions Of the mining industry. To hear the Opposition talk, one would believe the mining industry contributed nothing. Figures show that 81 mining companies contributed $1.013 billion to governments in Australia in 1979-80. That was not mentioned by the Opposition.' I was delighted that the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) talked of his hope for more Australian participation and the Government's aim to create the conditions, climate and opportunities for people to take a more direct part in Australia's development if they wish. I would like to think the Opposition would promote and examine the idea that double taxation of dividends in the hands of public companies is something that ought to be abandoned so that more individual Australians and employees of companies can participate and invest. Employees of companies should feel that they have a share in the developing corporation. That is the sort of positive approach I would like to see advocated. Let us concentrate on positive things. We should all be positive about the nation's ability to harness resources for the benefit

Australia's Mineral Resources: Taxation

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 571

of the total community. The Australian Labor Party is underselling Australia.
Australia has a large continent and a small population but a relatively high'standard of living. It has excellent transport and communications systems. Its achievements are great. We should make them greater. Let us be positive about the country rather than knock it all the time, as does the Opposition. The resources boom is being tackled and will be tackled by this Government for the social benefit of all Australians.
Mr Keating-How? Mr SHIPTON-By creating jobs, by the creation of new technology and new overseas markets and by the further development of a compassionate and realistic social security system. That is how the resources development decade of the 1980s will be developed for the benefit of all Australians. Mr Robert Brown-I am not convinced. Mr SHIPTON-The honourable member for Hunter is not convinced because he does not have a clear vision. He does not understand where Australia is going. I feel very sorry for members of the Labor Party. We have to be positive about Australia and have a clear, strong and bold vision of the sort of Australia we want. We have to be confident in our ability to manage technological change and to create a new era of prosperity for all Australians, mining and manufacturing industries alike. We are using and will use in the decade ahead the resources development to the benefit of all Australians and Australian industries. I do not deny that there are challenges, but the whole aim of government is to respond to those challenges. We need to develop innovation and technology. That can flow from the benefit of the resources tax. We need some positive and lateral thinking. I wish honourable members opposite were able to think positively. Let us look at ideas such as creating a new project merging and upgrading the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Division of Manufacturing Technology so that it will become in the 1980s what the Snowy Mountains Authority was in the 1950s. Combine the Division with the National Training Council. I am pleased to support the Government in this debate. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded. Mr KEATING (Blaxland)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented by the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton).

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member seeks to make a personal explanation?
Mr KEATING-I do.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member may proceed.
Mr KEATING-It is poor argument for any honourable member opposite to suggest that the Opposition is opposed to--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member must not debate the issue. He must point out immediately and precisely where he claims to have been misrepresented.
Mr KEATING-I will do that. The honourable member said that not one project could be named that the Opposition supported. In fact the Opposition supported the North West Shelf project from its inception. There is documentation to that effect, with gratitude from the company. The Opposition has seen many dozens of banking institutions concerning the financing of that project, as it has many other resources projects in this country. The oil and gas industry has a recognitionof--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I am reluctant to interrupt the honourable member, but he has the indulgence to explain where he has been personally misrepresented. He cannot advance a case for an offence, alleged or real, against the Opposition.
Mr KEATING-Mr Deputy Speaker, I was challenged on a number of occasions by the honourable member to indicate whether I or the Opposition has supported certain proposals and commercial organisations.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Th~ honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Viner-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. The honourable gentleman fell into his own trap because he said that a number of arguments were mounted against himself and the Opposition. If he is stating that he has been misrepresented he must identify where he personally has been misrepresented and not debate the arguments that have preceded that.
Mr KEATING-I was challenged. I have supported a number of projects on beh?lf of the Opposition. That has been recognised by the industries publicly and privately. We are not against profits and wealth and we do not knock the country. We put forward a positive proposal for a resources rent tax. We do not like being impugned by the drones on the Government back bench.

572 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

COMPLAINTS (AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE) BILL 1981
Bill received from the Senate, and read a first time.
Ordered that the second reading be made an order of the day for the next day of sitting.
AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE AMENDMENT BILL 1981

had the disapproval power in it since its inception
in 1920. This power has been used by the Senate as recently as 1973. On Tuesday last 1 introduced
a Bill to amend the Act so as to remove from the
jurisdiction to make determinations matters covered by the Act. 1 ask honourable members to
read my speech in support of that amendment in conjunction with the reasons 1 will give in support
of the motion now before the House.

Bill received from the Senate, and read a first An important responsibility of the Parliament

time.

and the Government is to ensure that the Public

Ordered that the second reading be made an Service Board and departments have the appro-

order of the day for th~ next day of sitting.

priate powers to ensure that the services of staff

are used efficiently and effectively. This is the very

DETERMINATION No. 503 OF 1980

least that the Parliament would require and that

Motion for Disapproval

the taxpayer would expect. The Government is

MrVINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister) (4.12)-1 move:

convinced that matters such as the hiring, redeployment and termination of employment of
. Commonwealth employees should be the pre-
rogative of the Board and departments operating

That this House disapproves Determination No. 503 of 1980 made under the Public Service Arbitration Act 1920 by the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission on 23 December 1980.
1 speak to support the motion, notice of which 1 gave on Thursday, 26 February last, that this House resolve, pursuant to section 22 (5) of the Public Service Arbitration Act, to disapprove Determination No. 503 of 1980 made by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. A certificate by the Public Service Arbitrator indicating that in
his opinion the. determination is not, or may not
be, in accord with the Public Service Act 1922 has been tabled. An advice of the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) indicating that in his opinion Determination No. 503 of 1980 is not in accord with a law of the Commonwealth has also been tabled.

within the framework set by the Parliament itself.
There can be no doubt that Parliament through its legislation has cared well for its employees and protected the rights of individual staff members.
Public servants enjoy many advantages over employees in private industry. They have permanency of employment. Their advancement is by
merit. Their rights of redress against arbitrary actions by management are protected by very elaborate and comprehensive appeals provisions,
in both the Public Service Act and the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act, which are second to none. On top of
that they have a generous superannuation scheme and an~ well paid. Most employees would be
satisfied with this but some public service unions want more, almost without limit. They seem to say that public servants should never be reduced
in level, even if work at the employee's level is not

The Government's decision to propose disapavailable or the employee is inefficient; and that a

proval of Determination No. 503 of 1980 must be public servant's employment should never be ter-

seen against a long history of irresponsible and minated, even if no work is available for him or

persistant union opposition to the redeployment her to perform. Such propositions would be quite

and compulsory. retirement provisions of the unacceptable to the community. They are unac-

Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and ceptable to the Government. It is our firm view

Retirement) Act 1979, which 1 will refer to herethat public servants have obligations and respon-

after as the Act, and a determination by some sibilities which follow on from the generous con-

unions to change the intent of the legislation and ditions and protections which the Parliament has

frustrate its operation. The unions, in effect, have provided. Not least, public servants have a duty to

attempted to challenge through the Commission provide an uninterrupted high standard of service

the right of the Parliament to determine the legisto the people of Australia. Such responsibilities

lative provisions that will apply to matters as funseem to have been put in the background by those

damental as the efficient and economical use of union leaders who have incited public servants to

staff of the Australian PubHc Service. The fact is industrial action over the Act, legislation which

that the Parliament must be the arbiter in such plainly aims to ensure that the services of public

matters. This point is given added force by the servants are used efficiently, effectively -and

fact that the Public Service Arbitration Act has economically.

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 573

I must emphasise that the Government makes a real distinction between matters relating to the engagement and termination of the service of staff which are the prerogative of management and determinations in relation to traditional areas such as wages and salaries, annual leave and hours of duty which are properly matters for arbitration. Let me also remind honourable members of the history of this matter. In 1976 the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Bill was introduced on the basis that it would not proceed further until there had been an adequate opportunity for debate and for consultation between the Public Service Board and unions. In the event, the Bill lapsed on the prorogation of Parliament in early 1977. When the Bill was introduced again in 1979 changes had been made arising from the intervening discussions with peak union councils. The main changes were the specification of reasons for which staff could be identified for redeployment and retirement and the inclusion of more detail of the appeal arrangements for the review of decisions.
The revised legislation gave comprehensive and elaborate protection to staff and was the result of extensive consultation with Public Service unions. Despite this, during 1979 some unions introduced bans and limitations. Some staff were stood down. In the result the Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association -ACOAthe Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers)-APSA(FDO)-and the Federated Clerks Union-FCU-lodged applications with the Public Service Arbitrator, which were later referred to a Full Bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. These applications sought a determination relating to procedures for consultation with staff organisations in redundancy situations and the specification of minimum time periods of up to 29 months to be observed before staff could be redeployed to a lower paid job or terminated, plus a range of related claims. In effect, part of the purpose of the application was to change the provisions and frustrate the intent of legislation which had been passed by the Parliament and which at that time had not been put into operation. The Board opposed the application, arguing that the claims made were inconsistent with the Act and that the provisions of the Act together with the provisions of Public Service Arbitrator's Determination No. 509 of 1977 provided sound, workable and fair arrangements for the handling of surplus staff, invalidity retirements and other redeployment and termination in Commonwealth employment, and that the applications should be rejected. The Government supported the Board's attitude.

The Full Bench decided in December 1979 that a determination should be made and that it should cover a range of matters. The Commision did not issue a determination but directed the parties to discuss and draw up a draft determination to give effect to the Commission's decision. Agreement could not be reached between the Board and the relevant unions and in the result two documents were submitted to the Commision; one prepared by the Bo~rd, the other by the unions. It was made clear to the Arbitrator and the Commision that nothing in the draft determination prepared by the Board or the Board's comments should be taken to indicate agreement by the aoard to the terms of a determination nor should be seen as 'c~mmitting the Board in any respect. So much for the claim which has been made by the unions that the Board got what it wanted.
On 23 December 1980 the Commission made a determination which came into operation on the date of proclamation of the Act-6 February 1981. Shortly before the Act came into operation the Board issued 106 staff with six-month or 12-month notices of redundancy, not retrenchments, in accordance with the provisions of Determination No. 509 of 1977. These notices were not issued under the provisions of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act. Not unexpectedly some leaders of the Public Service unions chose to make deliberately confusing and misleading comments about these notices, implying that they were, retrenchment notices issued in secrecy and had been issued under the Act. They set about putting fear into the minds of their members that something new and horrific was happening tei them. They chose to ignore the fact that 89 of the notices were issued to staff who had declined to move to Canberra with their jobs under the normal Canberra transfer arrangements and that these staff had known for at least 12 months of the Government's decision to transfer their jobs to Canberra. They chose to ignore the fact that long-established and well-understood practices meant that the notices would issue at about the time they did.
These same leaders also chose to ignore the fact that it was not the first time staff declining transfer to Canberra had been issued with such notices. They were silent about the fact that there has been a Canberra transfer program since time immemorial, in a Public Service sense, and there was nothing new about these transfers. They were also silent about the fact that over the years they have been fully involved in developing procedures to be followed in the transfer program, including the timing of the issue of notices to staff who decline to transfer with their jobs. The unions and the

574 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503. of1980

officers themselves know the rights of persons involved in transfer programs and the detriments if they decline to transfer.
The House will accept, I am sure, that there must be changes in administration from time to time that involve relocation of staff to the place where the work is required to be performed. This is ordinary responsible administration. There is nothing untoward, unreasonable or arbitrary about the processes involved in reallocating staff resources in this way. It is therefore a serious act of irresponsibility on the part of the unions to confuse and mislead their members in this respect and foment fear in their minds.
The other 17 staff who received notices of redundancy are located in the Australian Capital Territory and various States and their jobs were not required because of the winding down of a program, for example, at Woomera, revised administrative arrangemements introduced by the Government or normal organisational changes to meet the current needs. Most of the staff involved had been surplus for some time. In this case the unions were advised of the Board's intention to issue those notices to the 17 staff members and they raised no objection. Now some of the same unions obscure the issues and the facts and incite members to industrial action.
Transfers to Canberra and administrative changes have occurred for very many years and will continue to do so. Organisations simply cannot operate without adjusting to change. But the Public Service Board and departments have handled such situations in a careful and responsible way and quite properly have made every endeavour to find other jobs for staff when their existing jobs are no longer available. Indeed, the Board and departments have been successful in redeploying over 1,500 staff since 1976, in addition to larger numbers of staff involved in the Canberra transfer program. The termination of employment is clearly the last resort.
When the legislation was introduced in 1979, the Government ensured that Determination No. 509 of 1977 would continue to operate. That Determination provides a generous code of conditions and some procedures for the handling of surplus staff situations. The Determination requires the Public Service Board to advise the relevant staff association immediately it appears that a surplus staff situation has occurred or is likely to occur, and to provide all relevant details and arrange discussions with union representatives. In addition that Determination also provides for:
(a) six months formal notice for a permanent officer that he is excess to the requirements

of the Service and 12 months if over 45 years of age or with 20 or more years service; (b) a temporary employee shall be entitled to one month's formal notice that he is excess to the requirements of the Service; (c) a permanent officer shall receive an additional one month's formal notice that he is to be transferred to a lower salary level or terminated; (d) a permanent officer shall be entitled to be retained as an officer on full pay for the notice periods, that is, six or 12 months, as the case may be; (e) paid leave and expenses, where not met by prospective employer, to seek employment; (f) use of accumulated sick leave in certain specified circumstances; (g) reasonable expenses of moving household associated with transfer or termination; (h) every endeavour to redeploy to continue during notice periods; and (i) subject to minimum periods of service and age a temporary employee who is transferred to a lower salary level or terminated shall receive income maintenance for six to 12 months. The mere recitation of the benefits available under Determination No. 509 of 1977 to officers and employees who become excess to the requirements of the Service serves to point up the fairness, even generosity, of the conditions which apply to staff under that Determination. I turn now to a consideration of Determination No. 503 of 1980 and the reasons which in the view of the Government justify this House in disapproving it. That Determination deals with aspects of the identification of employees for redeployment and retirement under the provisions of the Act. It applies to members of the Administrative and Clerical Officers Association, the Australian Public Service Association and the Federated Clerks Union of Australia. The need for the House to disapprove this Determination is clear. The Attorney-General, in an opinion tabled in this House, has expressed the view that the Determination that I now seek to have the House disapprove is not in accord with the provisions of the Act. Specifically, the Attorney-General said that there are two clauses of the Determination which are in conflict with a specific power conferred by the Act, namely that clauses 4 (9) and 5 (1) of the Determination conflict with sections 9 (1) (b) and 11 (6) (b) of the Act. As the Attorney found,

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 575

the Determination required certain notice periods to elapse before the Public Service Board could issue a certificate that it was impractical to redeploy an officer or employee when the Act did not require such notice periods to be given.

The effect of the Determination in the additional processes it will require will be to frustrate the operation of and protract unnecessarily the processes leading to the compulsory redeployment and retirement of staff. In this respect I draw to the attention of the House the fact that the Determination restrains a permanent head from declaring an, employee as eligible for redeployment until at least three months after the relevant union has been advised of the redundancy situation, unless a shorter period is agreed upon, or special circumstances exist-for example, the abolition of a department.

'!he Determination establishes preference for

umon members. Such preference is completely

c?ntrary to the objects of the Act and to the prin-

CIple of merit, a principle which is the cornerstone

o~ the personnel management system of the Ser-

VIce. Preference to union members is quite unac-

ceptable to the Government. Non-union members

who find themselves surplus to the requirements

of the Service would, have lesser rights than

under union

tmheemDbeetresr. mWinhaetrieoni~

the equity and protection of the non-union

member in this? The Government, if it were to

accept Determination 503 of 1980 would, in

effect, be abandoning those who have exercised

the!r freedom of choice not to belong to a union.

ThIS the Government will not countenance.

Ap~rt from the inequity of preference the oper-

atIOn of preference under the Determination

would mean that the union member could be

retained in employment in preference to a more

efficient non-union member. That is surely the

very antithesis of the efficient management of the

Public Service.

!he Government is notalone in believing that umon preference is incompatible with the merit principle. Our view is shared by Mr Deputy President McKenzie, a member of the Full Bench which considered the unions' applications. In a dissenting opinion on the question of union preference he said:

. ~otwithstandin~ the practical impact of granting the claim IS hkely to be marginal, the use of union membership to choose b~tween employees even in that context is quite inconsistent With the present concepts of the Australian Public Service. I therefore reject the claim.

T~is Government al~o rejects the concept of umon preference. ThIS Government is not prepared to see the Public Service become a closed

shop. The redeployment process could also be ex-
~tehnidcehdalsuonpnreecveesnsatsritlhye BbyoartdhefroDmetisesruminignaaticoenr~
bficate under the Act that it is not feasible to redeploy an employee until six or 12 months after the surplus employee has been declared for redeployment, that declaration itself being subject to the three month delay I have mentioned. (Extension of time granted). The determination would thus prolong until long after the events requiring redeployment or retirement the Board's power to take the necessary action to, manage efficiently the staff affected. The Government as always is prepared to consider constructive comments about the operation of the Act. I have already given a commitment to the Council of -Australian Government Employee Organisations that the Government is prepared to review the provisions of the Act if, after some experience with its operation, it can be demonstrated that its procedures operate unfairly.
The staff of the Australian Public Service and ~ommo~wealth authorities are, generally speakmg, dedIcated and hard-working. They come in for a good deal of criticism. Much of the criticism, I regret to say, is exaggerated and unjustified and does not pay proper respect to the dedication and service given to their countrymen. It is a great pity that the actions of a minority of public servants and of some of the present leaders of the ACOA have tarnished the proud history of a non-political public service in Australia. I reiterate that it is in the public interest that the service of employees is used economically and efficiently. Determination No. 503 of 1980, as I have shown, cuts across this objective and is, in the opinion of the Attorney General for the Commonwealth not in accord with the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979. Therefore I commend the motion to the House.
Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the scope of the debate on this matter be extended to cover the subject matter of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Bill as the two measures are associated. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the measures at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering the two measures?
Mr Hawke-I want to raise the question of the time for reply. Normally, if we were engaged in the second reading debate of the matter which the Minister wishes to have debated cognately I

576 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

would have 30 minutes to reply. What has happened is that the Minister spoke last week in respect of the Bill and now he has spoken today in respect of the motion for disallowance. Our position, of course, is that we would agree to the wish of the Minister and the Government to have a general debate covering the two measures provided that I am granted the rights that I would have normally in a second reading debate on the Bill.
Mr Viner-I understand that arrangements have been made between the Leader of the House and the Manager of Opposition Business for the honourable member for Wills to be able to speak for 30 minutes. Accordingly, I ask leave of the House to move a motion to enable the honourable member for Wills to speak for 30 minutes.
Leave granted. Motion (by Mr Viner) agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Wills speaking for a period not exceeding 30 minutes.
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (4.35)-1 trust that every honourable member on the Government side ,of the House realises precisely what it is they are being asked to be party to in the matters now before this House. Each honourable member is being asked to overthrow a convention which has operated in this country for virtually half a century. To be precise, the last occasion on which a government moved to disallow a determination of the Public Service Arbitrator was in September 1932 under the Lyons Government-the seventeenth Ministry in the Commonwealth of Australia. We have had to wait almost 50 years and another 29 Ministries-for the advent of this Fraser Government-for this Parliament to be asked to overthrow the convention that the decision of the umpire under the Public Service Arbitration Act in dispute between the Commonwealth as employer and its employees should not be interfered with.
Let there be not doubt at the outset of this debate that as a matter of law the Government has the right to seek to take the action upon which it has now embarked. Indeed, the wording of the Act which the Government now seeks to invoke in this matter is almost exactly the same as existed and was used in 1932 by the Lyons Government. But successive, governments of different political persuasions until this Fraser era have understood that good government and honourable relations within the community depend not merely upon obeying the laws but also upon obeying the spirit of those laws. It is the acceptance of that spirit

through time which establishes the conventions upon which a stable society comes to depend.
The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) seems to have a very clear understanding of the truth of what I have to say on this matter when it comes to the game of cricket. In his gratuitous public lecture to Greg Chappell on the recent underarm bowling incident the Prime Minister was quite unequivocal and clear sighted when it came to this matter of law and convention. I quote from the West Australian newspaper of 3 February this year a report of what the Prime Minister had to say on that matter. The report stated:
The Prime Minister, . . . calling on Greg Chappell to apologise . . . said: 'Certainly it was legal, but cricket is much more than what is legal.'
He said that he was annoyed by the tactic and described it as a serious mistake.
'It is certainly contrary to the traditions of the game
'It was a very serious mistake-quite contrary to the good and decent traditions of cricket.'
I put it to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, what a tragedy it is that the Prime Minister, as he draws upon his vast sporting background as secretary of his college tennis club at Oxford, cannot bring to the politics of this country the same clarity of perception about the importance of tradition and convention as well as law as he does when he talks about cricket. This tragedy is compounded by the further incredible hypocrisy involved in the fact that the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) specifically urged the unions involved in this dispute about the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) .Act to take those disputes to the umpire. In that respect let us look at what the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) just said in his speech. He said:
The unions, in effect, have attempted to challenge through the Commission the right of the Parliament . . .
I will proceed to show that it was not an attempt to challenge which the unions thought up out of the back of their minds. The unions were specifically urged by the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister of this country to adopt precisely that course. It was not something that they conjured up in the back rooms of the unions; it was something that they were publicly urged to do by the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister of this country. Let me establish that point. The Prime Minister did not do this subtly

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 577

and quietly; he did it in a nationally televised address on 22 July 1979. After the saccharin platitudes to which we have become accustomed when he is adopting this role, he said:
I again ask all working men and women to stand up for your own rights. You can support arbitration-that is your right. You and your workmates can see that the union also supports arbitration.
There is no need to strike. No need to disrupt work. No need to damage yourselves, your industry or Australia.
He concluded:
There is a better way-conciliation and arbitration-the way oftheumpire. Australia needs your support.
That was not said about an unrelated dispute. Those were the words of the Prime Minister of this country in regard to the industrial disputation which had arisen about this legislation. The unions had taken direct action. What did the Prime Minister do? He appeared on national television and, having condemned the union members for their industrial disputation, he said: 'Now there is the way of the umpire. There is the way of arbitration. Take your case to arbitration'. He was not left on his own in this respect. What did the Deputy Prime Minister say on precisely the same point in regard to this dispute and the claims which the unions took to the Public Service Arbitrator? After the unions in question had lifted their bans and ceased their industrial action what was the reaction of the Deputy Prime Minister? On 2 August, in a media release, he said:
I welcome the lifting of the bans imposed in recent weeks by some public servants at the direction of ACOA and APSA.
The arbitration arena has always been available to test union claims on their merits and this can now occur.
I ask the House to savour those words. I repeat that the Deputy Prime Minister, speaking for the Government, said:
The arbitration arena has always been available to test union claims on their merits and this can now occur.
That is what the unions did. What is being done now? Will the arbitration arena be available? Will the unions be able to have their claims tested there as they were urged to do in this matter? Of course, you have only to ask the question to know what is the answer. At this Government's urging-through the mouths of the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister-of the Public Service unions to exercise their rights and, to use the Minister's language, to use the better way, the way of the umpire, they went into a formal hearing before the Full Bench constituted under the Public Service Arbitration Act. Let me indicate the nature of that hearing. It was not a transient, quick little hearing. It took 31 sitting days, including conferences. There were 1,761 pages of transcript and 43 exhibits from both sides. That was

the arbitration hearing that took place at the urging of the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister. In that lengthy Full Bench hearing the very issue which the Government now attempts to use to justify its action was raised by the Public Service Board. The issue was argued by the parties and the umpire, impartially and specifically, found against the Government's present contention which has been repeated in the House today by the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs. On 5 February 1981 in announcing the Government's intention, the Prime Minister saici:
Determination 503 of 1980 . . . has the effect of altering Parliament's intention.
The Full Bench, in its decision which was handed down on 20 December 1979, stated that it specifically considered this argument. It dealt with the argument which was advanced in the same form by the Public Service Board to the effect that the union's claims 'would negate the central intention of the Act because such provisions would render inoperable the Act's key intentions'. That is what was put by the Government via the Public Service Board in the arbitration hearing before the umpire. It is the very argument that the Government is now attempting to use to justify its action. What did the independent umpire to whom the unions were urged to go have to say about the argument then advanced, which the Government is trying to resurrect now? This is what was said:
. . . the objection to the exercise of jurisdiction fails for the reason that a determination giving the applicants rights relating to consultation and prescribing periods of time for various procedures would not be out of 'accord' with the Redeployment and Retirement Act.
The question whetherit falls within the category dealt with by section 22(2) of the Public Service Arbitration Act therefore does not arise. The argument that the Government now attempts to use was put to the umpire and rejected. In this respect I ask the House to take very careful note of what the Prime Minister said in justification of the Government's proposed course of action when, after the personal irrelevancies in which he engaged, he attempted to answer my question on this issue in this House on 26 February. He said:
There are some things which this Commonwealth Government, any Commonwealth Government, must do as an employer. There are some management prerogatives that any employer must take to itself.
We have heard the same sort of thing from the Minister today. That precise argument was put to the umpire to whom the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister had urged the unions to take their dispute with the Government. The Full Bench adjudicated on that point, the very argument that the Prime Minister and the Minister for

578 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

Employment and Youth Affairs have attempted to use to justify the position. The Full Bench said:
. . . the Board contended, the proposed determination involved an encroachment upon processes which were properly and exclusively the prerogative of management, in that its provisions would restrict the circumstances in which the employer proceeded to a decision relating to the size and deployment of the work force.
This is the argument that the Minister attempts to use in justification. It is the argument which the Prime Minister sought to use a fortnight ago in this House to justify the Government's action. The precise argument was put to the Full Bench. It was spelt out. What did the Full Bench have to say about the argument put to it on behalf of the Government? It said that the provisions relating to consultation and interpolation of periods of time between various depths may ill some circumstances inhibit the exercise of the Board's and the permanent heads' consideration but 'it cannot be said that a decision giving effect to such concepts constitutes a determination upon management or managerial policy as such.' The precise argument used by the Minister was put, considered by the umpire and rejected.
I suggest that the sequence of events is crystal clear. It is not beyond the comprehension of even the slowest of Government members. There was an industrial dispute followed by exhortation by one side, that is the Government, to the other, the unions, to go to arbitration. Both sides engaged at length in a Full Bench arbitration. Then the Government repudiated the arbitration that it urged upon the other side. It attempts to justify that action by arguments which it has advanced and had rejected by the umpire. This is truly Alice in Wonderland stuff. Mr Deputy Speaker, I ask you and every honourable member on the other side of the House, who will have to cast a vote on this issue, to contrast the approach of the Government and what it said in regard to the requirement upon the trade union movement to accept the umpire's decision with the sequence of events that followed. In particular, I suggest that a classic and immediate contrast people might want to make, in terms of what the Government and the unions are doing, is provided by what the Government has been saying recently to the Builders Labourers Federation. I wish to quote briefly from three statements made on behalf of the Government by the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) as to what trade unions should do about accepting the umpire's decision. I refer firstly to his statement of 27 January of this year that the Builders Labourers Federation was 'acting in disregard of decisions of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission'. He went on, on behalf of the Government:

The Government is supporting two decisions bf the Concili-
ation and Arbitration Commission.
There we have, on 29 January, the Government saying to the trade unions what they should do; claiming that they were acting in disregard of the decisions of the Commission, decisions which the Government proposed to uphold. On 4 February what did the Government-say about abiding by the umpire's decision? The Minister, speaking for the Government, said that the BLF was acting in total disregard of two decisions by the Arbitration Commission, that it was now 'attempting to menace the legal process' and that Mr Gallagher was 'seeking to use industrial blackmail because the Commission ruled against him on two occasions'. The position is crystal clear. The Minister criticised the union, perhaps with justification, but the basis of the Government's criticism of the unions was that they were not accepting the decision of the Arbitration Commission; that they were attempting to use their strength to pervert the legal process and override and avoid the decisions of the Commission.
On 17 February the Minister said that the Government was taking action against the BLF because of its shameful record and because of the 'blatant denial of the requirements of the normal industrial processes'. That is what the Government has to say when it comes to the question of whether unions do or do not abide by the umpire's decision. There is an absolute clarity of vision on the part of the Government that; as far as the unions are concerned, if there has been a case before the Arbitration Commission and they have participated they must abide by the umpire's decision. If they do not they run the risk of the Government's taking action against them. The Minister concluded by saying that the union had been engaged in a 'blatant denial of the requirements of the normal industrial processes'.
In the precise terms that the Government has .used in preaching to the unions on the issue, let us look at just what the Government is attempting to do in this case. It is not accepting the decision of the Arbitration tribunal. It is now menacing the legal process; it is engaged in a blatant denial of the legal process. As it said of Mr Gallagher it is now, in this place, as a government, using its muscle, the muscle of its superior numbers in this House and is doing so because the arbitration ruling is not acceptable to it. Does the Government believe it can ever again be heard with any credibility when it calls upon the trade unions to accept. the umpire's decision, not to use their muscle to get around it? Whereas in the past the Government has thundered out that call to unions, in the future it can only utter a pathetic whimper, the

i)etermina(ion No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 579

pathetic whimper of a Prime Minister and of Minthey will be acting as automatons, blindly exercis-

isters who at one blow have destroyed their crediing the power of their numbers. I say to them: For

bility by their blatantly hypocritical double stanGod's sake never again attempt to be heard bray-

dards in this area.

ing about ruthless union leaders manipulating a

The principle to which I refer was put very precisely and with impeccable clarity and logic almost 50 year ago in this Parliament when a government last attempted such a travesty of justice. Senator O'Halloran, a Labor Party senator from South Australia, put the point pithily and

tame, quiescent membership which is afraid to stand up, argue and be counted. That is exactly what each honourable member will be doing when the bells are rung and he files in and, with-
. out having heard any evidence, proceeds to overthrow the umpire's decision.

with impeccable logic and clarity. As reported at Of course, as this House has come to expect

page 162 of Hansard of 2 September 1932, he said from this Minister, his second reading speech con-

in a brief sentence that was unarguably correct:

tained a slippery attempt to justify his position by

If the principle of the acceptance of an umpire's decision is right in the one case, it must be right in the other.

misrepresenting that of another. He referred to the matters in question having been considered by

I suggest that precisely because the logic of that proposition of Senator O'Halloran is unassailable and unanswerable no government for 50 years has attempted such a despicable and hypocritical exercise as the one upon which this Government is now embarked.

the Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration and implied that he gained some comfort from that. He made specific reference to Mr Paul Munro, who is now Federal Secretary of the Administrative and Clerical Officers Association. Again, as one would expect, he made no attempt to spell out his reference. As the Min-

Therefore, I again ask each Government ister has seen fit in that speech to refer to the

member to understand precisely what he is now Royal Commission report, let me tell the House

being asked to do in this exercise-and he should exactly, not by way of the kind of slippery impli-

think about it. Determination 503 establishes a set cation in which he indulges, what that report had

of procedural safeguards to prevent subjective crito say on this question of disallowance by the Par-

teria from being applied to those persons who are liament. Recommendation 245 states:

selected for compulsory redeployment and retireWe recommend that the Government's power of disallow-

ment and establishes certain periods of notice and income maintenance fot them. As I have said, the determination was made by a properly constituted tribunal after a lengthy hearing in which all

ance of the tribunal's determinations at present contained in section 22 of the Public Service Arbitration Act be removed. Disallowance has occurred on four occasions only and the proceedings in meeting the provisions under this section involve an unwarranted use of resources. But, more import-

the arguments that are now used by the Governantly, it seems for us to be wrong in principle for an arbi-

ment in purported justification were advanced to the tribunal-the umpire to whom th~ Government had urged the unions to take their case.

tration procedure, whether in the public or private sector, to be qualified in this way and it is at variance with the way arbitration awards are viewed in the private sector where the employer has no right of veto on arbitration awards.

Let us contemplate what honourable members are being asked to do. They are being asked to disallow that decision, to participate willingly in this House's exercising-summary jurisdiction in a matter on which it, as distinct from the tribunal, has received no evidence whatsoever. What a marvellous exercise it will be to watch people who have not been here at all just troop in and, after having heard no evidence at all, exercise summary jurisdiction to disallow a matter which has been argued at the length I have indicated before the independent umpire. I ask them through you, Mr
Deputy Speaker: Is that what they think justice and fair play are about? Is that what they think decent and reasonable industrial relations are about? Is that how they think a standard of behaviour for the rest of the industrial community is set? Is that how members believethey honourably discharge their function and responsibility to this Parliament? If they merely troop in and acquiesce

That is what the Royal Commission had to say on this issue. This is the sort of slippery impudence both sides of the House have come to expect from the Minister in these matters.
Mr Viner-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to take a point of order. I object to the terminology of the honourable member. He has completely distorted what I said in my second reading speech.
Mr Scholes-You can make a personal explanation later.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The Minister is taking a point of order on the basis that the term used reflects upon him.
Mr Viner-It does reflect upon me, and it deliberately misleads the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Minister finds the term used to be offensive. It is a challenging debate and I suggest to the honourable member

580 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

for Wills that he did use a marginal term and that he might withdraw it.
Mr HAWKE-I will not use the term again.
Mr Viner-Mr Deputy Speaker, I will not accept that because, as you said, the honourable member for Wills used a marginal term. You asked him to withdraw. I ask that he withdraw unqualifiedly.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair accepts that the honourable member for Wills has withdrawn.
Mr HAWKE-Mr Deputy Speaker--
Mr N. A. Brown-He is wrong in fact, too.
Mr HAWKE-The honourable member will have his chance. We will see how he goes then. Consistent with the approach to which we have become accustomed from this Minister, he then said in a speech on the question of appeal rights that it will have the effect of removing from the Public Service Arbitrator the jurisdiction to make determinations in relation to matters covered by the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979. In his speech-I ask the House to note this-he went on to say:
The Act provides for appeal procedures for the protection of employees from arbitrary or capricious action.
In the proceedings before the Full Bench this issue was specifically a matter of argument between the parties, with the unions arguing about the difficulties that could be involved. On this point, the Full Bench said:
In the event that the applicants consider in the future that the Appeals Tribunals-
That is what the Minister says is the protection in the Act-
are unable to deal satisfactorily with situations such as the claims envisage, the matter can be brought before the arbitrator for consideration.
That is what the Full Bench said about the Government's claim. The Minister says that we have the appeals provisions in the Act. The Government argued that before the Full Bench and the Full Bench said that if there were any problems the matter could be taken to arbitration. There again that precise matter is argued; the arbitrators are saying that there is the protection of the arbitrator if the appeals procedure in the Act does not work fairly, but the Minister is saying that is not so and that there are appeal procedures in the Act. That sort Of argument would make even Gilbert and Sullivan blush.
I have no doubt about what line of argument will be followed by our opponents, but I make it clear on behalf of the Opposition that we are not seeking special privileges for public servants. We

are not doing that any more than the Full Bench was seeking to give those people special privileges. We simply believe that in the field of industrial relations those people should not be made second class citizens. This is not just the view of the Opposition. It is enshrined in the relevant convention of the International Labour Organisation; that is, the Labour Relations (Public Service) Convention of 1978. Article 8 of the ILO convention states:
The settlement of disputes arising in connection with the determination of terms and conditions of employment shall be sought, as may be appropriate to national conditions, through negotiation between the parties or through independent and impartial J1lachinery, such as mediation, conciliation and arbitration, established in such a manner as to ensure the condfidence of the parties involved.
Can honourable members think of anything less likely to have the confidence of the parties? Here again we see the hypocrisy of this Governmentthe Prime Minister, strutting the international stage saying how international law and conventions must be obeyed if we are to have decent relations between people, and yet in this issue he is flagrantly violating the international convention in regard to the settlement of disputes in the Public Service which his Government voted in favour of at Geneva in 1978. I conclude by saying that in whatever way one looks at this, from the beginning with the urging by the Government for the matter to go to arbitration, with the Government telling the unions to abide by arbitration and then itself shooting the umpire, and telling others to abide by conventions and then voting against them, it is an exercise in hypocrisy.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON (Lowe) (5.5)- I express very deep sorrow for the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke). I have some respect and quite a deal of liking for him, but I have to impress upon the House that he does not know what he is talking about. He has not been here long enough. He is a novice in this Parliament and now he is telling us how to run the Parliament. The honourable member spoke about the disallowances that have occurred over a period of 50 years and the denial of the spirit of conventions in a stable society. If he looks at what has happened he will find that the disallowances have nothing to do with the administration of the Departments of State. I can set out every single one for him .because I happened to be the Minister for Labour and National Service at one time and I was fanatically interested in these matters. The first one I have here relates to a salary matter in 1926.

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 581

Mr Hawke-You remember that one, do you?
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-I do not remember that, and neither does the honourable member.
Mr Hawke-You have been here since 1932?
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-If the honourable member will wait a minute he will get an explanation. I was not rude to him and did not interrupt when he spoke. Nor didl10se my temper, and I will not lose it now. The second matter relates to an allowance for officers in Canberra. The Bill has nothing to do with matters such as allowances. In fact, it relates to efficient administration, but provides that there shall be exceptions relating to wages and salaries, to long service leave and to hours of work. That matter is provided for in the legislation. The poor fellow opposite does not know that. What an unbelievable thing it is for him to come into this House and make statements but not know what he is talking about. The third case involves a 1932 Public Service regulation which relates to the salaries of people under a certain age.
Mr Hawke-Are you saying--
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-I did not question the honourable member for Wills. He should stop questioning me. Has he lost his block? He nearly lost his block when a point of order was called. I make it absolutely clear and certain that we are talking about the administration, not industrial matters or wages. I have to put it to the House in this way because I think it is vitally important. We are dealing not withwages and salaries, hours of work, long service leave, conditions of employment or the other matters, but with the administration of government. I believe, and I think every sensible member of the Opposition will believe-if Gough Whitlam were here he would stand up and abuse the honourable member for Wills-who argues the total responsibility for the administration of the laws of the Parliament should be with the Arbitration Commission. In fact, where administration involves departments of State, it must stay here in this House. The honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) must concede that the matter of administration is totally different from industrial relations, and the function must be a function of the Parliament itself. I would not give up one element of the authority of the Parliament on this occasion.
In regard tq the honourable members reference preference to unionists and the decision of the Commission to include in the Determination a provision that preference be/given to unionists, I stress as bne Who for a long time has been

associated with the problem of preference and attempts to introduce compulsory unionism that the Full Bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission is 20 years out of date. It does not relate to the present conditions in the Public Service. Preferencema:y have had some meaning at a time when employers dominated the unions. Today, monopolies of power have been assumed by a few active and important sections of the trade union movement. I refer to the Transport Workers Union and the Storemen and Packers Union as examples. Today people are fearful of the misuse of power by such unions. In the interests of the people as a whole the monopoly must be controlled. That is the first question with which I wish to deal. It is here too I think the honourable member is out of touch with life when he refers to an umpire. I mentioned the propaganda associated with that cliche. Here again I believe that the honourable member for Wills is frightfully out of touch. In relation to any matter dealing with the administration of government or with the administration of departments of state does the honourable member for Wills tell me that he can say: 'They have not obeyed the. decision of the umpire?' There is only one umpire in these matters: The Parliament. I have asked previously-I wantto mention this againwhether there is any man in this chamber who can go home tonight sincerely believing that he can put over to the public that this maUer--
Mrs Kelly-There is one woman who can.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-Please be nice; I will be nice to the honourable member. I think I will be able to give the honourable member for Canberra a lecture when she is on her own about the administration of government; nothing else. This is a totally irrelevant statement. I emphasise that we are talking about administration. I challenge any member of the Australian Labor Party who follows me in this debate and who says that in this case administration of the departments of state should be by an arbitrator of the Commission who has never been in parliament. Some arbitrators might have been in the Public Service but have left it. Db honourable members opposite tell me that people who have no knowledge of parliament-who have not been elected-I include for the time being the honourable member for WiIls-,-shouldtellhonourable members in this House what the functions of government ought to be and what the functions of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission ought to be, notwith" standingthe Commonwealth Constitution with its division of powers? I turn now to the next point I wish to raise. I like to refer to provisions contained in the Public Service Arbitration Act and the

582 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act. I think I know a fair bit about them. If honourable members look at the Public
Service Arbitration Act--

Mr Hawke-You don't know anything about retirement.

Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-Wait a minute, my son.

Mr Hawke-What do you know about retireml?nt, Bill?

Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-Be a good boy and stop looking at me like that. The honourable member for Wills reminds me of when I go home at the weekends and having to put up with all the kids. I do not want to debate across the table with the honourable member for Wills in the House today. Let me come back to the point I was raising. The Public Service Arbitration Act provides-I wonder whether the honourable member for Wills has ever heard of this-that where there is a conflict between an award or determination and a law of the Parliament then the law of the Parliament shall prevail. Again I ask
honourable members opposite-even the newcomers, particularly the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly)-whether they wanno tell me that they would prefer to prevail an award over an Act of Parliament. They are here to determine the laws of the land. If honourable members like to look at section 24 of the principal Act in this case they will find that there is a repetition of what is contained in section 44 of the Public Service Arbitration Act. I must confess that in subsection (3) there has been a slip of the pen because there is a contradiction of what is contained in clause 1. In this case I am fairly certain that if the matter were taken to law the principal clause, clause 1, would prevail. If it did not prevail, we would have to fall back, as we have been advised by the Attorney-General (Senator Durack)-he has said that what has been done is contrary to the law and that the.House will have the right to decide the matter-on section 22 of the principal
Act.

Mr Hawke-What about sub-section (2)? Just read it.

Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-If the honourable member for Wills gives me the two Acts I will read them out, provided he gives me time to read
them.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (HOD. J. D. M.

Dobie)-Order! There will be less conversation in

the House.

.

Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-I am referring to section 24 of the Public Service Arbitration Act

and section 22 of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act. I thank the honourable member for Wills for waving that piece of paper.
Mr Hawke-You passed it.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-I can see that the honourable member's hands look a little grimy. Here it is.
Mr Hawke-Your poor pathetic little man.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-There we have the law itself. The honourable member for Wills did not mention it. I do not want the honourable member for Wills to keep interrupting me.
Mr Hawke-What is this griminess business, you poor pathetic little person? Why do you resort to griminess?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There will be less interjection.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-I want to establish that under both the Public Service Arbitration Act and the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act there are sections which say that the law will prevail over an award or a determination of the Arbitration Commission. There can be no doubt about that. That is exactly what the Government is concerned with on this occasion. I should like to refer to another very important fact. The Government is endeavouring to ensure that once the Government or the Public Service Board becomes involved in a matter associated with redeployment or retirement the Public Service Board must observe a code. If the Public Service Board does not do so, the matter can come back to this Parlia, ment for consideration,when every member of the Opposition will have the opportunity to make a change. I believe if honourable members look at what has been decided-the Minister has already stated most of the facts-they will find that every effort has been made to ensure not only that goodwill is maintained with the public service but also that the rights and privileges of the Public Service are maintained.
Before I go further I want to mentiOn some of the provisions of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act which protects members of the service. The Bill provides for voluntary retirement at the age of 55, for a declaration relating to the redeployment and compulsory retirement of staff who can no longer be used by a department because they are surplus, medically unfit, inefficient or incompetent. As I said earlier, what we are trying to achieve in the interests of the public is the highest possible degree of efficiency. Against that background, I find

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 583

it impossible to believe that any organisation, group, or any memQer of parliament could claim
a or act in the belief that the Conciliation and Arbi-
tration Commission had power to make wards or determinations on matters relating to the administration of the Commonwealth Government.
I deal now with other steps, that have been taken to ensure that the provisions of redeployment and retirement are properly administered. Determination No. 503 of 1980 gives preference to union members, contrary to the objective of the Public Service Arbitration Act. It does various other things that are contrary to the Act. It restricts departments and the Public Service Board from taking legitimate action to achieve economy and efficiency. I think the intention of the Parliament itself is clear enough. Under the provisions of the Bill now before us, a formula is set out which must be followed by the Public Service Board. If there is any irregularity at all an appeal can be made on the ,grounds of unfairness, or injustice. I do not think the Government could have ,done anything less in the best interests of the country and the Public Service. Heaven knows, administration these days is difficult enough. Members of the opposition cannot understand the difference between sound administration on the one hand and industrial relations matters such as the provision for wages and salaries on the other hand. I referred earlier to matters such as long service leave and hours of work. The Government has chosen to treat these as industrial matters.
Some honourable members might remember that in 1972 I insisted on being introduced in this House for the first time a law to provide a definition of industrial relations. By and large if a matter is industrial it has to do with production and trades. It has nothing whatsoever to do with administration. That is clear if one cares to read the Oxford Dictionary. In 1972 we brought in an amendment relating to industrial relations. It provided that industrial matters could be within the jurisdiction of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. Now, if required, in these industrial matters, an appeal can be made to the Full Bench of the Commission. I have listened to what has been said today. My opinion is: I say positively that no one who disagrees with the views that I have put ought to be in government. No one can understand the difficulties of administration and claim that a government should give up its right to administer to an arbitrator. The person who argues that way should not be here. The person who argues that way must have his proposals known at the next election to see whether they will be tolerated by the Australian people.

Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (5.20)-We have reached this position of confrontation between the Government and the employees of the Government because the Government refused in the first place to have meaningful discussions with the Public Service unions. When the unions asked over a number of years that the Government sit down with them and discuss what were to be the provisions under which they would work in the Public Service, the Government described as discussions commitments that the Government itself had made to bring in legislation. Irrespective of what the peak councils would say to the Government this was the way in which the Government was going to behave. There could be no more important issue in the matter of industrial relations than job security.
It is all right for the right honourable member for Lowe (Sir William'McMahon) to say that wages, annual leave and sick leave matters can be decided by some other tribunal, but in the administration of government job security will be decided by the government itself. It is very difficult to draw the line and to have people understand that perhaps there are different responsibilities and different people making the decisions. Even the right honourable member for Lowe fought as hard as he could against his own redundancy when the Liberal Party of Australia in Lowe decided that he was redundant before the last elections. He fought very hard to get preselection again. He is now the father of the House. He did not like being declared redundant by his own political party.
There has been a quite conscious attack on the Public Service employees of this country since this Government came to power at the end of 1975. There is no doubt from its behaviour that it sees some political advantage in saying to the Australian public: 'Look what we are doing in Public Service bashing'. If honourable members look at the proposals on, staff ceilings, at the Governments proposals on the wage systems in Australia and at other measures which have affected Public Service employees, there is no doubt that honourable members will see that over the last five years there has been quite a conscious Public Service bashing exercise in this country. In the second last paragraph of the speech made tonight by the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner), he stated that the Public Service has come in for a great deal of criticism. He stated:
Much of the criticism is exaggerated and unjustified and does not pay proper respect to'the dedication and service given to their countrymen,

584 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

Much of the criticism is exaggerated and unjustified because the Government leads the exaggeration and leads the improper criticism of its own employees. There can be no worse industrial relationship in this country at the moment than the relationship between Public Service employees and this Government. To all intents and purposes the Public Service throughout Australia is completely demoralised. This incident cannot be isolated from all the other measures the Government has taken to restrict the service that the Public Service is to give the public. Time and again we have seen the Government bring the Public Service into disrepute by its mad decisions and by its bad decisions on staff ceilings. We have warned the Government time and again that the service the community expects-especially in the areas that I represented between 1977 and 1980-from the Public Service has not been received because of a decision on staff ceilings in the Public Service. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, who is at the table, knows that people were not being serviced in the Commonwealth Employment Service o'ffices because of the decisions made here by this Government, that it was not going to give additional staff to meet the requirements to deal with another 200,000 unemployed people. It was quite prepared to allow the Public Service employees to be brought into disrepute in the minds of the public as a result of that decision.
This Government alone carries the responsibility for the way in which the Australian community now sees the Public Service. It seems to me that the Government is trying to get itself off the hook because perhaps no one is held in less repute in this country than politicians. As if to get rid of the frustration which we all carry,because we know what members of the public think of us, this Government has embarked upon a sort of counter exercise to see whether it can place that feeling of frustration on the Public Service.
In the first two or three years that this Government was in office it wanted the public to believe that all the economic ills in Australia flowed directly from the decisions and the actions taken by the trade union movement. The Public Service was very much involved. The politicising of the Public Service in Australia has come directly from the confrontationist attitude and policies which this Government has put into force. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) could not have got a better member of his Ministry to bring about this confrontation than the Minister who not only sold out the Aboriginal people and the unemployed but also who now enjoys the idea that he

can wander around Australia condemning Australian Public Service employees. He rather likes the idea of living in that sort of confrontationist atmosphere all the time. We, of the Opposition, and the Australian Public Service employees, know that when the Minister goes to speak with other members of the Ministry he will not be speaking on behalf of public servants. It is a great pity. I hope for the sake of the public servants and the bureaucrats who back up some of this material that the Minister wrote this, because I would hate to think that someone in the Public Service would tell some of the lies contained in the document.
I have never heard a member of a trade union or of a Public Service union anywhere at any time suggest some of the things that are in this document. I have never been asked, nor has any member of our party been asked, to support some of the suggestions that have been put in this document which was given to us today by the Minister as his reasons for the disallowance of the Determination. What he says is justnot true. The unionists would know that they could not put up such proposals to the public and expect the support of people in public life in this country. Obviously the input into this speech, which we saw for the first time only today, must have come from the Minister's pen. I quote from it. The Minister stated:
They seem to say that public servants should never be reduced in level, even if work at the employee's level is not available or the employee is insufficient; and that a public servant's employment should never be terminated even if there is no work available for him or her to perform.
I have never heard the suggestion put forward by anybody that someone is just left in a department when there is absolutely no work to be done. As I said at the outset, if this Minister and this Government had been prepared to sit down with the peak councils and discuss the matters of working conditions, retirement, redundancy-whatever honourable members may like to call it-in the first place in a proper perspective, without any threats, we would not be. wasting our time in the Parliament today. But it suits the whim of the Government to do this. Honourable members will notice that the Government brought this matter on after the elections, not before them. There can be no doubt that due to these confrontationist tactics the former honourable member for Canberra, Mr John Haslem, was sacrified at the elections because the Prime Minister made up his mind and said to himself: 'We can bash the public servants. Do not worry about the two House of Representative seats in Canberra; we can sacr.ifice them if we get the rest of the people in Australia on side by telling them that the public servants are a bunch of overpaid and underworked people,

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 585

both in the Australian Capital Territory and throughout his Commonwealth, who have to be continually stood over by this Government'.
That is the way this Prime Minister thinks and that is the way this Government works. Of course the material which the Minister put in this document presented today does him and the Government no service at all because it is clearly just not true. I know that Mr Speaker and the Deputy Speakers are not happy with the term 'lies' being used in this Parliament. But, Mr Deputy Speaker, that document contains lies. No one has ever put forward the proposal contained in that document, except this Minister. He continually does it in the Parliament. The only way to nail him is to say what is contained in that document. This document is part of continually demoralising the Public Service. Why would the Public Service go out of its way to give the sort of service it is expected to give to the community when it is continually dealing with this Government in dispute after dispute? There has been no let up since the end of 1975.
Of course there are other matters which the Australian public ought to be aware of, including the way in which this Government has cut off the channels of employment opportunities for thousands of young Australians who normally would have joined the Public Service had staff ceilings not been in existence. In the report of the Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration Dr Coombs said: 'Do not think that because you have a cheaper Public Service that you will have a better Public Service. It just means that you are not serving the community in the expected way'. Of course, the pensioners and the unemployed will have their troubles when they go to the social security office, but they cannot understand that much of what is occurring is as a result of decisions being taken by this Government.
I have already said that job security is the most important thing to those people already in employment. Why would they not want these matters arbitrated? Why would they not want somebody outside listening to the case being presented, as was pointed out to the Parliament by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke)? Why would they not want a third party to say: 'Some justice has to be incorporated in the operation of this Act'? This Government has drafted legislation in a sloppy manner continually over the last five years. It is no fluke that-for the first time in 50 years it has moved for disallowance. Why would not the unions, pressured by their members, say: 'We want some additional provisos about the way

in which these redundancy and retirement provisions will operate'? We are not talking about redundancy and retirement but this Government's power to sack people. We are talking about a government that is not trusted by 5 per cent of its employees. We are talking about a group of employees in Australia-a quarter of the Australian work force-who have absolutely no trust in the Government. Why should not they be suspicious of how an Act of Parliament will operate when fuzzy terms such as 'redundancy' and 'retirement' are used? The employees are aware of the situation. We now have the razor gang running around. What if the razor gang comes back and reports that the Commonwealth should dispense with certain responsibilities; that perhaps Aboriginal affairs should be given back to the States; and other responsibilities should be given back to the States? The next move of the razor gang would be to use this nice Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act to dispense with the services of several thousand publiQ servants in such a way that they have rio right of appeal. That would cut across what the arbitrator has said ought to be a decent notice and a decent time within which things can be reorganised.
There is a way open for this Government to win back the trust of its employees. It should give an undertaking in this Parliament that it would speak to the employees' representatives about these matters before they are presented to the Parliament; that when the legislation comes before the Parliament it would incorporate some of the views put forward by the spokesman for the employees. In this case it does not matter whether the workers come in a white or a blue packet, the Government takes the same sort of attitu-de. It has totally ignored all the views put forward by the public servants. It has even talked about having consultations with the peak councils, but no such consultations have taken place. A situation of u!1rest will continue. Bad service will be given to the public and strikes and industrial upheaval will continue as long as this Government takes its path of union bashing and Public Service bashing in order to win political favour with those people who happen to think that Canberra is a waste of time and money.
Australia cannot continue along this path. There is no suggestion that public servants have to be put on a pedestal above the other workers of this country. It is not a question of pointing out that perhaps they have a better superannuation scheme. No one has a better superannuation scheme than members of the Parliament. It is a

586 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

question of winning back the trust of Public Service employees, giving them the number of employees required to carry out the services that the Australian people expect. That is what ought to be done. The way in which this Government has moved, not only to introduce the Act, but also to cut across a decision that has been made by an arbitrator, shows its complete disregard for the Australian Public Service and its intention continually to confront Public Service unions in the three years ahead.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley) (5.33)-To bring the debate back to the basic issues and to what it is supposed to be about, I inform the House that recently a leading firm of management consultants looked at three inquiries into the Public Service in Australia; the Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration, the Bland report on the Victorian Public Service and the Wilenski report on the New South Wales Public Service. This firm of management consultants noted that the three inquiries had all reached the following general conclusions about the Public Services: They were obsolete in modern management, weak in policy, strong on line management and poor in organisation, essentially due to the system of promotion within the Public Services. The firm noted also that the inquiries had made several general recommendations of which three are relevant to the present debate---:-firstly, to develop more mobility within the Public Servict<; secondly, to make early retirement more achieveable; and, thirdly, to develop more lateral personnel movement at early stages of employment.
Those considerations are a very good basis for debating the motion to disallow Determination No. 503 of 1980 and the amendments to the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act presently before the House. The Government's actions in both matters serve to implement in part those very desirable recommendations. Substantially, that is what the Government is seeking to do in this matter. The Government is seeking to introduce some modern management principles into the organisation of the Commonwealth Public Service. For that reason alone public servants and their unions should support these measures as they will lead to a better and more efficient Public Service, of which they can be even more proud than they are of the present Public Service.
I should make it clear also, particularly in response to the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young), that we support the Public Service. We acknowledge its valuable work, and often work of national importance. In the main,

the men and women in the Public Service are hard working and loyal and often could have more lucrative careers outside the Public Service. I hope honourable members and the public at large will not be influenced by any of the propaganda being directed at the Government that it is anti-Public Service, or any of the high flying phrases we heard from the honourable member for Port Adelaide this afternoon that the Government is engaging in some form of Public Service bashing. If ever there were a form of Public Service bashing we heard it 10 minutes ago when the honourable member for Port Adelaide was making a thinly veiled threat to some public servants that he would get them if . they had any part in drawing up the speech of the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs .(Mr Viner) which was delivered in this House today. That was exactly the innuendo in the speech of the honourable member. He said that no public servant would be prepared to put his pen to paper and write the speech delivered by the Minister this afternoon. That was an outrageous threat to make to public servants. Indeed it was strictly Public Service bashing which I never thought I would hear from any honourable member in this Parliament.
I should make it clear also that the vast majority of public servants would support the Government in its introduction of economies in public expenditure and in the administration of the Public Service. The vast majority of public servants support the Government's contention that the Public Service is there to serve the people and that because the people pay for it out of their hard earned wages it should be kept to a reasonable size and made as economical as possible. Any intelligent public servant would realise that personal taxes-including the taxes of public servants-cannot be reduced if governments con" tinue to spend so much in the public area. Public servants pay for the Public Service as much as anyone else.
The basic principle in this debate which must be understood is that the Government is an employer running the biggest business in the country and spending $36 billion this year. It is absurd that the Government does not already have the management prerogatives of other employers in the countrY: Without these basic principles and management powers the Government can never hope to have complete efficiency and economy in the Public Service. It can never hope to introduce modern management techniques. The pre~ent debate is really dealing with whether the Government is to exercise at least some of the powers of the employer to run a business in the interests of

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 587

efficiency and economy, or whether it is to abrothat. Secondly, it requires the permanent head to

gate that responsibility and leave it to outside provide the Public Service union with all relevant

bodies such as the Australian Conciliation and details and to discuss the issue with the union. The

Arbitration Commission, the Public Service Arbidetails the permanent head must provide are: The

trator, unelected and unaccountable as they are, reasons why the officer may have to be trans-

to run affairs as they think fit. If it is to be the latferred; the number of and other details relating to

ter, there will be no hope of the Government ever the positions and employees in the department;

containing the size and cost of the Public Service, details of the people who will be needed in the sec-

of its introducing modern management principles, tion; and a host of information about the internal

or of its getting value for money from all its workings of the department. No private employer

employees.

could be expected to divulge that sort of infor-

It is for those reasons that Determination No. 503 of 1980, made by the Australian Conciliation

mation and no outside union would expect to receive it.

andArbitration Commission, should be Worst of all, under this Determination the per-

disallowed. It is for those reasons also that the manent head and the Public Service Board would

Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and then be obliged to hold with the union discussions

Retirement) Act 1979 must be amended to reabout how to avoid the redeployment of the em-

move from the Public Service Arbitrator the jurisployee, how to avoid the very thing that this Par-

diction he presently has to make determinations liament has decreed should occur. That is what is

in relation to matters covered by that Act. Unless directed under the Determination which is before

we amend the Act in the way now proposed by us today. The permanent head and the Public Ser-

the Government, the Public Service Arbitrator vice Board would have to discuss retaining or

will be able to continue to make determinations modifying the old cumbersome systems. They

on matters that should be the sole responsibility of would have to discuss reviewing the extent of out-

the elected government-matters such as who side contracting work carried on for the depart-

should be employed, which departments are overment. In other words, under the Determination,

staffed, whether employees should be moved to in the face of what an Act of this Parliament

different areas and how the Public Service should states, the Government would be told: 'Reduce

be run to gain more efficiency and economy. They outside contracting work so that you can keep the

are matters which every employer in private inold ramshackle system you have had in the past

dustry has power to determine and they are matand have the work done internally by more public

ters which the Government as an employer servants than you need'.

.&hould have power to determine.

That is an absurd direction which the Determi-

One has only to look at the Determination to nation is trying to give to the Government. It is

see that it must be disallowed. Part 1 deals with the exact opposite of what, by way of legislation

redeployment situations. In situations in which it passed by this Parliament, the Government has

appears to the permanent head of a department decreed should be done. I remind the Opposition

that an employee's services cannot be used in that -this is the crux of this debate-that it is the Par-

departmentbecause it is so overstaffed that it is liament which is supreme. The Government, after

not efficient or economical, the Act gives the perreceiving those directions, would be directed by

manent head power to move the employee to a the Determination to give the union reasons for

different job in the Public Service. That is a fairly going ahead with the decision. It is ridiculous to

moderate provision. But the Determination beexpect the Government to justify its actions to the

fore us would stifle the implementation of that unions in such a way on something which is purely

provision because it would give excessive power to the Government's business, something which is

the Public Service unions and effectively would purely its prerogative.

prevent the employer, the Government, from exercising fully and promptly the very modest powers the Act gives it to use the management prerogatives which the employer alone must exercise.

Apart from that protracted process, the
Government would be prevented from acting for three months after it gave notice to the union. The Act passed by this Parliament directs the permanent head of the department to carry out the re-

What would be done under the Determination deployment procedures, but the Determination

in such cases? First, the Determination requires states that he cannot do that until he goes through

the permanent head to advise the Public Service the whole procedure laid down and then not until

unions before any public servant can be transhe has given the union three months' notice. No

ferred. No modern employer in private industry . elected government can allow itself to be pushed

would be expected or could be expected to do around like that. No elected government, as an

588 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

employer, could allow its management-employer related to the normal terms and conditions of em-

prerogatives to be trampled upon in that way. ployment. Those matters will still be subject to ar-

Again, the Act provides that if the Public Service bitration. That would not be changed by this

Board cannot redeploy an employee it must issue legislation.

a certificate stating that it cannot practically redeploy that employee. But the Determination states that the Board cannot do that and cannot reduce the salary of that employee for a period of up to 12 months. Again, we say that an elected government cannot allow itself to be frustrated in such a way in implementing proper management principles and proper principles which have been laid down by an Act passed by this Parliament.

The Government will expect unions and employees-and employers,. for that matter-to abide by the umpire's decision on those matters. But in this legislation and in the disallowance of the Determination, we are not dealing with any of those matters; we are dealing with matters which are solely the responsibility of the employer. No employer would allow arbitration on a decision of whether that employer should employ certain

In a second area, the Act provides for retirement of a public servant when that public servant cannot be redeployed in the Public Service. But the Determination provides some mechanics for that to be done. Then it does a very strange thing;

people or whether an employee should be transferred to a different section. Indeed, in private industry even the case of a dismissal is not" something which constitutionally the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission can hear.

it gives preference to the unionist: If the public servant concerned is a member of a union he keeps his job but if he is a non-unionist he will lose it, even though it is not compulsory for a public servant to join "a union and, in such a situatiqn, a non-unionist might be a better employee. What an injustice that would be to the non-unionist.

Public servants can rest assured that this legislation does not trample on the principle of arbitration, nor does it represent an abrogation of rights which public servants would have in outside employment. Indeed, in the Public Service the terms of employment and provisions for separation and superannuation are far more generous

Some of these provisions will remain. They existed before Determination No. 503 was made and the Government is prepared to let some of them stand. Anyone of them by itself would be enough to justify 'disallowing the Determination; in combination they more than justify disallowance. The Determination should be disallowed. The amendment to the Act proposed in this Bill should be passed because, as the Act stands, the Public Service Arbitrator can overrule a law passed by this Parliament. No democratically

than any outside employer would or could afford . to provide. The principles of arbitration and resort to the umpire are still principles to which the Government subscribes and are principles to which it encourages the unions and employees of this country to subscribe. In conclusion, it is unfortunate that we did not hear the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) more frequently exhort parties to resort to the umpire and to follow the umpire's decision when he held his previous office.

elected government can allow that situation to Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (5.48)-1 was sur-

continue. No respon~ible public servant would prised by the speech of the honourable member

want that situation to continue. The public which for Diamond Valley (Mr N. A. Brown). He

elected the Government could not possibly want seemed to base his justification for the proposed

that situation to continue.

amendments to the Commonwealth Employees

Mr Hawke-You are not changing that Act.

(Redeployment and Retirement) Act and the disallowance of Determination No. 503 on the claim

Mr N. A. BROWN-If the honourable member were to read the papers he would see that that is exactly what would happen. At the moment, laws passed by the Parliament can be overruled by a decision of the Public Service Arbitrator. One other important matter should be mentioned. A criticism which has been levelled at

that they comply with modern management technique. I exhort honourable members not to be fooled by that. Once the jargon is cleared away we see that all this legislation is based on one fundamental principle; that is, to sack public servants quickly and easily and to leave them with minimum rights of appeal.

the Government is that it is not accepting the deOn 26 February in this House, the Prime Minis-

cision of the umpire. That criticism is not wellter (Mr Malcolm Fraser) described the Common-

founded. The matters which we say should go to wealth Employees (Redeployment. and Retire-

the umpire, whose decision should be respected ment) Act 1979 as 'imaginative and far-reaching'.

and obeyed, are matters related to salaries and This is an apt description of this legislation. It is

wages, hours of work, holidays and other matters imaginative in the sense that with one legislative

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 589

sleight of hand, it will turn the clock back in industrial relations by giving the Public Service Board unfettered management prerogatives more aligned with those of the master-servant relationships of last century. It is far-reaching in the sense that it strikes at the security of tenure of the 153,000 federal public servants under the Public Service Act and at all the employees in statutory authorities. It is also far-reaching in that it is the culmination of a long series of administrative changes and legislation designed to reduce public service conditions of employment and prevent recourse to arbitration.
In the current debate on Determination 503 of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, the Government's role has been hypocritical and short sighted. The dispute between the Government and Public Service unions in this issue has had a long history covering several years and precipitating intense industrial conflict. After extensive hearings and evidence, a Full Bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission decided that a determination should be madedespite the opposition of the Public Service Board-and this determination was brought down on 23 December 1980. After a long and sometimes bitter industrial conflict, the due process of our legal system brought about a negotiated agreement in the form of Determination No. 503. As the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) pointed out earlier this evening, the Prime Minister has always urged that unions look to the way of the umpire. This theme was reiterated on 2 August 1979 by the then Acting Prime Minister when he said:
. . . the arbitration arena has always been available to test union claims on their merits and this can now occur.
But yet, when a decision was brought down, a decision which the Prime Minister did not like, in the manner of a spoilt child who cannot get his own way by fair play, he alters the rules. As the honourable member for Wills said, the right honourable gentleman should take heed of his own recent comments to the Australian cricket captain Greg Chappell, regarding rules of the game and the accepted conventions and practices of this country. The umpire's decision-in this case Determination No. 503 of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission-is being totally ignored by this Government, thereby representing an insult not only to the Commission but also to accepted legal practices in -this country for the settlement of industrial disputes.
The Government had clearly decided to ignore the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission when the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister

(Mr Viner) announced on 5 February this year that the Government would move to disallow Determination No. 503. This was decided without the benefit of any formal legal opinion and the reason given was that it had 'the effect of altering Parliament's intention'. Two weeks later, on 26 February 1981, with the benefit of a hastily contrived legal opinion from the Attorney-General (Senator Durack), the Minister changed his mind on the reason for disallowance and announced instead that Determination No. 503 was 'not in accord with a law of the Commonwealth--
Mr Viner-I rise to order. The honourable member referred to the opinion prepared by the Attorney-General as a hastily contrived opinion. I consider that the word 'contrived' is a reflection upon the honourable gentleman and I ask for it to be withdrawn.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (HOD. J. D. M. Dobie)-The Chair sees no point of order. The honourable member has no,need to withdraw.
Mrs KELLy-It was announced that Determination No. 503 was 'not in accord with a law of the Commonwealth, namely, the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979'. At the same time the Minister announced that it was the Government's intention to introduce amending legislation to exclude from arbitration matters which are the subject of this Act. The reasons given by the Government and the Minister for this retrograde action were that these matters are the prerogative of management and lie within the responsibility of the departments and the Public Service Board. This view had already been put to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and rejected in its decision of 20 December 1979. The decision stated:
. . . management or managerial policy as such is not a proper subject matter for an award or other. We are unable to find in the applications any claim that can be said to transgress this principle. The provisions relating to consultation and the interpolation of periods of time between various steps may in some circumstances inhibit the exercise of the Board's and the Permanent Head's consideration, but it cannot be said that a decision giving effect to such concepts constitutes a determination upon management or managerial policy as such.
Thus the Conciliation and arbitration Commission has already rejected the arguments relating to 'fettering of management initiative' which the Government is now still using as the reason for disallowance of Determination 503 and as the reason for excluding recourse to arbitration.
The general principle of arbitration, that employer and employee should abide by the umpire's decision, should be upheld throughout the community, and in particul!\r, should be upheld by this Parliament in its role as the largest employer in this country, and in its role of being responsible

590 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

for the establishment of legal machinery for the settlement of industrial disputes. If we aspire to a fair and just society, we cannot afford to encourage disrespect for the umpire's decision and we, in this Parliament, have a duty and an obligation to oppose the disallowance of Determination 503 and oppose the Bill for amendment which excludes arbitral jurisdiction. These two proposed measures can only result in loss of faith in the arbitration system and considerable loss of morale in the Public Service as the Government continues its policy of Public Service bashing in order to score cheap political points.
The Government's intention to disallow Determination 503 also raises the question of the appropriateness of that power. This action is an interference in the properly constituted legal machinery established to deal with conciliation and arbitration matters. There is clearly conflict between the Government's role as employer and participant in the conciliation and arbitration process and its role as law maker. This conflict of interest was well recognised in the Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration recommendation No. 245 which was quoted in full by the honourable member for Wills.
The Government cannot expect to be a participant in a dispute, while at the same time reserving the right to dismiss or ignore the umpire, and then retain the respect of the community. The Government's intention not only to disallow Determination 503 but also to amend the Act so as to prevent any recourse to arbitral jurisdiction is outright foul play, and will not inspire the confidence of employees or employers. The effects of this legislation on the Public Service will be to lower morale further by reducing job security and to lower the quality and quantity of services offered to the community. The Government is clumsily. attempting to pave the way for the Lynch razor gang to complete its task of reducing Public Service functions and numbers.
If Determination 503 is disallowed, and Determination 509 of 1977 takes effect, there will be no adequate requirement for consultation, discussion of alternatives, or provision of information. The effect will be to leave the whole procedure for redeployment and retirement in the hands of the Public Service Board. The rights of employees to appeal under such arrangements are extremely limited. The effect on public servants will be reduction of job security and destruction of the concept of a career service in the public sector, and this will open the door to partisan political decisions and intrusions.

The amendments to the Act are brought forward in the name of efficiency-yet the Act itself, in the great power it gives Ministers and departmental heads over public servants, can be used not just to further their own notions of efficiency, as outlined by the honourable member for Diamond Valley, but to politicise the Public Service to an unprecedented degree. The Act will apply to public servants in departments anclstatutory authorities throughout the country and its scope will allow the Fraser Government to institute unprecedented organisational change, probably following the outcome of the Lynch razor gang's review. It is possible, too, that the Act will pave the way for reduction of Public Service numbers as further technological change takes place, such as the introduction of computer systems, word processors and the like. This Government has also publicly stated its commitment to selling off publicly owned enterprises to the private sectoI', and this Act would facilitate this process by providing arrangements whereby employees could be quickly redeployed or retired.
Under this legislation, whole departments or sections could be removed and their officers nominated for redeployment. For example, rumour has it that the razor gang is after the scalp of the Australian Development Assistance Bureau-the expert body administering Australia's overseas aid-and this at a time when there are increasing demands from our Asian and Pacific neighbours for Australia to take a responsible role in regional development and at a time when it appears that our Prime Minister would like to participate more fully in the North-South dialogue in Mexico later this year. If ADAB were to be abolished, its officers could be nominated for redeployment with no right of appeal, unless they could prove that they did not properly belong to the group of people classed as employees of this Bureau.
Many cases already exist where particular individuals have been harassed or victimised by more senior public servants. In a recent case a public servant accused of incompetency and, of all things, links with the Liberal Party was cleared by a special committee of inquiry but her harassment continues. Under this legislation, the scope of Ministers in this Government or future governments and senior public servants to remove individuals whose views they do not share is greatly enhanced. It would be possible fora Minister or a permanent head to get rid of a policy section so that, for example, if the Treasurer did not like the advice he was getting he could substantially alter, reduce or remove the policy sections of the Department of the Treasury.

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 591

There is an urgent need to maintain the system whereby employment conditions can be reviewed objectively by means of the conciliation and arbitration process. This is the basis of our system of industrial relations and it should continue to be so. The decisions of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission in Determination No. 503 of 1980 will be supported as fair and reasonable by most Australians. If we wish to preserve the confidence in established legal procedures for industrial relations in this country, we must reject the Government's moveto disallow Determin'ation No. 503 of 1980 and reject the amendment of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act which prevents recourse to conciliation and arbitration.
Sitting suspended from 6.3 to 8 p.m. MrCHAPMAN (Kingston) (8.0)-Oneofthe most important requirements of government in the present era is that its administrative arm, the Public Service, should improve its efficiency. In practical terms we have reached the limit as to how much we can extract from the people of Australia through taxation, hence we have reached the limit of revenue raising capacity of the Government. Politically, in three successive elections the people of Australia have endorsed the principles of restraint in government expenditure and of a small public sector. In this environment it is essential for the Public Service to operate at maximum efficiency, making the most effective use of limited resources to fulfil successfully the valid functions of government. The two matters we are debating tonight, the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Bill and the disapproval of Determination 503 of 1980 by the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, give effect to this aim of the Government. That is the intention of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act which was passed by the Parliament nearly two years ago. That legislation confers on public servants an option to retire voluntarily from age 55. It also provides a more effective basis for management initiated redeployment and retirement in the interests of more efficient and economical staffing. The legislation also establishes an appeals tribunal to ensure that staff receive fair treatment. It enablesthe payment of special benefits to those who are retired between the ages of 55 and 60 for reasons other than being excess to requirements or ill health. Thus the legislation that was passed nearly two years ago and the matters we are debating this evening seek the goal of efficiency to which I have referred.

Determination 503 is contrary to the achievement of this goal. It frustrates it by instituting protracted procedures before redeployment or retirement can occur. Hence it must be disallowed by this House. The amending Bill removes from the Public Service Arbitrator the jurisdiction to make determinations in relation to matters covered by the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act.
By opposing this legislation and the disapproval of Determination 503, the Labor Party is demonstrating its opposition to an efficient and economic public sector. This was much in evidence during its years in office when all sorts of new programs were developed without any regard to efficiency. By opposing the Government in these matters, the Labor Party is abdicating its role as a responsible Opposition to become a mouthpiece, not for the rank and file public servants who perform their day to day duties loyally and to the best of their abilities, but for the irresponsible union leadership which has persistently opposed the provisions of this legislation and sought to change its intent and frustrate its operation. Labor spokesmen in this debate have clearly revealed themselves as representing this mouthpiece.
The honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) provided a superficially attractive case in opposing these proposals. However, careful analysis reveals that he was using sleight of hand. His, arguments were only very superficial.
Mr Carlton-As-usual.
Mr CHAPMAN-As usual, as the honourable member interjected. The honourable member for Wills accused the Government of ignoring the umpire's decision, as he described Conciliation and Arbitration Commission Determination 503. He claimed that it was the first time since 1932 that a government had interfered with the umpire's decision. He completely ignored the fact that it is also the first time since 1932 that an umpire has made a decision contrary to the intent and the letter of an Act of Parliament. The opinion of the Attorney-General (Senator Durack), which was tabled in this House, clearly indicates that two clauses of Determination 503namely 4 (9) and 5 (I)-conflict with sections 9 (1) (b) and 11 (6) (b) of the act. For nearly 50 years no umpire has challenged the supremacy of Parliament in these matters. This, is the relevant point of the argument, not the attempt of the honourable member for Wills to reinterpret history by claiming that no government has challenged the umpire during that period. I now refer to the specious sporting analogy of the honourable member for Wills. He referred to the recent

592 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

underarm bowling controversy in an international cricket match. He remarked that even if such an act were legal it was contrary to the institution and traditions of cricket.
Mr Hawke-That is what the Prime Minister said.
Mr CHAPMAN-I think the honourable member for Wills agreed with his comments. The honourable member related to challenging the umpire's decision in relation to the matters before the House. He completely ignored the fact that the greatest and overriding institution and tradition is the supremacy of Parliament.
Mr Young-Which House?
Mr CHAPMAN-The Parliament is made up of both Houses as the honourable member for Port Adelaide ought to know. Furthermore, the umpire can make a decision only in accord with the laws of the game. To extend the analogy of the honourable member for Wills, the umpire cannot, or at least he should not, give a batsman out caught if he has not hit the ball. He cannot prevent a batsman batting with a bat and decree that he use some other instrument. These analogies are relevant to the issues we are debating tonight. Determination 503 is contrary to the law, as indicated by the Attorney-General's opinion which was tabled in this House.
The provisions relating to the redeployment and retirement of staff are matters of management prerogative. They are not matters of industrial relations in the same way in which wages and conditions of service are. Of course, in those instances it is appropriate that an umpire-that is, the Conciliation and Arbitration Commissionshould make determinations. It is not acceptable that the internal workings of government administration should be subject to an outside non-elected body such as the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. Rather, such internal workings are subject to the supremacy of Parliament. It is interesting to speculate on whether the union leaders and the Opposition would have accepted the umpire's decision if, for example, the umpire in the form of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission had determined that under this legislation public servants could be retired instantly without any compensation or that they should receive only half pay instead of full pay during the period in which their redeployment and retirement procedures were being fulfilled. Of course, neither the union leaders nor the Labor Party would have accepted such a decision by the umpire. Therefore, the entire case of the honourable member for Wills is specious and unsubstantiated by argument.

The honourable member for Port Adelaide referred to staff ceilings. He ignored the fact that since the time of the Menzies Government in the early 1950s staff ceilings have been in operation. They were applied by the Government of his own persuasion when it was in office between 1972 and 1975. He referred to the effect of staff ceilings on the Commonwealth Employment Service. He entirely ignored the fact that as a result of the Norgard inquiry the Government increased the staffing resources available to that important instrument of government policy. The honourable member also mentioned the razor gang and insinuated that if it were determined by the so called razor gang that some functions of the Federal Government ought to be done away with or handed back to the States it would not be proper if under this legislation Commonwealth employees were redeployed or retired to institute that reduction in Federal Government activity. Of course, if the Government determines that, in the interests of efficiency and economy, such an area of government activity ought to be reduced or handed back to the States, it is appropriate for the Government under this legislation to find alternative positions for the public servants so displaced or, if necessary, to retire them. It is the very purpose of this legislation to ensure that government operates efficiently and economically.
We also need to consider that for most of its history Public Service employment has been regarded as different from employment in the private sector. Public servants were prepared to accept lower salaries and, perhaps, less generous conditions of employment in return for job security and permanency of tenure. In recent years, especially when Labor was in government, the Public Service has become the pacesetter in regard to employment conditions and wages rather than lagging behind in that regard. Therefore, in many areas of private sector employment employees have benefits that are no better than those which apply to employees in the public sector. On that basis also it is appropriate that employment provisions with regard to retrenchment or redeployment which apply in the private sector should now apply to the extent provided in this legislation in the public sector as well. Of course, in the private sector employees have no redress if they are retrenched, sacked or become redundant. This legislation provides for appeal, also a protracted procedure which is designed to protect the interests and rights of public servants who are affected by its passage. In that regard they will retain significant advantages when compared with employees in the private sector.

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 593

This legislation is necessary if we are to have an efficient and economic public sector, to ensure the efficient delivery of government services and programs so that the taxpayers' dollar is not wasted; so that programs which are a legitimate activity of government, and determined by it to be necessary, are implemented in the most effective way; and so that there will not be over-staffing and wastage of resources. It is on that basis that I say that the original intent of the legislation should continue to apply and, more importantly, that the matters which we are debating tonight, the amending Bill and the proposed disapproval of Determination 503, should pass. The Minister has argued at length the basic case for the Government. That case stands against the arguments that have been put by the honourable member for Wills and the honourable member for Port Adelaide. On that basis I support the proposals of the Government and urge their speedy passage.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (8.13)-The issue before this House is as clear and simple as any that has ever come before a parliament. It concerns the desirability or otherwise of the Government's disapproving Determination 503 of 1980 of the matter by the Full Bench of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission made on 23 December, and substituting the political judgment of this Government. The relationship between the Executive, Parliament and the judiciary is often complex, but there can be no action more cynically contrived to undermine confidence in our industrial tribunals than this Government's action, particularly as it reproduces in the Parliament the very arguments that were put to the Full Bench of the Commission in the lengthy hearing which has been outlined by the,honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke).
I trust that the arguments that were put to the Commission were put with more clarity and erudition, and considerably more sophistication, than we have heard here today. No matter how those arguments were put to the Commission, they were rejected. That is precisely the point that was made by the honourable member for Wills, the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) and the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly). To date that statement has gone unanswered by any Government member. I can understand their embarrassment. How can the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) be regarded any longer as speaking with credibility on industrial matters when, as was pointed out by the honourable member for Wills, he suggested to the Administrative and Clerical Officers Association, in respect of this industrial issue, that it ought to go

back to the court and, to use his own term, 'accept the way of the umpire'. That was his advice. How is it now possible for the Prime Minister, who openly and publicly urged public servants to follow that course, to use his numbers in the House cynically, so as to reject the decision of the umpire?
The Leader of the National Country Party, when he was Acting Prime Minister and bans were lifted by Public Service unions, was delighted. Let me quote him for the benefit of members of the National Country Party. Their leader said:
The arbitration arena has always been available to test unions claims on their merits and this can now occur.
I have been in two parliament and have seen many events, but I have seen nothing quite as disgusting as this situation, in which the Government seeks to replace the decision of the Full Bench of the Commission. It has trotted out a series of arguments today, yet during the debate not a dozen Government members have been present in the House. When the bells ring they will walk in here and put their arms up without any regard for the argument!. that have been put, or for the rights at issue.
Mr Falconer-How many are there here on your side?
Mr Hawke-We aren't going to upset the umpire's decision; you are.
Mr HOLDING-We are supporting the umpire's decision. I would have thought that if members of the Liberal-National Country Party were being asked to vote against the decisions of the industrial tribunals of this nation they should at least be here to hear the arguments put. I find it fascinating that the one man who has the responsibility in this Government for the future course of industrial relations-not merely with the unions in the private sector but also with those in the public sector; I refer to the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock)-has not even been here to listen to the debate. I commend him upon his judgment and upon his absence. He is a man of some integrity. If there is a shonky set of facts, a dubious legal argument or a cynical exercise in industrial relations the brief gravitates automatically to the hands of the Minister for 'Unemployment'. The Minister for Industrial Relations will not have a bar of it. He does not want to be near it, so he leaves it to the Minister for Unemployment.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member will address the Minister by his correct title.

594 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

Mr HOLDING-I thought nothing could be more correct than to describe the Minister as the Minister for Unemployment but if I have it wrong apparently he does not object to it. At least he has that much credibility.
I wish now to deal with substance of the Government's argument. It can be divided into three phases. Firstly, it represents a shonky set of facts, secondly, a dubious legal argument and finally, a cynical exercise in industrial relations. In regard to its being a shonky set of facts, the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner), in his second reading speech, indicated that in his view it was part of the intention of the unions, in seeking the Determination of the Commission, to prevent the implementation of the intention of this Parliament. That is a fascinating argument because section 24 (1) (3) of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979, which deals with awards, provides:
Where a term of an award, whether made before or after the commencement of this Act, that applies in relation to an employee is inconsistent with a provision of this Act, the term shall prevail and the provision of this Act shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be inoperative in relation to the employee.
That is the intention of the Parliament. Let us go through the words carefully because obviously they have eluded the Minister. It refers to the intention of the Parliament where a term of an award is made either before or after the commencement of the Act. So, it foresees challenges and decisions by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. It further states that in relation to an employee where there is a d~termination of the Commission which is inconsistent with the Actthis was the intention of Parliament thus expressed-then to the extent of the inconsistency, theterm of the award shall prevail.
It is an extraordinary argument for the Government now to say what a terrible thing it is for the Parliament, having applied its mind to this legislation, to say: 'Yes, we contemplate challenges to the Act; we contemplate that the unions will want to test this before relevant industrial tribunals'. The Act quite specifically refers to an award under the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, and we have before us a determination made by a Full Bench of the Commission. The intention of the Parliament as expressed by section 24 (3) of the Act is quite clear-the provisions in the, terms of the award will apply to the extent that there is inconsistency. That is what the legislation says. How is it possible or credible for any Minister-save this Minister of the Crown-to argue against the very terms of the Act which contemplate an inconsistency between the Act and

the award and which says that the term of the award shall apply? That is what the Act says but it is something which seems to have eluded the honourable gentlemen opposite. So, they ,are forced to rely upon this extraordinary document, the opinion of the Attorney-General (Senator Durack). I do not want to be uncharitable to the Attorney-General.
Mr John Brown-But you will.
Mr HOLDING-No, I will not be. I say simply that he is a loyal servant of this Government. There would be no members of the legal profession who in seriousness would regard him as a lawyer's lawyer. In fairness to him, he does not pretend to be. His first duty is to his Cabinet colleagues and to carry out the will of this Government. It becomes a bit difficult when one has to do that by writing a legal opinion. But, I will say this for him: He did his best. I would have been far more persuaded if he had sought the opinion of the Solicitor-General or some eminent members of the legal profession who are noted for their independence in these matters. and then, on the basis of their opinions, had said they were opinions with which he could concur. I turn to page 6 of the Attorney-General's opinion. His decision is that clause 4 (9) is inconsistent with section 9 (1) (b) and section 5 (1) is inconsistent with section 11 (6) (b). I point out to honourable members who are perhaps unfamiliar with the law that the High Court in the Booth's case stated that an indirect effect on the operation of the Act does not mean it is out of accord; that 'out of accord' means a direct conflict with the provision of the Act. That is what the High Court said.
I invite all honourable gentlemen to turn to page 14 of the Attorney-General's statement, where he refers to the Determination which introduces a time factor into the award. It stated that an officer of employee who has been declared eligible for redeployment cannot have his salary level affected until certain notice periods have elapsed. It uses the word 'until'. In dealing with this term of the award in paragraph 15, of this somewhat shonky legal document 'until' becomes 'unless'. The term 'until' imparts an, element of time in which a particular set of facts could take place, that term has been transposed by the Attorney,General and he has used his own term 'until' as if it were a part of the determination. Of course, it is nothing of the sort. He states that the inconsistency arises because we are using the term 'unless other circl,Jmstances have occurred'. I have been around the law long enough, as other people in this chamber have been around the law long enough, to know that if one wants a legal opinion to prove certain political arguments it is generally

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 595

obtainable. Part of the problem when one prod\lces that kind of legal opinion is that it will not always hold water when introduced into legal company who take these arguments seriously. No one-in this Parliament would want to take this legal--opinion of the Attorney-General into the High Court and hope to get any kind of favourable judgment. There is no emphasis upon which this document-it is the only document that the Government has to float with-can prove to this House that this is an appropriate legal basis or opinion upon which we should overthrow a determination of the Full Bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. It is a very limited argument by the Attorney-General. It was tried before the Full Bench and was rejected. This legislation and the arguments that have come forward are the most cynical exercise that I have ever seen by any government that has set out to determine public confidence in our arbitration system. It will live to haunt this Government because there is no trade union official at any level, either in the Public Service or in the private sector, who will ever again regard any statement by the Prime Minister or his Minister for Industrial Relations 'about obeying the umpire's decision' as anything other than a cynical exercise.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar) (8.28)-1 think honourable members of the House might be excused, after hearing the powerful oration, or peroration, of the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding), for thinking that somewhere along the line he had lost the whole point of the argument. Therefore, it is quite important to go back to what we are talking about. We are amending the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act. We are removing provisions from it which would enable a Public Service arbitrator or the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to usurp the powers of the Parliament. The honourable member for Melbourne Ports quoted the whole of Determination 503, and he actually read it quite accurately. It says that if some determination is made which conflicts with what is in this Act then the Act shall be inoperative to the extent of that inconsistency. In simple language, that means that the Parliament has made an Act to deal with the redeploymentand retirement of public servants and it thought it had a pretty clear idea 'of what it wanted in that Act but it found that there was a determination-No. 503 of 1980-by the Public Service Arbitrator and which was upheld by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission which

introduced a totally new principle into employment in the Public Service. This principle involved preference to unionists at the point of the determination of their employment. In other words, if it were determined that there was a surplus of employees for any particular reason or that certain employees were not able to perform their functions, at that point under very strict laid down rules preference would be given to members of unions in the redeployment or laying off of the surplus employees. That was a completely new principle which was introduced not by the Parliament, which after all ought to be the body that determines what the rules are for employment in the Public Service, but by external bodies which are not responsible to any elected persons.
We have heard an enormous amount, ad nauseam, about referring decisions to the umpire. We have heard, of course, various cricketing al-' lusions and the like. I am not prepared to defer to an umpire on matters which are properly for determination by the supreme legislative body. There is argument between employers and employees on certain matters of wages and conditions. It is quite proper that they should be put before an independent arbitrator and that the umpire's decision be accepted. I would be more impressed by the arguments put forward by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), the honourable member for Canberra. (Mrs Kelly) and the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) if they gave consistent advice to those in the trade union movement-those who support their party and dictate their actions in this Parliament-to accept the decisions of the umpire, that is the Conciliation and' Arbitration Commission. That is not the case in relation to matters concerned with wages and conditions which are properly within the power of those arbitrators to determine. It would be helpful if the decisions of those arbitrators could be taken notice of and, in fact, implemented.
However, when it is a matter concerning the basic rules and conditions of employment, continuity of employment and redeployment in the Public Service I think it is important that this Parliament makes the decisions. I do not know of any provision in the rules of the employment of public servants where preference is given to members of unions when considering promotion, retirement or redeployment. A provision in the Conciliation and Arbitration Act-I have to say quite clearly that I think it is a bad provision-allows for insertions in awards in the ordinary situation, outside the Public Service, which give preference to unionists. In other words, they are closed-shop

596 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of 1980

provisions. I am against such closed-shop provisions in the private sector but I accept that under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act there is at the moment a provision for those insertions to be made. I think it is bad but that is the rule under which we live at the moment. I do not for one moment accept that that provision should be introduced to cover the Public Service. If we were to introduce into the Public Service a preference for unionists we would get a totally different rule for promotion, redeployment or retirement. It would be, in fact, a provision for mediocrity in the Public Service.
I want to make a serious comment about the attitudes of the members of the Australian Labor Party towards the Australian Public Service. I believe their actions cumulatively over the years have been such as to bring the Australian Public Service more and more into disrepute in the eyes of Australians generally. I think that these actions may have been well meant at the time they were taken. Indeed, I am sure that the early actions of Mr Clyde Cameron when he was Minister for Labor which made the Public Service a pacesetter in wages and conditions were intended to be in the public interest. Towards the end even Mr Cameron clearly admitted that his actions had not been in the interests either of the public or of the Public Service. Mr Cameron pointed out in a letter to Mr Munro of the Administrative and Clerical Officers Association-it is a well publicised letter-that at the time of Federation and thereafter it was a generally recognised principle that to be employed by the Commonwealth Public Service was a privilege. It was employment which was undertaken at remuneration usually slightly less than that in the private sector but it did have permanency provisions that were not available in the private sector. It was generally understood also that various actions such as strikes would not be undertaken by members of the Commonwealth Public Service.
Over the years these distinctions have been eroded. They have been eroded no more speedily than were after the advent of the last Labor Government. There has been an enormous change in the relative positions of the Commonwealth Public Service and the rest of the work force. One of the examples of this is, of course, that there has been for public servants indexation of retirement benefits which private schemes generally do not provide. The permanency provisions still exist and even the Commonealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act which provides for the retirement of employees under certain conditions gives very real control over how that,can be done and the conditions under which

it can be done. Such provisions exist to protect this same element of permanency.
Therefore, I am absolutely opposed to ;the extension of a 'preference for unionists' clauie in addition to all these other benefits applying t,o employment in the Public Service. What it would mean, of course, is that the very best people would not necessarily be members of unions. Some people hold very strongly to the view that they should not indulge in the kind of industrial action thatMr Munro and his colleagues recommend. They would be the people who, as a matter of principle, would not wish to belong to the union. But when it came to any matter relating to employment, redeployment, retirement, or even promotion if such provisions were extended, it would be those people who perhaps performed least well who would be most protected under this provision. The Opposition is suggesting that this very important matter of principle should be allowed to pass out of the hands of the legislators. I am not just speakng to the Parliament as the employers of the public servants; I am speaking about the members of parliament as the people who have to make the basic rules under which the Public Service is employed and under which taxpayers' money is used to perform functions on behalf of the public. I do not believe that that power should be given to anybody else.
If one listened to the arguments that have been put forward by the Opppsition against the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Bill and, of course, the principal Act when it was introduced, one would think that this was a particularly bad piece of legislation and that it bore very heavily on members of the Public Service. If one actually reads the legislation-it is open to any member of the public to look at it-one finds that the arrangements made for the redeployment or retirement of staff are very cautious indeed. If one looks at the A<;:t itself and at Determination No. 509 of 1977 which altered certain provisions in the Act but which is accepted within the principal Act one finds that a very lengthy procedure exists before the Public Service Board can actually get to the point of retiring anybody. It involves consultation with the unions, it involves telling people all about it, it involves finding ways of employing people in other areas and, at the end, it involves giving a notice period of six or 12 months, depending on age or length of service. After that the Board is required to give an employee a month's notice or to transfer him or her to a position at a lower level, or ultimately it can give one month's notice of termination under quite r'easonable conditions. In addition to that, of course, there is an appeals

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 597

procedure so that anybody thus affected can make an appeal which is considered by an independent body.
.. I do not think the arguments put forward earlier in the debate by the honourable member for Wills add up. He said: 'Why does not the Parliament accept the recommendations of the Coombs inquiry into the Public Service that the power of the Parliament to disallow any provision of an arbitrator be removed because in the private sector employers have no power to disallow?' Private employers are not placed in the same situation. If a business is running into trouble in the market place, if it wishes to close down production of a product or if it wishes to change its method of operations it is able to do so without these extraordinarily lengthy provisions contained in this Act eventually to layoff staff who Can go elsewhere under certain conditions written into various awards.
But the conditions are certainly nowhere near as lengthy and as arduous for the employing authority as those in the provisions of the original Bill. I think, however, that it is reasonable to il1clude in the Bill lengthy procedures to protect employees in the Public Service because I still believe in the principle of secure tenure for public servants. But equally, if it becomes clear over a period that certain functions currently performed by the Public Service are no longer necessary-if as a result of sunset legislation which requires that certain bodies be closed down after a period unless there is a new Act of Parliament to renew them, or if it is found that employees in the terms of the Act suffer loss of licence, qualifications or in cases of limited efficiency and where that is proven under the almost elephantine procedures required under the Act-I think it is quite fair in the taxpayers' interest that steps be taken to redeploy such people in other areas or to retire them under these generous conditions from the Public Service.
I am quite happy to put this case before the Australian people. The Public Service unions invited all my constituents to conduct a major campaign on me to persuade me that the disallowance of this Determination was an outrageous thing, as claimed by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) and the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding), and they had a long time in which to mount this serious chal" lenge. Within the first week of this campaign I received two telephone calls from public servants
in my electorate; one for and one against. I
received two letters, one of which was against the Bill. The other one was misdirected. In fact it should have been given to another member of

Federal Parliament but the public servant concerned did not know in which electorate he lived. Subsequently I have had another eight letters. Two of those came from addresses well outside my electorate and on forms which had been prepared by the union. In one case the letter was rather badly stuck on to a piece of grubby paper with glue. So the campaign on this matter has been a pitiful one. Perhaps the Government should allow its case to rest with members of the public, who will see that there is a need not to have external bodies determine completely new idears of preference for unionists within the Public Service.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (8.43)-I'am very pleased to enter this debate following the previous speaker, the honourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton). As members of the Parliament well know he was an official of a political party before he was elected to Parliament, as I was. He was General Secretary of the Liberal Party of Australia in New South Wales.
Mr Armitage-What would he know about unions?
Mr LEO McLEAY-As the honourable member for Chifley has interjected,. what would the honourable member for Mackellar know about unions? I ask that also. I think that makes a point regarding his speech. I make no bones about the fact that prior to being elected to this Parliament I was the Assistant General Secretary of the Australian Labor Party in New South Wales. My qualifications for speaking in this debate are that for 15 years of my life I was a Commonwealth public servant. I think that the attacks this Government is making upon public servants are extremely wrong. As the honourable member for Mackellar would know, for many years the Government has enjoyed the support of the upper echelon of the Public Service while it has heen in gov{"rnment. While we were in government the Liberal Party subverted our Government by keeping the support of the upper echelon of the Publi9 Service.
The honourable member may nol have received many telephone calls in his electorate. He sits there laughing now, knowing that he has participated in one of the worst things that this Government has ever done to the Commonwealth public servants. I think that it does him discredit, as a person who aspires to being a Minister in the Government, to do this ill thing to Commonwealth public servants. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) made a number of allegations in his second reading

598 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

speech. He said that Commonwealth public servants are welL cared for and that they enjoy many advantages over employees in private industry. The Minister for unemployment, as he should be called rather than the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, said that public servants have permanency of employment. He also said that they have advancement by merit and that they have appeals provisions which assist them.
'. I do not know who wrote the speech for the Minister, and ~ do not know who wrote the speech for the honourable member for Mackellar although I suspect from the inaccuracies that he probably wrote it himself. Of course what was written in those speeches does not pertain to the Public Service nowadays. In fact three or four years ago, when I left the Public Service, it was not occurring then either. There is not a well cared for Commonwealth Public Service in this country. There are not many advantages that public servants have over people in private industry and most certainly after the recent legislation put through by this Government is enacted there will be nO permanency of employment at all. This Government has said in many statements that one should abide by what the arbitrator says; the umpire's decision should be final. One of the excuses the present Government gave for the way it took over in 1975 was that the umpire made a decision-one of the most unprincipled unipires anyone has ever seen. The Government said that even unprincipled umpires' decisions should be taken as being writ.
Mr Ruddock-He is your umpire.
Mr LEO McLEAY-The Government now says: 'That does not matter'. I am very suspicious of all lawyers, including the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock). The Government says: 'The arbitrator can make any decision he likes. Unions can go through the industrial process, they can abide by the law, but if it does not suit us we will make something different in the Parliament'. For the first time ever the Minister has said that the Government will disallow a decision of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. I recall that when I was a union official, I heard Ministers in this Parliament say that one should accept what the Commission says, that one cannot have industrial anarchy and that in Australia we had the best industrial problem solving system in the world. That great system, which Ministers of this Government have said we should support, has come down with a decision that,unfortunately for the Government, favours the public servants. The Government has said: 'We cannot have that. We will change it and bring into the Parliament legislation to disallow

it'. That is probably one of the most unprincipled acts that this Government has ever done. Part of the reason might. be that it realises at last thal public servants are starting to wake up to the fact that this Government will not do anything to heIp them.
They are also starting to realise that this Government, by the way it is wrecking the Australian economy, will not advance assistance to public servants. The Government is now saying: 'We are going to bring in union bashing legislation'. There is no way that anyone can say that this is not some sort of union bashing operation. In Canberra, the only city in this country where the majority of the people who live and work are public servants, the Government is not happy with its political support at present. It is bringing in political legislation, political regulations to try to get the Public Service under the thumb again.
- In recent days we have heard and read that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) thought what the permanent head of his Department said was terrible. I think it is probably a healthy thing that the public servants are doing to this Government what they did to the previous Australian Labor Party Government on. many occasions. It just shows that the Treasurer is probably a lot more thinskinned than he has tried to make out to the Parliament.
We have seen in the last two days the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) standing over a parliamentary committee. The honourable member for Mackellar, who has just made such a brilliant speech to get himself into the Ministry, said in the past that he was in favour of the Parliament being paramount over the Executive. It just proves the old saw that there are those in the Executive, there are those who aspire to be in the Executive and there are those who are not, who will not be and who want parliamentary reform. The people who want to get into the Executive most of all are not interested in parliamentary reform. We have seen the Minister for Defence stand over a parliamentary committee. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has carpeted the Chairman of Sub-committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence (Mr Katter), for having the hide to say that public servants should talk to the Parliament about what is going on. The Government has said that it has to find a way to pull public servants into line; sO it disallows an Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission decision that has done something to assist them.
The empty vessels on the second bench, the second rowers of the Government, are trying to interject. Nobody listens to them because of the old

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 599

saying that empty vessels make the most noise. They will get no telephone calls from the Prime Minister because they cannot get up and carry the bag for the Government. None of the three on the second bench will get into the Ministry. The honourable member for Mackellar will go back to doing something else which will not be as good as what he did when he was the Secretary of the Liberal Party. At least when he was the Secretary of the Liberal Party in New South Wales it was going somewhere. Unfortunately for the Liberal Party he left and it is not now in such good shape. He is not going anywhere here.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member will come back to the question before the House.
Mr LEO McLEAYI am addressing myself most particularly to the question before the House. I believe, as do some other honourable members, one should follow the previous debate. I am attempting to show how hollow the words of the honourable member for Mackellar are. He has come here with a brief from the Prime Minister to bash the Public Service so that he can get himself into the Ministry. If he were successful in bashing the Public Service he might find that it is not as amenable as he would have hoped.
I spent the formative years of my life in the Commonwealth Public Service-not in the more rarified areas of administration but as a tradesman-and I found that for many years people in that area endeavoured to use arbi-
tration. The Australian Telecommunications Em-
ployees Association and its State Council of which I was a member have tried to do their best through the system. Indeed, last week the members of the executive of my union had discussions with the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) to try to achieve a fair go for public servants. This Government is not interested in that. It is not interested in adhering to the decisions of the Arbitrator. It is saying that it will throwaway any type of industrial problem-solving in this country. It is a very false argument for honourable members opposite to support the disallowance of this regulation. It is wrong for the Government to say that and then at a later date to go to trade unionists and say: 'You should abide by the decisions made by the courts'. If the Government were sincere and wanted to have decent industrial relations in this country it would take the good with the bad. If commissioners are appointed to make decisions and if the unions have to abide by those decisions most certainly the Government should try to abide also by those decisions. This is all part of a very widespread campaign by the Government to cause industrial unrest in this country.

The Qantas Airways Ltd dispute has grown from what was a small dispute, mainly because of the ineptness of the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock), because the Prime Minister was trying to stand over him or because of some decisions at which the Government arrived at a closed meeting. The Government decided it would become a big dispute. The News Ltd publications have flown troublemakers into Australia to cause industrial unrest in this country. The proposal before the Parliament tonight is just part of
that political campaign to cause industrial unrest amongst Australians, to divide Australians further, to have a very divided country. This proposal comes from a government that says it wants some sort of consensus in the country. It is a wrong proposal. In this Parliament I have made a number of pleas to the Government about conditions in the Commonwealth Public Service. I have made pleas to the Government about superannuation rights for Commonwealth public servants. It is laughable to read in the second reading speech of the Minister for Employment and
Youth Affairs that-public servants are very well off. Nowadays Commonwealth public servants are not well off at all. They are not as well off as people in private enterprise. They do not have the same career prospects that they had. Legislation brought into this Parliament by the Government in recent times has removed any chance of permanancy that Commonwealth public servants had or the ability to look at a career structure that may have suited them.

Mr Carlton-Rubbish! Absolute rubbish!

Mr LEO McLEAY-The honourable member

for Mackellar says: 'Rubbish!' That is the same

sort of rubbish about which people speak con-

cerning the Liberal Party and the rather parlous

position in which it was left by the honourable

member.

-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member seems to be having difficulty in maintaining relevance to the matter before the House. I ask him to make a special effort to do so.

Mr LEO McLEAY-Mr Deputy Speaker, I would have hoped that you would have asked honourable members opposite not to interject.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Ignore the interjections.

Mr LEO McLEAY-One has difficulty, when interjections are so facetious and so lacking in substance, in not answering them. Since I have been a member of Parliament I have believed that lies should always be put to rest. With due respect to the honourable member for MacKellar I will not continue with that line.

600 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

The Government has not done the right thing in this legislation. The Government should have adhered to the decision of. the umpire. Members of Parliament can look at what the Government says in a rather cynical way from now on, when it tells other Australians that decisions it makes should be adhered to because it is the umpire and when it is not willing to adhere to a decision that has been made in the main by people appointed to the Bench by its political party. On behalf of Commonwealth public servants I make this final plea: The oft made claim that they are doing well should be looked at without the rose coloured glasses worn by members of the Commonwealth Parliament who earn extremely high salaries. In some instances we have had the same sort of union bashing of Commonwealth public servants from this side of the House, which I deplored. I deplored it in the party room as I would deplore it from the Government side in the House. Commonwealth public servants are not doing well. This legislation will put them even further behind than they were before. I hope that members of the Public Service in Canberra in particular will remember the great disservice that this Government is doing them tonight.
Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (8.57)-Since the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) is not the only member of the Opposition having some difficulty in maintaining relevance let me go back to the issues before this House. Let us go back to some of the legal issues on which the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) and the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) seemed to part company. As I understand the honourable member for Wills, he said that the Government was entitled to do what it was doing but that it should not do so for a number of specious reasons. On the other hand, the honourable member for Port Adelaide decided that there was some error in the opinion of the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) to which he sought to direct our attention. Firstly, there is a power to disallow. How does that power arise? It arises under statute. For how long has it been there? Even the honourable member for Wills, whose research took him back to 1927, tells us that it has been there since 1927. Honourable members might recall that between 1927 and the present day there has from time to time been a Labor government in power. When in power it has not seen fit to alter that legislation. It is not as if section 22 were on its own. A corresponding section is to be found in the Conciliation and Arbitration Act which again has been there for a considerable period.

The first issue with which we should deal is whether the Attorney-General or the Government has power. The answer to that question is that it does have power. What is the prerequisite for the exercise of that power by either House of Parliament? I might remind honourable members that it is not just by the Government but by either House of Parliament. The prerequisite is that an opinion of the Attorney-General should be laid before this House. What is the purpose? It is to give the House an opportunity to guard against error just as the Public Service Arbitrator or the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission when making an award is entitled to say that the award mayor may not be in accordance with law.
The honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) seemed to have some difficulty with the opinion of the Attorney-General. He referred us to page 6 of that opinion. After waving. it around he said, as we understood him, that the Attorney-General had done the best of a bad job in trying to put forward something on which the Government could act. The fact that that is wrong can be demonstrated very simply by looking to the Attorney-General's opinion, to one section in the Act and to one clause in the Determination with which we are concerned. The Attorney-General said at page 6 of his opinion that there was a conflict in effect between clause 5 (1) of the Determination and section 11. (6) (b) of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act. Sub-section (6) states:
When the Public Service Board has compliep with subsection (1) in respect of an employee, the B<'drd shall-
(b) in any other case-issue to the Permanent Head or prescribed Commonwealth authority cOncerned a certificate in writing certifying that it has not been practicable to redeploy the employee, and furnish a copy of the certificate to the employee.
It does not say 'may' or 'may, when he wishes to' or 'shall in six months', 'shall in 12 months' or 'shall in two years'; it says 'shall'.
Mr Holding-It is not the Attorney-General's opinion, it is yours.
Mr SPENDER-As the honourable member for Melbourne Ports would understand, as a matter of plain English shall means shall, and as a matter of legal English shall also means shall. I ask the honourable member to turn his attention to clause 5 (1) of the Determination, which says that the Board shall not reduce an officer's or employee's salary level nor shall it issue a certificate under section 11 (6) (b) until certain specified terms of notice have been given, one of which is 12

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 601

months. Clearly enough the Commission has purported to introduce a provision which collides directly with section 11 (6) (b). There is no way to make the clause in the Determination and the provision of the Act fit together. In simple language they do not accord with each other.
Let us therefore pass on. I hope the honourable member for Melbourne Ports has understood what I have said. It is clearly demonstrable that the opinion is well founded. Indeed, the honourable member for Wills, with his agile mind, did not feel that he should in any way question the Attorney-General's opinion, no doubt for good reasor..s. Let us go to some of the things which the honourable member for Wills said. I refer to where he got on to what one might describe as the merits. One of the honourable members on this side of the House was kind enough to describe what the honourable member for Wills said as superficially attractice. Superficial it certainly was; attractive it could not be to any logical mind. First of all he said: 'Look, you have done a terrible thing. You have not abided by the decision of the umpire'. That he said, was utterly wrong. He brought in Greg Chappell and Gilbert and Sullivan, which really were not out of keeping with the kind of argument he was putting to us.
Mr Hawke-I brought in your Prime Minister. Don't you agree with him?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member has made his speech.
Mr SPENDER-Yes, he has made his speech and he has committed himself to it. He told us that it was terrible not to abide by the umpire's decision. He overlooked, conveniently enough, that the umpire's decision was in this instance wrong and, on the basis of legislation that has been on the books for over 40 years, this House or the Senate is entitled to overturn that decision, as it should do. He says that we should agree with the decision and accept it even it if is utterly wrong in law. That is the logical consequence of what he is putting to this House. It is a further logical consequence of what he is saying that even if the Determination stated that five years or 10 years notice would be given before any action were taken, he would then say: 'That is perfectly okay. In no circumstances should you ever question the determination of the umpire, no matter how erroneous and how much in conflict with the Act that determination may be'; That is a remarkably irresponsible attitude for anyone in this House to tak
The next colourful item which the honourable member for Wills brought up was that the same arguments had been put. He said that the hearing

went for 31 days and that these arguments were put. He would know that it quite often happens that arguments that are put are not accepted and are later demonstrated to be utterly right. The fact that arguments have been put and not accepted by the majority is neither here nor there. What did he lastly say? He came back to a convention. It seems to me that whenever Opposition members find themselves in difficulty they go digging around and discover a convention which exits somewhere-it hovers around in the atmosphere, ready to be grasped by them and brought into play. He said that in 1932-his researches apparently stopped then-a determination was overturned. I think he said that that was the last time any government did that. He said that since then there has been a convention that that should not be done. As I understood him, he said that this law has become a dead letter. If he consulted what was said on 8 September 1932 he would find that Mr Rosevear said effectively what has been put on the part of the Opposition. He said:
The whole issue seems to be the maintenance or destruction of the principle of arbitration.
That was as wrong then as it is wrong now. If the honourable member's researches had taken him a little further he would have found that in 1973 the Senate overturned certain determinations. If he bothered to apply his mind to the Act he would find that under the Public Service Arbitration Act either House of Parliament may disallow a determination and it is not the task of the Government to do so. He managed conveniently--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member for North Sydney will resume his seat. Most honourable members who are interjecting have made their speeches. I think it is fair that an honourable member on the other side of the House should also be allowed to have his speech heard in peace and quiet.
Mr SPENDER-He managed conveniently to misunderstand apparently the section of the Act to which he was addressing his mind and to overlook an action of the Senate in 1973. He would have us believe in those circumstances that the law was a dead letter. Who was in power in 1973? It seems to me that a Labor government was in power. Did it do anything to repeal section 43A of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act which is the sister section to the one which we are concerned with now? No, it did not. Did it repeal section 22, the one that the honourable member for Wills complains of so much? No, it did not. I suggest that the Labor Party has not attempted to do so at any time it has been in power since 1932. What is

602 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

the reason for this masterly inactivity? The reason is perfectly plain. The Labor Party would prefer to have this provision available to them in the law when it manages to struggle back into office so that it can exercise the same powers in either House of Parliament that we now seek to exercise in this House of Parliament. There is no other explanation for the failure of the Opposition when in power to seek to alter the law in a manner which would be consistent with the arguments that it has put forward tonight.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (9.10)-1 do not wish to spend time repeating the arguments of my colleagues who have clearly demonstrated the ad hoc character and injustice of the Government's disapproval of the Public Service Arbitrator's determination. I wish, however, to focus on what the debate illustrates about the Government's values towards its own workers-the people who have to carry out perhaps the most important functions of our society, especially in the areas of education, health, welfare, social security and so forth.
Government speakers have referred to the so called fair and generous provisions under which public servants work. Any Government Minister who cared to visit the Department of Social Security office in my electorate would see scenes which would amaze him. He would see conditions of employment which no worker in private enterprise would tolerate. At the Department of Social Security in (}lenroy people have to sit on steps as they wait for their social security benefits to be paid. Conditions insi~e the building are crowded and officers are forced to work virtually on top of one another. The office contains enormous piles offiles which carinot be handled by the officers. Yet, according to the Government, these people cannot complain-they camlot go to an independent arbitrator to put their case.
The conditions of employment of public servants are becoming intolerable in certain areas. Let us not judge the situation according to what goes on in certain high level offices in Canberra. Let us look at what goes on throughout the Commonwealth. If we do we will see that the conditions of employment of public servants are becoming'worse and worse. It is because of this that they want to have the right to go to arbitration.
The reason behind the Government's actions is its ideological obsession with the reduction of the public sector. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) and man other honourable members opposite have made it clear that they hold an attitude of contempt and hatred towards public servants. The nation is being kept on tenterhooks waiting for the

report of the so-called razor gang under the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch). This report, unless it is a damp squib, will in fact recommend savage and substantial cuts in the Public Service. These cutbacks will, of course, reduce many basic services, which, according to any humane criteria, ought to be increased rather than diminished-services in education, health, social security, transport and many other areas which are under threat at present.
I ask the Australian people to recognise that the Liberal Party is desperately trying to reduce these needed services while at the same time sustaining extremely high levels of taxation. So we have no taxation relief but continuous attempts to reduce the range of services available to the people. In other words, we are getting less and less value for the taxpayers' money from this Government.
What is the real reason for these attempts to cut back the Public Service? It is the virtually incoherent economic policy of the Treasurer and his assistants which is based on dogmatic doctrines, on doctrines proposed by people such as Professor Milton Friedman, which are clearly and demonstrably not working in other countries. What do we have? We have statements by Ministers and others that they want to follow the example of the United Kingdom and ~hat they want to follow the example of the United States of America and cut more savagely into the services of the people. The Government realises that this policy is electorally unpopular and that it will be seriously and greatly resented and rejected by the Australian people. So what does it do in order to sell this policy? It carries out its usual trick of seeking a scapegoat. Of course, the scapegoat of this Government is, as always, a group of workers. In this case, the workers are its own employees-the public servants. It is in fact trying to bla,me public servants for the incoherent and dogmatic economic policy that it is trying to pursue.
Let us fact the facts. The real reason the Government is introducing these amendments to the legislation is that it can carry out this dogmatic economic policy only if it has the powers to sack public servants. Make no mistake, the wide powers which this Bill seeks to give the Government will allow it to dismiss public servants and throw them on to the unemployment scrap heap. Of course, we are told by honourable members opposite that all these people will find' work in the so-called free enterprise sector which the Liberals believe is some kind of magic wonderland that creates employment. The facts are quite the contrary. In fact the legislation not only seeks to undermine the conditions of public servants but also, in respect of redundancies and sackings,

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 603

seeks to undermine the lives of many public serability. It is true that some of them could earn

vants who have given faithful service to the more in the private sector. It is also true that

Australian people for many years. These people many of them at all levels and divisions work as

will be finding themselves redundant or kicked hard and as honestly as do their private enterprise

around by a heartless Government.

counterparts. Nevertheless, like every occu-

I am a member of the 'Joint Parliamentary Committee of Public Accounts. Department after department has made clear in reports to the Com-

pational group there is a percentage of people who are working only at half steam ahead at all times.

mittee that its efficiency is being reduced because Recognition of diminishing opportunities to ad-

of staff ceilings that are imposed and by the revance, sheer boredom from years of repetitive and

dundancy provisions which are being introduced. uninteresting work, and illness are but a few ex-

Department after department is complaining that planations of why people sometimes lose interest

it cannot carry out its functions when it has to and enthusiasm in their jobs. That is not the ex-

worry about reduced staff ceilings and cutbacks in clusive problem of the Public Service. It is a syn-

the number of public servants.

drome which reaches into both the private and the

The Australian Labor Party is committed to supporting and extending the public sector to provide for the crying needs of the Australian people. We guarantee that we will protect the rights of
public servants as we will protect the rights of other workers throughout this country. If the Government is determined to continue this fight, if the Government is determined to push through these amendments and if the Government is' determined to continue its policy of Public Service bashing we will in fact support the workers if they fight back, and fight back they certainly will, be-

public sector. However, a major difference between the two is that if somebody in the private sector regresses to the stage of almost a permanent full stop, unless that person is the owner's or the boss's son'or a long time employee who has given long and faithful service and whose poor work effort is ascribed to illness or a trauma of a personal nature, it is a case of kaput for that person. Whether it be called dismissal, sacking, early retirement, transfer, redundancy, re-organisation or any other sugar coated term it can be finis for that person at the flick of a tongue.

cause the unions involved are already mobilising. , Opposition members interjecting-

We are going to create a situation in which the
Public Service and public servants will be forced to go on strike, to introduce bans a,nd to take other such measures. They will be forced to do so by the actions of this Government which refuses to accept the decision of the arbitrators. When that happens we in the Australian Labor Party will give them our full support. We are sure that no

Mr DONALD CAMERON-Obviously, many of the people on the opposite side of the House have little understanding of the private sector where a person can be pulled into the boss's office and told at the click of a finger: 'I'm sorry, I am dispensing with your service'.
Mr Hawke~A flick of the tongue.

matter how long this fight takes, we will win it.

, Mr DONALD CAMERON-The honourable

Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) member for Wills (Mr Hawke) is obviously so tal-

(9:19)-The honourable member for Burke (Dr ented that he has never had to seek another pos-

Theophanous) so excited me with his unique presition elsewhere. But there is very little talent in

entation that I have been busily gathering facts to the Opposition. It is obvious that members of the

rebut some of the claims that he made.

Opposition either have held down union positions

Mr Hawke-You went to the wrong place to get facts.

or have been public servants. Many opposition members do not have a clue as to what the private sector is all about and have little appreciation of

Mr DONALD CAMERON~The honourable the special provisions which are granted to a sig-

member will hear the facts. I have relied upon mynificant but small percentage of the nation's work

self as a source for most of the facts and therefore force. If people in the, private sector, from the

I have gone to the right place. I speak as a person office boy to the very top of management, do not who has a brother by marriage and a sister In emperform the curtain may be drawn. Furthermore,

ployment with the Commonwealth Public Serwith few exceptions, most sections of private

vice. They have been employed in the Public Serenterprise depend on performance to survive. I vice in Canberra for many years. I have served in think lcan hear the plaintive cry of the honourthis place for almost 15 years and dur~ng that time able member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young).

it has been a privilege to work with a large number of public servants-women and men~

Mrs Kelly-He is not in the House.

who have shown complete dedication and great Mr DONALD CAMERON-He is not here.

604 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of 1980

Mr Hawke-He would have eaten you up by now if he were here.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-I can tell the honourable member for Wills that others have tried and failed. I am saying that private enterprise frequently cannot simply carry dead wood; that is the difference. Furthermore, the most honest worker in the country can be out of work tomorrow because of a bad decision by company mangement which leads to that company's collapse. A bungling of the economy by the government of the day can cause thousands of people to become unemployment statistics. This can happen even with a simple decision in relation to tariffs, such as we saw in 1974. It was a deliberate decision. The Labor Government of the day decided that there was a shortage of workers and tipped the textile industry down the drain inca deliberate effort to create an unemployment pool to fill those vacant positions.
Mr Hawke-How about getting back to the Bill?
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Well, I am. The honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) told us in a television interview how the Cabinet made a definite decision in relation to that matter. I am portraying the fayt that in the private sector life is not nearly as secure or guaranteed as it is in the public sector. Those things which happen to people in the private sector simply do not happen to the permanently employed public servants. The public servant has protection and permanency. In return he serves the people of the nation and the government of the day regardless of its political persuasion. In almost every respect he enjoys better conditions than his exact counterpart employed by the private sector. I do not, of course, make mention of the successful professional outsiders but often their moment in the sun is for but a handful of years.
It is part of the national sport to criticise public servants. That will never abate while they enjoy a privileged position. However, generally speaking, special conditions have been granted in the past in return for a very special type of service-service to the public and to the government and acceptance of the principle that often, regardless of what the public servants personally think or know, the final decision rests with the government of the day. Incidentally, in private enterprise the same situation often applies. It is just the case of the boss being not the government but the private employer.
We know that the Public Service unions have endeavoured to inspire their members to lobby furiously members of parliament against this

legislation. I think this was mentioned by the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender). The only phone calls and letters I have had, with the exception of one or two letters from the unions themselves and, at the very most, two letters from public servants, have been from public servants wanting to know when this legislation was to be enacted. Those public servants want to retire. I notice the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) nodding in agreement and even some of the new members are agreeing with me. I think that speaks for itself. I would be interested to know how many members on this side of the House have received such representations and how many those representations would total. I suggest that there have been but a handful of such representations against the Bill.
I refer to the fact that all those comments which have been made by Opposition speakers in relation to the intentions of this Government are most unfair. I believe that no departmental head will embark on a program of wholesale dismissal or even occasional dismissal without having made a proper assessment of the qualities of the person whose usefulness in the work force and in the Public Service may have come to its end. The provisions of this Bill are such that the permanent head has to account in great detail for the reasons the decision is being made. It simply cannot be a case of the wishes of the honourable member for Wills, the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding), and the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen). It may be a little like the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) wishing to change his front bench. It is not like that at all. It will not happen simply by the permanent head expressing a wish. It will not happen like that at all. He has to account for his actions.
Mr Innes-They tried but they changed it back again.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-My friend from Melbourne has also been relegated to the back bench and, indeed, looks more comfortable there than he did when he sat on the front bench. Since this Bill was enacted the original--
Mr Leo McLeay-You squealed. They got rid of you.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-The honourable member has made his speech. He might allow somebody else to have an alternative opinion.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Sections of the existing Act which was introduced in 1922 relate to persons being dismissed for inefficiency. In 50 years only three public servants have been dismissed on the grounds of inefficiency. In relation to

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 605

the size of the Australian Public Service I think a figure was mentioned which was well into the hundreds of thousands of people. The number of dismissals or plain sackings averages about 10 a year. Sadly, the only area where there has been movement has been in relation to section 20, the surplus staff provision. Perhaps the greatest example of people being laid off because they were surplus to requirements was when Telecom Australia started replacing the manual telephone exchanges in country areas. There was no opportunity to offer those people affected alternative positions. In manY'instances if they had been able to transfer to a major population centre they would have been given a job and been cared for. But their only problem was that they lived in the outskirts of those areas. They were probably married women living away from the general centres of population. They opted to continue married life under the same roof as their husbands instead of pulling up roots and going into a city some , miles away.
In supporting this legislation I express the view that it is this Parliament that has to have the final say. That is what these amendments are all about. This Parliament and the Government of the day have been elected to care for the well-being of the nation. The Government has decided that it has no alternative but to follow this course of action. This Bill is r )t being introduced on a take all and give nothing basis. As I said before there are public servants who cannot wait for the fuss to finish and the Bill to be proclaimed and become law so that they can say: 'I am getting out early'. They will go out with generous superannuation cover. That is their choice. It is a quid pro quo. Something is being given and the means are being introduced to strengthen the efficiency of the Australian Public Service. Probably there are people other than those who want to retire early who are hoping for this Bill to be enacted. There are thousands upon thousands of public servants who for years have had to carry inefficient workers on their backs. Perhaps the existence of this legislation will in itself act as a stimulant to those who tbought life was completely easy and without worry no matter how they worked. The donkey ride is over. Finally, the salaries and provisions that public servants enjoy--
Mrs Kelly-Did enjoy.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-My friend from the Australian Capital Territory says that they did enjoy them. I suppose that if I were holding the seat she is holding I would be worried about what may happen in three years' time. The people of Australia, the taxpayers, put up the money to

provide the salaries of public servants and everything else. They have every right to expect that this Government will devise ways and means of ensuring that the Commonwealth Public Service is as efficient as possible. The only criticism I have of this Bill is that it was not introduced 50 years ago when the original Public Service Act was introduced.
Mr INNES (Melbourne) (9.32)-I rise to oppose the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Bill. It is simply another chapter in the union bashing to which my colleague, the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young), referred this afternoon. Whether a person has a white collar or a blue collar it matters not. The Government is endeavouring to reduce the numbers of those who have the audacity to support and project the aspirations of people on the other side of the coin, those who have to fight desperately for wages and conditions and who are suppressed by every action of this Government. What amazes, surprises and dismays me is that even the younger honourable members in this House, the arch fascists such as the individual who asked a question this afternoon--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-I suggest that the honourable member's language is a little lurid.
Mr INNES-Mr Deputy Speaker, you do not have to object. If the cap fits, you or the individual to whom it belongs can wear it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will not interrupt. He will resume his seat. He will please use slightly less lurid and more parliamentary language; otherwise 1 will have to check him again. He will get 'back to the Bill.
Mr INNES-If my language hurts you, Mr Deputy Speaker, 1 humbly apologise. 1 return to the Bill before the House. It is another exercise in legislation--
Mr Tuckey-Now you are going to tell us to forget the law.
Mr INNES-Here he goes. That is him. The honourable member dedicates himself to the cause of fascism to which 1 have referred. Let us return to the Bill and the issues involved in it. The question is whether we believe the honourable member for Diamond Valley (Mr N. A. Brown) who said that this is a unique piece ofiegislation. He said that we have to ensure that the Government has a right as an employer to give effect to all the actions open to it in order to apply the law. The right honourable member for Lowe (Sir

606 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

William McMahon) suggested that it is rather a passive piece of legislation about which we should not be terribly concerned. But there is a sting in its tail. The Bill relegates public servants to secondclass citizens. Their positions in terms of the availability of the law and the arbitration commissions of Australia will be second rate. The legislation will affect people who serve the community. They have been. told by people with whom you have served, Mr Deputy Speaker, that their futures are beyond question. They have been told that they will have some protection and tenure of employment. They have been told that they will not be relegated to a situation in which they will be at large. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) has only just appeared. He has done the Parliament a great service by appearing. He obliges us by coming to listen to one of the most serious debates that the Parliament has undertaken for many a long day. He suddenly arrives. He is the Minister responsible. As the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) said today, he is like an eel in a bath. We cannot trap him.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. I have asked him already to try to talk in a rational, parliamentary way.
Mr INNES-lam appealing to you, sir, not to show your prejudice.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will not interrupt the Chair. He will resume his seat. I ask him to oblige the House by returning to the Bill. This is not the time of the night to enter into onslaughts on other honourable members.
Mr INNES-I take issue with you, Mr Deputy Speaker, by suggesting that the architect of the Bill is the Minister at the table. The imbecile next to me is trying to interject.
Mr Lusher-I object to that. I ask for a withdrawal.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I think the honourable member for Melbourne should withdraw. His remark was personally offensive to the honourable member for Hume. The honourable member ought to withdraw and get back to the Bill.
Mr INNES-Mr Deputy Speaker, I will withdraw in deference to you, but for God's sake, have a look at him. I return to the Bill. The Government's abysmal record as an employer of labour has been highlighted during the last few weeks. Public servants throughout the country were

forced to take industrial action against a determination by a government that was designed to create an industrial problem. That has been the abysmal record of this Government since it took office. I can refer to dozens of industrial disputes that have arisen in this way. There has not been one in" dustrial dispute since 1975 which either the Minister at the table or the actions of the Government have played any part in resolving. In the final analysis, the only people who have resolved industrial disputes in this country have been the industrial authorities to whom the disputes have been referred, as was the case in the Public Service dispute. People who understand anything about industrial disputation-not those who play around with issues such as abortion and have no participation in this House other than to create divisions such as the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher) creates-have accepted the Jackson report. The honourable member for Wills played a very large part in the decisions taken in that respect. The direction given by that Committee in regard to industrial disputes was the setting out of a range of issues that might well be a prerequisite to the consideration and determination of such disputations. This Bill is about relegating the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission's determinations to such a level that it will not be able to give a decision at all. Government pressure is to be directed at any industrial dispute that is referred from Public Service organisations. The honourable member for Diamond Valley said: 'You've got only a number of issues such as wages and conditions, that will be referred. Therefore, they are still the consideration of the arbitrator'.
Mr Lusher-Now, come on. Mr INNES-Mr Deputy Speaker, will you please tell that imbecile to keep quiet. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member for Hume is not in his place and will not interject from point blank range at the honourable member for Melbourne. I warn him that I will have to take action if he does. Mr INNES-As far as the issues to be considered by the Public Service Arbitrator are concerned, we must bear in mind that changes in technology will determine the aspirations of people for further employment. These will be the issues that we will be talking about. It is not just a question of the Government being an employer or of these employees having rights that other employees do not have. It is a question of considering the issues of the future that will create industrial disputation. Whenever technological change occurs it will have an effect. For example, upon

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 607

the introduction of the domestic satellite com-

munications system it may be necessary to tell

some individuals that, .because there have been

changes in the processing and communicating of

data, they will lose their jobs in the Public Service;

they will have no recourse to arbitration. If they

ate to depend upon imbeciles like the honourable

member for Hume to determine theit futUI:e,

Heaven help them.

.

Mr Lusher-I rise on a point of order. I just cannot sit here and take this sort of nonsense.

Mr DEPUT.Y SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Melbourne will withdraw that comment.

Mr INNES-Well, go out.

Mr Lusher-I am entitled to sit in the chamber.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hume will resume his seat. This is not a chatting chamber. The honourable member for Melbourne will address the Chair and will please apologise for that unfortunate slip of the tongue.

Mr INNES-Apologise? I will leave it to you.

Mr Lusher-I take a point of order. The honourable member has not apologised or withdrawn.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I thought he had.

Mr Lusher-No. He left it to you.

Mr INNES-I withdraw. It is unbelievable that people such as the honourable member for Hume should be members of this chamber. They are not prepared to argue as to the facts. The real issue in this dispute is whether or not this Parliament is to sit in judgment on individuals who have been providing a range of public services over their lifetime. They have dedicated themselves to this work and have seen themselves as filling a career position. That is no longer to be the situation. A determination will be made by the head of the department and such officers will be relegated sideways, or will find their position destroyed. Their numbers will be reduced by determinations made in this place. Apparently we are to sit here like God and determine the terms of reference, relegating the public servant to a situation in which his future will be destroyed. What sort of procedure is that? We will be relegating public servants to the status of second class citizens.

When the honourable member for Diamond Valley, who has had some experience in this field, expresses the point of view that wages and working conditions are involved in what can be consideration by the Public Service Arbitrator, I say that that is a load of poppycock. The fact is that in

the future the question on most people's lips will be: Where am I to go after being relegated to the industrial scrap heap? That will happen by the time they are 55 years of age. Some irtdiviaual who is the head of a department will be making that decision, against which there will be no real right of appeal. An appeal will be made all right, but it will back before all these imbeciles on my left.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member offends. He will withdraw that expression.
Mr INNES-I will withdraw it, but you can please yourself about that too. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs has been dealt with by the honourable member for Wills, who could carve him up in any debate. I challenge the Minister to go outside and debate this matter with the honourable member-in the open where public servants can be in attendance and can ask the Minister questions as to their future. The Minister would have neither the guts nor the integrity to do so. The real issue in this debate is the question of whether or not public servants are to have fair and reasonable access to an appeal if a wrong decision is taken. We on this side are saying that there can be all the appeals one likes, but one body against which no one can appeal is this austere gathering, half of whom have never seen an industrial dispute. This Parliament is to make the decisions. One can employ all the logic about the place, but the decision will depend on honourable members opposite having the numbers. Our friends on the left are the supporters of industry. What a connotation to apply to public servants in this issue. This has all been done in private enterprise. The farmers kick the guts out of their employees. Therefore, the same principle, we are told, should apply to public servants.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs) (9.47)-in replyHaving listened earlier today to the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) endeavouring to sustain an argument against the disallowance of Determination 503 and the amendment of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act, and having heard the contribution that has been made by the honourable member for Melbourne (Mr Innes), this House is well and truly entitled to support the Government's motion. No real arguments have been put forward to justify the Government's withdrawing from the course that it has proposed.

608 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Determination No. 503 of1980

The honourable member for Wills tried to say that the Government was in breach of convention in moving to disallow this Determination under the provisions of the Public Service Arbitration Act. He said that the last time a government had moved for the disallowance of a determination was in 1932. In my speech I pointed out that the most recent use of the power of disallowance under the Public Service Arbitration Act by this Parliament occurred in 1973, in the Senate.
Mr Hawke-That was by a bandit Senate.
Mr VINER-Let me point out to the honourable member for Wills, who was not a member of Parliament at the time, but was I believe President of the Australian Labor Party, and therefore a supporter of the Whitlam Government, that what the Government did was to make an election policy promise to give all public servants four weeks' annual leave. In fact, in honouring that promise, it went before the Public Service Arbitrator and obtained a determination which gave four weeks' annual leave only to those public servants who were the members of a union. Understandably, the Senate was appalled at the hypocrisy of that action. The late Senator Ivor Greenwood moved on behalf of the Opposition of the day the motion to disallow the determination so as to give justice to an public servants and not the injustice that had been perpetrated by the Whitlam Government. The debate went to the point where the then Government ran out of speakers in the Senate to support what it was proposing. The end result appears in the Hansard of 7 March 1973 at page 249. Senator Greenwood said:
I am happy that the result of the move which the Opposition has taken to disapprove the Public Service Arbitrator's determination, which preferred some people and gave benefit to unionists and not to others, will be agreed to. I am pleased that the Government has recognised the will of the Senate. I congratulate those Labor Party senators who exercised their influence in Caucus to secure the desired result . . .
In other words, that meant that the Government would introduce legislation to give four weeks' annual leave to an public servants. At the end of the debate the question to disallow the determination was resolved in the affirmative and there was no division. The Government of the day acquiesced in, concurred with and agreed to the disallowance of the determination. I suggest to the honourable member for Wills that the next time he enters into a debate in this House he should read something of the history of the subject matter before the House. Let us not suggest that there has been any breach of convention by this Government; let us acknowledge quite clearly that there has been the proper exercise of power by this House to move for the disallowance of the

Determination. I am quite satisfied that this House will be persuaded that the proper thing to do in this case is to disallow that Determination.
The honourable member for Wills sought to impugn the standing of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in respect of the exercise of this power by quoting words from an address to the nation by the Prime Minister in July 1979. I remind the House of the circumstances of that time. There were bans and limitations imposed by a number of Public Service unions. Some were imposed by the Administrative and Clerical Officers Association and by the Australian Public Service Association. Others were imposed by Australia Post mail officers at the notorious Redfern Mail Exchange. There was a Telecom Australia technicians dispute and, at that time, the Commonwealth Employees (Employment Provisions) Act was proclaimed. That Act gave the power to the Government of the day to suspend and, if necessary, to terminate the services of public servants who would not perform their duties. Furthermore, a number of public servants-in fact 1,112-in Australia Post had the rules of no work as directed-no pay applied to them. In Telecom 120 staff members were suspended under that Act. It was in those circumstances that the Prime Minister made his address to the nation. It was in this context that the Prime Minister referred to conciliation and arbitration as the way of the umpire. He stated:
I have no doubt that union lawlessness is resented by the community at large and is rejected by Australians wherever they may be. Where the Commonwealth has the authority, it is my responsibility, it is the Government's responsibility, to protect the rights of average Australians against union power so often abused by union leaders. We will do so with all the strength at our command and with all the constitutional powers available to us.
What has been happening in recent weeks is not an attack by some parts of the union movement against the people Government: it is an attack by some ports of the union movement against the of Australia. It is the people of Australia who will prevail.
It was in that context that the Prime Minister referred to the way of the umpire. When we apply that to the case before us we see the fact-which the honourable member for Wills did not refer to or acknowledge-that the Determination the Government is seeking to have disallowed was, in the opinion of the Attorney-General of the Commonwealth, 110t in accord with the law of the Commonwealth. Is it not therefore appropriate in the face of such an opinion that the Government should move for the disallowance of the Determination which has been demonstrated to be inconsistent with a Commonwealth law? There is nothing at all inappropriate or inconsistent between the statement made by the Prime Minister

Determination No. 503 of1980

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 609.

in his address to the nation and the action of the Government in moving to disallow this Determination.
Moreover, I draw the attention of the honourable member for Wills to the very point of the power given in the Public Service Arbitration Act. One has to understand the structure of government and the nature of ministerial responsibility. It was the situation in 1920 and 1932, as it is today, that the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth is the Minister responsible for the Public Service. Therefore, it is appropriate, as provided by the Public Service Arbitration Act, that if the Attorney-General is of the opinion that a determination is not in accord with the law of the Commonwealth, the Attorney-General provides that opinion to the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister is then obliged under the Public Service Arbitration Act to cause to be tabled both the determination and the opinion of the Attorney-General, and then the House may be moved to disallow that determination. All of those things have happened, and therefore it is completely appropriate that the Government, led by the Prime Minister, who is given this power in his position in relation to the Public Service as recognised by law, should seek to have that determination disallowed.
The honourable member for Wills sought to suggest that the Government's action in moving to disallow the Determination is inconsistent with the stand that it has taken against the Builders Labourers Federation in seeking to have that union deregistered. I would like the honourable member for Wills to have addressed any of the 30,000 marchers in Sydney and put that proposition to them. I think he would have got his ready answer. Those 30,000 people would have applauded the action of the Government in seeking to deregister the Builders Labourers Federation, which has shown itself to have total disregard for the conciliation and arbitration system of Australia. I think that those 30,000 marchers would have agreed with the Government that it is its responsibility, and the responsibility of this Parliament, to see that the Public Service of the Commonwealth of Australia is managed efficiently and economically and that the Government and the Parliament through the Public Service Board are given appropriate powers of management in the administration of the Public Service.
The honourable member for Wills quoted in aid a recommendation of the Royal Commission into Australian Government Administration which suggested that this disallowance power be removed from the Public Service Arbitration Act. I think both he and those Commissioners, with the

greatest of respect to them, overlooked a fundamental point. As I have said, that is that the Government and this Parliament through the Public Service Board must have effective powers of management over the administration of the Commonwealth Public Service. Therefore, it is completely appropriate that this Parliament has the power to disallow a determination by the Public Service Arbitrator which is not in accord with a law of the Commonwealth.

If the honourable member for Wills really does have aspirations to the prime ministership of Australia. I wonder were he to reach that position whether he would put forward the same propositions that he has advanced in this House today. I think the honourable member for Wills would have to acknowledge that the Parliament must have effective authority and responsibility through legislation over the management of the Australian Public Service. After all, that Public Service, if I can put it at this level, is one of the basic institutions of the political structure in Australia. A non-political Public Service is utterly essential to the effective administration of government in Australia.

Therefore, through the combination of the Public Service Act, the Public Service Arbitration Act and the kinds of powers that are being utilised in this Parliament todaY,the full authority and responsibility of the Parliament for the administration of the Public Service is reflected. As I said, nothing has been put forward in argument by the Opposition which justifies the Government's withdrawing from the action that it has taken in this House. Therefore, the Government will be proceeding with both the motion and the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Bill.

Question put:

That the motion (Mr Viner's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

68

Noes . . .

47

Majority

21

Adennann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baumc,M.E. Bimey,R.J. Bourchiec,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman,A.G.

AYES

Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Killen, D.J. L1oyd,B.
Lusher, s, A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKeUar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J.

610 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Commonwealth Employees Amendment Bill

AYES
Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J; J. Chapman,H.G.P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R.
Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris,G.McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W.M. Howard,J. W.

Mclean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William
McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J.R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Tambling, G. E. J.
Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C, W. Viner,R.I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewelt,N. Brown,John Brown, Roberl Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Dulfy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R.V. Fry,K.L. Hawke,R.J.L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E. Jacobl,R.

Johnson, Lea (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C.
Klugman, R. E.
McLeay, !.eo McMahon, Lea Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D.
Scolt,J.L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wallis,L.G. West,S. J.
Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Moore, J. C.

Child, J.

Question SO resolved in the affirmative.

COMMONWEALTH EMPLOYEES
(REDEPLOYMENT AND RETIREMENT) AMENDMENT BILL 1981

Second Reading

Consideration resumed from 3 March, on. motion by Mr Viner:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

.68

Noes

47

Majority

21

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Bimey,R.J. Bourcbier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman; A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Jan Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

HUnt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Killen,D.J. !.Ioyd,B. Lusher, S. A. I.ynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. Mclean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Newman, K. E.
Nixon.P.J. O'Keefe, F. I.. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian
Rocher. A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Dulfy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R.V.
l'ry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. I.. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E. Jacobi,R.

Johnson, Lea (Teller) Jones. Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J.
Kelly,R.J. Kenl,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E.. McLeay, !.eo
McMahon. Les Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes. G. G. D. Scott,J.1.. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T.
Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Moore,J,C.

Child,J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

In Committee
The Bill.
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (lO.lS)-This evening we have witnessed one of the most remarkable exhibitions that could ever have occurred in the history of this Parliament by a so-called reSponsible Minister of the Crown. When the Minister

Commonwealth Employees Amendment Bill

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 611

for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner)

rose to make his speech in reply to the second

reading debate he presented this Parliament and

this nation with the most extraordinary prop-

osition that could ever have been put; that is, that

in some way known only to the peculiar workings

of his mind it would be appropriate that consider-

ations before this Parliament should properly be

understood as appropriate to be debated by our

talking to a crowd of 30,000 people collected in

the streets of Sydney. Somehow or other he

thought that was an appropriate testing place for

arguments to be considered by this Parliament. I

suppose that from the statement by the Minister

we must assume that he regards the gathering of

30,000 people-including those who watched it

on television-as an appropriate adjudicating

forum for the issues in this debate. The leading

figure in this march was the best known nazi in

Australia.

.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! The Chair is not to know whom the honourable member is referring to.

Mr HAWKE-There is no problem about identification.

Mr Lusher-Mr Chairman, I raise a point of order. Which clause is the honourable member for Wills addressing himself to?

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-There is no point of order. The honourable member is debating the Bill as a whole.

Mr HAWKE-That is an example of about the level we can, expect. There need be no doubt about the person to whom we are referring. He is colloquially known as 'the skull' for fairly obvious physiognomical reasons. He is Mr Ross May; a man who is proud of the fact of his political affiliations and who is the best known nazi sympathiser in Australia. There he was on television leading this march. The Minister says to the Parliament, apparently with some due sense of responsibility, that it would be appropriate to take the arguments on this issue before a march which is led, as I said, in part by Australia's most prominent nazi. That is the sort of judgment that this Minister makes about how these issues should be considered. Mr Deputy Chairman, I ask that I be heard in silence.

Mr Viner-Get on with it, Bob. All bullies seek protection from someone else.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The Minister will withdraw that remark.

Mr Viner-I withdraw, Mr Deputy Chairman.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order!'! ask the Committee to come to order. The honourable

member for Wills is fairly experienced and I think can handle most interjections without any help from the Chair.
Mr HAWKE-That is indeed correct, Mr Deputy Chairman. Let us now get to the facts which consistently throughout this debate the Minisler and every member of the opposite side of the chamber have significantly avoided. The facts are simple and straightforward and have not been faced up to. Let me make it clear particularly to those so-called legal members opposite what the law is in regard to this place. We had a proposition from the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) and the Minister that something was wrong about the Arbitrator or a Full Bench constituted under the Public Service Arbitration Act making a decision which was against a law of the Commonwealth-a law of this Parliament.
Let us get absolutely clear the position in respect of the particular piece of legislation before the Committee for amendment at this time and the basic Public Service Arbitration Act. Let me refer firstly to section 22 sub-section (2) of the Public Service Arbitration Act and more particularly to those so-called legally qualified people who have implied that an arbitrator cannot make a decision which is against the law. Even those on the Government side with the simplest minds may understand sub-section (2) of section 22 of the Public Service Arbitration Act. I read from it:
The Arbitrator may, where he thinks it proper to do so, make a determination that, in his opinion-
Sir William McMahon-Or award. Mr HAWKE-Do we have to deal with old grandpa over there who does not even know what he is talking about? It is appropriate, when talking about retirement legislation that we should get a contribution from a man who is most eminently retirable. This is what the sub-section says- ' Sir William McMahon-Mr Chairman, I take a point of order. As the proceedings are being broadcast, I draw attention to the larrikinism of the honourable gentleman. I ask that he withdraw his reference to grandfather. The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! There is no point of order. The honourable member should use parliamentary language. Mr HAWKE-I will read out what the section says and, of course, what honourable members opposite do not want to hear. I repeat:
The Arbitrator may, where he thinks it proper to do so, make a determination that, in his opinion, is not, or may not be, in accord with a law of the Commonwealth relating to conditions of employment of employees in the Public Service . . .

612 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Commonwealth Employees Amendment Bill

The Arbitrator can make a determination where was represented via the Public Service Board. All

he believes it not to be in accord with the law of the arguments were put. The arguments of the

the Commonwealth. That determination is to be Government were rejected and now they want to

found in the Public Service Arbitration Act. Let shoot the umpire.

us turn to the Act under which these matters have arisen, the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act. What do we find in.section 24 sub-section (3) of this Act, the sub-section which the Government is seeking to amend? Honourable members who say that it is improper that an arbitrator should make a decision which is not in accordance with the laws of

The CHAIRMAN. Order! The Honourable member's time has expired.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON (Lowe) (1O.25)-1t is with great regret that I have to inform the Committee once again that the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) does not know what he is talking about.

the Commonwealth should remember that the Honourable members interjecting-

sub-section which amend states:

the

Government

is

seeking

to

.

Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-I wish honourable members would not laugh because I do not

Where a term of an award, whether made before or after the commencement of this Act, that applies in relation to an employee is inconsistent with a provision of this Act, the term shall prevail and the provision of this Act shall, to the extent

like them laughing at the honourable member. I respect him and do not like him being laughed at. If they insist they can laugh again. Let me quote

of the inconsistency, be inoperative in relation to the accurately from section 22 of the Public Service

employee.

Arbitration Act which was amended on 15

Both in respect of the Public Service Arbitration November 1956. I want everyone to listen care-

Act and the 1979 legislation which the Governfully. The section states:

ment is now seeking to amend, a specific The Arbitrator may make a determination which is not in

statement of the intention of the Parliament that accord with an award or order of--

an arbitrator may do precisely that thing is incorporated in the legislation. If an arbitrator after hearing argument-which none of the honourable members here who are putting up their hands to

Mr Hawke-Read the next section. Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-Please be a good boy. I continue:

act in summary jurisdiction to over throw the considered opinion of a lengthy Full Bench hearing have heardcomes to the conclusion that it is right, fair and just in terms of settling an industrial dispute properly before him and if he thinks a de-

the Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration or of the Commission, but, except as provided by this section, is not empowered to make a determination which is not in accord with a law of the Commonwealth.
Mr Hawke-Read the next sub-section.

termination should be made which is not in acSir WILLIAM McMAHON-Please be good.

cordance with the law the Parliament has said You do not need .to shriek your head off. If

specifically that it is its intention that he should honourable members read through this Act very

have the right so to do.

carefully they will find that that is the law and

What happened in this case? A dispute arose specifically in the Public Service in the context of legislation giving the Arbitrator the right to make a decision which could be against the laws of this Parliament. In the course of that dispute the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony), knOWing what the law was-the law which they had specifically passed in 1979 allowing the Arbitrator to make a decision against the CE(RR) Act-said to the unions in that context: 'You go to the Arbitrator'. After having said 'You go to the Arbitrator' they did not say: 'Now look at this parenthesis. In the parenthesis we say to you: "If we do not like the decision of the Arbitrator we will get

that is the only way in which the law can be interpreted. One cannot, in an award or determination of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, whether or not it happens to be relative to the Public Service, give power to anyone under any circumstances in an administrative matter if that power is superimposed upon the law of the land as determined by this Parliament. Honourable members wishing to assert to the contrary should not be here because they believe in handing over of power. When they are elected to govern they will hand over that power to a commission that knows nothing at all about the administration of government and factors associated with it.

up in Parliament and exercise a power that has Mr HAWKE (Wills) (10.27)-1 have within

been there unexercised for 50 years".' They did me considerable reserves of charity. I, therefore,

rtot put any parenthesis at all. All that they said will not use the language which could be properly

was: 'Go to the Arbitrator'. The unions went to directed to the right honourable member for

the Arbitrator in good faith. This Government Lowe (Sir Wiiliam McMahon). Mr Chairman, I

Commonwealth Employees Amendment Bill

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 613

ask you and every honourable member of this chamber to stop interjecting and to listen to the facts and to what the right honourable member for Lowe has just said. In full knowledge, presumably he has read sub-section (1) of section 22 of the Public Service Arbitration Act. So there is no doubt let us see what he has said. Sub-section (1) of section 22 states:
The Arbitrator may make a determination which is not in accord with an award or order of the Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration or of the Commission, but, except as provided by this section, is not empowered to make a determination which is not in accord with a law of the Commonwealth.
That section goes on to say what the Arbitrator can do. The right honourable member for Lowe would not read out the following sub-section which I previously read out. It reads:
The Arbitrator may, where he thinks it proper to do so, make a determination that, in his opinion, is not, or may not be, in accord with a law of the Commonwealth relating to conditions of employment of employees in the Public Service . . . .
The first sub-section says that the Arbitrator cannot make a determination except in accordance with this section. The next sub-section spells out precisely how he can do it. What sort of member reads out the first sub-section which says it cannot be done except in accordance with the provisions of the section and yet does not read out the next sub-section which lays out precisely why and in what circumstances the Arbitrator can do it? That is a misleading of this Parliament and involves a very serious reflectiori on the integrity of the right honourable member for Lowe. .
Consideration interrupted. The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., I shall report progress. Mr Hawke-There is no progress for the right honourable member for Lowe. Why don't you read it, you dishonest little bastard? Mr Viner-;-Mr Deputy Chairman-The DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Minister will resume his seat. -Progress reported. Mr Viner-Mr Deputy Speaker~-
ADJOURNMENT Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr Viner-Mr Deputy Speaker, after we have passed the formal motions I wish to take a point of order regarding the statements made by the honourable member for Wills.

Mr Innes-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Melbourne is not occupying his proper place; I cannot acknowledge him.
Mr Viner-Mr Deputy Speaker, I require the question to be put--
Mr Scholes-Mr D~puty Speaker, I take a point of order. No Standing Order requires a member to be in his place when taking a point of order. He is entitled to take a point of order from any position in the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no substance to the point of order.
Mr Viner-Mr Deputy Speaker, I require the question to be put forthwith without debate.
Mr Scholes-Mr Deputy Speaker, I must challenge your ruling. During a division a member can take a point of order. Any member can take a point of order from any point in the House. You cannot find a Standing Order which says that he cannot.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat. The honourable member for Corio supports his point of orde~--
Mr Scholes-You are denying a rule of the House. It might be convenient, but it is wrong.
Mr DEPUTY' SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member frustrates the Chair in attending to his point of order. Therefore, the Chair disregards the point of order.
Mr Viner-MrDeputy Speaker, I require the question to be put forthwith without debate.
Question put:
That the House do now adjourn.
Question resolved in the negative. Mr Viner-Mr Deputy Speaker, I foreshadowed that I wished to raise a point of order. The honourable member for Wills made some disgustingly disparaging remarks about the right honourable member for Lowe. I ask the honourable member for Wills to withdraw those remarks. They were clearly audible on this side of the House. Mr Hawke-I withdraw. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Wills has withdrawn. The Committee will resume.

614 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Commonwealth Employees Amendment Bill

COMMONWEALTH EMPLOYEES (REDEPLOYMENT AND RETIREMENT)
Al\'IENDMENT'BILL 1981 In Committee
Consideration resumed..
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister) (10.33)-1\ bad lawyer always commits the fundamental error of not quoting or referring to the whole of the law. The honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) went as far as sub-section (2) of section 22 of the Public Service Arbitration Act. Sub-section (2A) of section 22 states that in a case in which an arbitrator makes a determination which, in his opinion, is not or may not be in accord with a law of the Commonwealth he shall:
. . . send to the Prime Minister and to the Attorney General, with.the certified copy of the determination, a state-
ment of the laws of the Commonwealth with which, ill his
opinion, the determination is not, or may not be, in accord.
In the case before the Committee, although the determination was made by the Full Bench, the Arbitrator in fact did send to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) such a certificate; namely, a certificate to the effect that the determination made, in his opinion, was not or might not be in accord with a law of the Commonwealth. Furthermore, sub-section (4) of section 22 of the Pu blic Service Arbitration Act, being the section to which the honourable member for Wills referred-as I pointed out, all bad lawyers fail to quote or refer to the whole of the law-states:
If, before a determination is laid before the Parliament under the last preceding section or under this section, the Attorney-General advises the Prime Minister that, in his opinion, the determination is not in accord with a law of the Commonwealth referred to in the opinion, the Prime Minister shall cause the opinion to be laid, together with the determination, before each House of the Parliament.
That is what occurred in the case before the Committee. So the Government has presented to honourable members a statement by the Public Service Arbitrator.to the effect that this determination is not or may not be in accord with a law of the Commonwealth; namely, the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act. Furthermore, the Attorney-General of the Commonwealth (Senator Durack) has advised the Prime Minister, who has laid on the table of this chamber the opinion of the Attorney-General, that that determination is not in accord with a law of the Commonwealth. Therefore, with complete legal propriety, this Government has acted in a way which asks honourable members to disallow the determination. Let not the honourable member for Wills come into this chamber again

and try to present himself as a lawyer, which he has never been.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (1O.36)-As the debate has taken what might be described as a legal turn,. I wish merely to support the view put by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke). I suggest to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner), who is at the table, and the right honourable member for Lowe (Sir Williaril McMahon) that both of them probably are straining legal credibility when they refer to the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979 as a law of the Commonwealth for the purposes of section 22, sub-section (4), of the Public Service Arbitration Act.
That Act is quite specific in outlining what has to be dealt with. Both the Minister an,d the right honourable member for Lowe have referred to thatAct as alaw of the Commonwealth. The fact of the matter is that the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979 was not in operation at the date the determination was made. Therefore; I should have thought that it was doubtful whether that Act constitutes a law of the Commonwealth for the purposes of the Public Service Arbitration Act and the sections thereof upon which the Minister relied. That is just one more very dubious legal submission which has been tossed around this chamber by the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs.
I turn now to what the Committee is being invited to do in respect of this Bill. I ask honourable members to consider what the Ministerafter all, he purports to have some legal trainingstated to the Parliament on moving his motion for disapproval. Referring to the application made by the unions to the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, he said:
In effect, part of the purpose of the application was to change the provisions and frustrate the intent of legislation which had been passed by the Parliament and which at that time had not been put into operation.
If honourable members were to look at the Bill before the Committee they would realise that it deals essentially with one section of the Act, namely, section 24. That was the section upon which the Minister relied for proof of the intent of the unions to frustrate the intention of the Parliament. It is from the Minister's use of terms and the terms of the Act that we have to determine what the intention of the Parliament was. I said in my speech during the second reading debate on this Bill, and I say again because the Minister has not dealt with the point, that sub-section (3) of

Commonwealth Employees Amendment Bill

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 615

section 24 of the Act, which this Bill seeks to amend, states:
Where a term of an award, whether made before or after the commencement of this Act, that applies in relation to an employee is inconsistent with a provision of this Act, the term shall prevail and the provision of this Act shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be inoperative in relation to the employee.
What does that mean? I would have thought that even to someone who is prepared to strain a legal argument as much as the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs is it simply means this: The Parliament in expressing its. intention has contemplated that the unions will seek a determination from the Commission, that it will seek an award made under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. It is foreseen. The Parliament has contemplated the question: What occurs, what is the intention of the Parliament in the legislation, if adeter.mination is made by the court which is inconsistent with the terms of the Act? I think that haS been very clearly expressed by the Parliament. Section 24 (3) says that where that situation occurs the term of the award shall prevail. That is to say, where this Parliament has expressed its intention it is the determination which will prevail over the Act. That was the intention of the Parliament. If that was the intention of the Parliament why does the Minister come into this place and persistently misrepresent the intention--
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! The honourable member will address his remarks to the Chair.
Mr HOLDING-Mr Chairman, I ask you to ask this Minister why he comes into the chamber and deliberately misleads the Committee as to the intention of the Parliament.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. I hope the Committee will always acknowledge the right of every member of this place to hold an opinion. I do not think it is a proper use of parliamentary language to use abuse instead of logic.
Mr HOLDING-Mr Chairman, I object to your statement that I am using abuse instead of logic. In fact, with great respect, Mr Chairman, if .you had been listening, I took the Committee through what is a very logical exercise in interpretation which invites only one conclusion. I have reached the conclusion that as I believe anyone else would on any fair reading of this section. The Minister, who has some training as a lawyer and who purports to have some legal expertise, in his speech said-it is his own speech; I did not write it for him-that the intention in seeking a determination was to render the section of the Act

inoperative. In fact the very section which we are now asked to amend is the section which contemplates that action being taken, and legally being taken, by the unions. That is the first thing. That is a concept which the Parliament had before it. We are not suggesting that they were doing anything improper. When they exercise the legal rights which the Parliament has given them and they get a determination in their favour-and the legislation which this Parliament passed makes it perfectly clear that where there is inconsistency the determination prevails-on what basis does this Minister tell the Committee that the intentions of the Parliament are not being carried out? It is as simple as that.

Of course, I only have to reply on one further fact. In order to justify what this Government has done it now has to amend the very section. That is what this. Bill does. Basically the Bill amends one section of the Act. Why is this so? It does this because it does not like the intentions which were previously expressed in its legislation. In order to justify some of the palpable legal nonsense and the political misinformation which has been given to this place by this Minister the Government has now had to bring in another Bill to amend what was previously its intention. It is a spurious legal exercise, as it is a dishonest political exercise.

Sir WILLIAM McMAHON (Lowe) (10.46)-I rise again to test the accuracy of what has been said by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke). I can do no more than quote exactly what he quoted. Section 22 (1) of the Public Service Arbitration Act states:

The Arbitrator may make a determination which is not in

accord with an award or order of the Commonwealth Court

of Conciliation and Arbitration or of the Commission, but,

except as provided by this section, is not empowered to make

a determination which is not in accord with a law of the

Commonwealth.

.

Section 22 (2)-and this was quoted by the honourable member for Wills-states:

The Arbitrator may, where he thinks it proper to do so, make a determination that, in his opinion, is not, or may not be, in accord with a law of the Commonwealth relating to conditions of employment of employees in the Public Service not being-

We are not dealing with conditions of employment in the legislation before us; we are again dealing with the administration of the Commonwealth-that is, the administration of departments of state. Sub-section (2) continues:

(a) the Compensation (Australian Government Employees) Act 1971-1973, the Commonwealth Employees' Furlough Act 1943-1953 or the Superannuation Act 1922-1956; or
(b) any other prescribed Act or the prescribed provisions of any other Act.

616 R~PRESENTAllVES 10 March 1981

Adjournment

Sub-section (2A) states:
IIi that case, the Arbitrator shall send to the Prime Minister and to the Attorney-General, with the certified copy of the determination; a statement of the laws of the Commonwealth with which, in his opinion, the determination is not, or may not be, in accord.
A formula is provided for the Attorney-General to advise the Prime Minister of his opinion and for the Prime Minister to cause the opinion together with the determination to be laid before both Houses of the Parliament. Why is this procedure adopted? It is adopted because we regard the Parliament of this country as predominant over an opinion given by an arbitrator. The very reason notice No. 1 was given relating to Determination No. 503 of 1980 was to permit this chamber to disapprove of that Determination of the Public Service Arbitrator. The position is very clear. When the vote is taken we will find out who is to be believed-those in the Opposition or those in the Government. The Committee will be the judge. I believe that the people will regard the Committee as the judge and they will punish the Opposition. I could never be rude to the honourable member for Wills. I can only say: Let the people judge. When they know the decision of this place and the reasons I know which side of the Parliament will be condemned.
Progrc:;ss reported. .
ADJOURNMENT
Senior Citizens' Week-Apex Organisation-Nuclear Weapons Testing in
Tahiti
Motion (by Mr Viner) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (1O.50)-It being Senior Citizens' Week I wish to say something on behalf of our senior citizens and also comment on the way in which they are being treated by the present Government. My congratulations and thanks go to those people for the contributions they have made to the development of this great country. They are the true pioneers of our land and deserve a better deal than they are receiving at the present time. The present level of age pensions is $64.10 a week for single pensioners and $106.80 for married pensioners. Income from other sources of up to $20 a week for single pensioners and $34.50 for married pensioners may be earned without affecting the level of those pensions received. If pensioners are paying rent or lodging a further $5 a week is payable by way of supplementary allowance. I include also in this category those pensioners receiving invalid, widow's and ~upporting parents' pensions which are at tlie same level as those outlined.

The present level of pension payments to single pensioners is $4 a week below the poverty line as set by the Henderson Committee of Inquiry into Poverty. Insofar as the poverty line, which is set at 24.3 per cent of average weekly earnings, is concerned one might well ask how realistic the poverty line is today. In other words, even if pensions were set at the poverty line level, which would mean $68.20 for a single pensioner, how would those single pensioners be able to afford the basic necessities of life, including adequate shelter, food and clothing? The rental supplement of $5 a week paid to those pensioners paying rent or lodging is rather meaningless in this day and age. It has remained at $5 a week since 1974. We all know, of course, that no accommodation is available for this amount. A minimum of $20 a week is required to obtain the most meagre of accommodation facilities. Indeed, for such pensioners, rental control should be instituted so that pensioners are not required to pay in excess of 20 per cent of their total income for accommodation facilities.
Those pensioners suffering most are single pensioners receiving age or widow's pensions. How these people exist in view of the price of goods and services I do not know. They are Obviously living from day to day just eking out a meagre existence. If they have young children, as do many of the pensioners I know personally, life is very hard indeed. These people are part of our community. They are making or have made significant contributions to the welfare of our nation and they are not being given a fair go by the present Government. When we look at the situation in Australia today, with the rich getting richer and the poor getting poorer because of the Government's policies on income splitting for the wealthy, tax concessions and tax evasion loopholes available to those in business, the assistance given to those in need in our community, including the pensioners, is not good enough.
A further matter that I wish to raise is applicable to those pensioners who earn a supplementary income up to the limit which enables them still to receive a pension and to retain their fringe benefits. Those pensioners will find that they are earning a total income which is above the tax free level of $4,041 per annum, which will mean that they will be paying tax of almost $1 for every $3 they earn above that limit. This could be a very big burden for those pensioners who have not set aside this money. I therefore call on the Government to increase pensions to a level above the poverty line, to increase the rental supplement to at least $20 a week and to raise the tax free income zone to at least $4,400. The pensioners of

Adjournment

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 617

this country deserve at least this much from the Australian Government. '
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (10.54) -Today, 10 March 1981, the Apex organisation in Australia celebrates its fiftieth birthday. In fact, this celebration was held at lunch time today. The contribution that Apex has made to the Australian community and business life over the past 50 years requires special recognition by this House and this Parliament. On 10 March 1931, the organisation being born in the middle of the Great Depression, the name of Apex was adopted by the former Young Businessmen's Club of Geelong, thus commencing a period of 50 years' service and dedication to the Australian nation and its people. In fact, at a time when we as Australians are seeking a real national identity and pride it would be appropriate to use as it catch-call 'as Australian as Apex'.

though these qualities were the only considerations that make a nation alive and progressive. That is not the situation. These strengths are secondary to the primary strengths in the community of adequate social needs and proper services. It is in this area of strengthening the individual communities in which Apex operates that it and other service clubs deserve the commendation of all Australians. Bringing fellowship to each other, giving service hours to the aged, the lonely, the suffering and the young and providing leadership opportunities to those with ability has allowed
Apex to build the real strengths and pride into communities which no government can build arid which are needed to supplement and complement
other economic and business advantages. Apex has filled many of the neglected troughs that are frequently left by the waves of economic pros-
perity that Australia has experienced over several decades.

, A five minute speech in the adjournment de-
bate cannot capture 50 years of Apex history. It is sufficient to say that Apex commenced with the vision of three young Victorian Architects at
Geelong on 19 November 1930-Ewan Laird, Langham Proud and John Buchan. It must be of interest to honourable members in this House that
our colleague the honourable member for Murray, Mr Lloyd, is married to a daughter of a founder, Mr Ewan Laird. The organisation
received the early support of the Rotary service clubs and its approach and ethics, in many ways, resemble Rotary. Since then it has received the support of most Australians, given service to all AustraJians and also internationalised its services and its name.

Last year members of this House pressed the then Minister for Post and Telecommunications to alter an Australian Postal Commission decision not to print a stamp to commemorate 50 years of Apex in Australia. Those members were able to change that decision and an Apex fiftiethanniversary stamp will be issued on 6 April 1981. But this is small recognition of the present 800 clubs and 18,000 Apexians and those Apexians of the past who have passed through this organisation and contributed to Australian communities and Aus-
tralian business. It is small recognition of those who have contributed through one or more of the various forms of Australian government, including those Apexians who have served in this House. As a former Jaycee and a current Rotarian

The Second World War reduced Apex numbers to about a half through enlistment in the Services by the younger members. Members and past members were prepared to ser,ve their nation in

I would hope that all honourable members would join me in congratulating Apex and Apexians on this, their fiftieth anniversary, and in thanking them for making Australia more Australian.

this world conflict. Apex launched service

schemes whereby, through its national body, Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.58)-1 wish to

many organisations such as the Australian Inland draw attention to the plight of the Polynesian

MissIon, the Flying Doctor Service of Australia people in Tahiti who are suffering under theyoke

and many others were beneficiaries. Apexians created' a national awareness of the difficulties

of French colonial rule. The French Government promised independence to the Tahitian people 10

suffered by Aborigines, spastic children, civilian years ago but this promise has not been honoured.

widows and many other disadvantaged groups. In fact, whenever one sees a strong civilian widows

The testing of nuclear weapons by the French Government has been taking place in Tahiti for

association in operation, those widows and that 17 years. During the period when the Whitlam

club become living and current testimonies to Apexians who acted positively in the 1960s to

Australian Labor Party Government was in office , the Australian Government was successful in an

bring comfort and companionship to an otherwise action before the International Court of Justice to

forgotten section of the community.

stop nuclear weapons testing in the vicinity of the

Mururoa Atoll. However, as decisions of the In-

Much is spoken today about economic stability, ternational Court of Justice are not binding,

economic development and economic strength as France continued its nuclear program.

618 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Adjournment

It is true that atmospheric testing has ceased but since that time experiments have been conducted underground. There has been a rigid censorship of the newspapers in relation to the tests. As a result, the information regarding the tests has not been passed on to the Tahitian people. They know little, but suspect much, regarding the radioactivity these tests are generating in the soil, the surrounding atmosphere and the waters of their island. The Tahitians have learned of these facts only from scientific studies emanating from Australia.
Let us look at some of these facts. People are contracting exotic illnesses which can be related only to excess radioactivity and which can be treated only by French military doctors. These doctors come to Tahiti for periods of two years only, after which time they return to France. In consequence, there is no continuity in the treatment of these illnesses. The waters of the island

are so contaminated that French residents drink only bottled water. Yet, in past years, the fresh waters on the island were noted for their purity.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! It being 11 p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 2.15 p.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 11 p.m.
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 10 March 1980, pursuant to statute:
Defence Amendment Act-Interim DeterminationsStatutory Rules 1981, Nos. 26, 27, 28.
Seat of Government (Administration) ActOrdinance-1981-No. 4-Workmen's Compensation (Amendment).

Answers to Questions

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 619 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers t9 questions were circulated:

United Nations Women's Conference
(Question No. 27)

Mr Holding asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:

(1) Did he receive any representations from the Australian Labor Party regarding ALP Parliamentary representation to the United Nations mid-decade for Women Conference in Copenhagen held in July 1980.

(2) If so, was a bipartisan Parliamentary delegation to that Conference proceeded with; if not, why not.

(3) Is he able to say which countries (a) voted for, (b) abstained and (c) voted against the World Programme of Action for Women at the Conference.

(4) Did Australia vote against the Programme; if so, why, in

view of the fact that a large number of Western countries

merely abstained from voting.

.

(5) Did any Australian women's organisations make appli-
cation to join the Australian delegation to the Copenhagen conference; if so, which ones (a) applied; (b) were accepted and (c) were refused, and what was the reason in each case.

(6) What (a) women's organisations; (b) individuals and (c) Federal Parliamentarians attended the previous United Nations Women's Conference in Mexico in 1975.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) There is no record of any formal representations from
the Australian Labor Party regarding ALP Parliamentary representation on the official delegation to the Wo.~ld Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women.

(2) Not applicable.

(3) (a) The following 94 countries voted for the World Programme of Action adopted at the Conference:

Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Barbados,
Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Byelorussian SSR, Cape Verde, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea,
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Yemen, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, German Democratic Republic, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahirya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Seychelles, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian
SSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Cameroon, United Rep-
public of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe.

(b) The following 22 countries abstained:

Austria, Belgium, Chile, Denmark, Finland, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Guatemala, Holy See, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New

Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Swaziland, Switzerland, Thailand, United Kingdom.
(c) Australia, Canada, Israel and the United States voted against the World Programme of Action.
(4) The Government decided as a matter of principle that Australia could not vote for the text of the World Programme of Action because it contained unacceptable political nferences inconsistent with Australian foreign policy. In particular, the Government could not accept a reference condemning Zionism in the same context as racism and apartheid, and a reference to the Palestinian Liberation Organisation as the representative of the Palestinian people. We remain firmly opposed to such references. However in the General Assembly on 5 November 1980 Australia abstained in the vote on the draft resolution on the follow-up to the Programme of Action and resolutions adopted at the World Conference.
The draft resolution is intended to facilitate the implementation of many of the significant and positive action proposals adopted at Copenhagen and does not of itself incorporate the political formulations which we found unacceptable. We are consequently committed, during the remainder of the Decade for Women, to support activities which are commonly agreed and intended to advance the status of women throughout the world.
(5) The Government did not call for applications from women's organisations for representation on the official delegation. It is the government's prerogative to select the members of official delegations to international intergovernmental conferences. In this case the official delegation was selected by the then Minister for Home Affairs in consultation with the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Generally membership of official delegations to inter~ national conferences comprises government officials and advisers who will be responsible for implementing the policies agreed at those conferences. The government considered, however, that in this case the inclusion of women from the community who have been involved in efforts to raise the status of women would be valuable and would indicate the Government's support for the role of non-governmental organisations in raising the status of women and in participating actively in the decision-making process. The members of the official delegation were:
Head of Delegation
The Hon. Robert James Ellicott, QC., M.P., Minister for Home Affairs
Representatives
Mrs Beryl Beaurepaire, Convenor, National Women's Advisory Council
Mr Robin Ashwin, First Assistant Secretary, International Organisations, Africa & Middle East Division, Department of Foreign Affairs
Ms Kathleen Taperell, Director, Office of Women's Affairs
Senator Kathy Martin
Alternate Representatives
Dr Stefania Siedlecky, Adviser in Family Planning and Women's Health, Department of Health
Ms Carolyn Wiltshire, Executive Secretary, National Women's Advisory Council Secretariat
Ms Pera Wells, First Secretary, Australian Mission to the United Nations, New York
Ms Elizabeth Jensen, Adviser, Office of Women 's Affairs

620 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Answers to Questions

Dr Ruth Pfanner, Women in Development Unit, Australian Development Assistance Bureau
Ms Margaret Adamson, Second Secretary, Australian Embassy, Vienna
Mrs Valerie Fisher, Member of Country Women's Association and member of the National Women's Advisory Council
Dr Laurel Macintosh, President, National Council of Women of Australia
Mrs Jan Marsh, Industrial Advocate and Research Officer, Australian Council of Trade Unions and member of the National Women's Advisory Council
Mrs Evelyn Scott, Manager, Regional Aboriginal Hostels, Cairns
Advisers
Mr Greg Fraser, Senior Private Secretary to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment
Mr Robert Wills, First Secretary, Copenhagen Mr Lindsay Smith, First Secretary (Information), Copenhagen Mr Michael Brims, Second Secretary (C & A), Copenhagen Ms Kerry Lovering, Department of Employment and Youth Affairs Ms Rosa Walden, Office of Women's Affairs
The following Australian women received financial assistance to attend the Non-Govermnental Forum, held concurrently with the conference:
Ms Lyndsay Connors (ACT) Mrs Lolita Castillo (NSW) Mrs Marianne Crowe (Vic.) Mrs Kathleen Edwards (Vic.) Mrs Maureen Giddings (NSW) Mrs Elizabeth Grant (ACT) Dr Janet Irwin (Qld) Mrs Eva Kennedy (Qld) Professor Norelle Lickiss (Tas.) Ms Wendy McCarthy (NSW) Mrs May O'Brien (WA) Ms Mary Owen (Vic.) Dame Raigh Roe (WA) Mrs Judith Roberts (SA) Mrs Valerie Renkema (Vic.) Mrs Birgitta Stefanik (ACT) Mrs Heather Stevens (NSW) Mrs Cecile Storey (Vic.) Ms Patricia Szirom (Vic.) Mrs Mab Walsh (NSW) Dr Alice Whitley (NSW) Mrs Affie Zagorides (NSW)
(6) (a-b) At the World Conference of the International Women's Year in Mexico in 1975, Australia was represented by an official delegation of 14 as follows:
Delegates
Ms Elizabeth Reid, Head of delegation Mrs Margaret Whitlam, Representative Ambassador Robin Ashwin, Representative
Alternates and Advisers
Mr P. J. Galvin, Co-ordinator, International Women's Year Secretariat
Ms S. Dowse, Senior Adviser, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Ms S. Castley, Member of the Australian National Advisory Committee for International Women's Year
Ms M. Pozos, Member of the Australian National Advisory Committee for International Women's Year
Mr A. Wilson, First Secretary, Australian Embassy, Lima

Mr J. Campbell, First Secretary, Australian Mission to the United Nations, New York
Ms P. Wensley, First Secretary, Australian Embassy, Mexico
Ms S. Ryan, Executive Officer, International Women's Year Secretariat (Member of the ACT Legislative Assembly)
Ms L. Manderson, Executive Officer, International Women's Year Secretariat
Ms H. Robertson, Consultant, International Women's Year Secretariat
Ms L. Lake, Prime Minister's Office
Concurrently with the 1975 World Conference a meeting of representatives of non-governmental organisations and individuals took place in Mexico. The following 10 women were sponsored by the Australian Government to attend:
Ms Catherine Allen, Victoria, Young Women's Christian Association
Ms Eva Bacon, Queensland, Union of Australian Women
Ms Laurie Bebbington, Victoria, Women's Officer, Australian Union of Students
Ms Pat Eatock, Australian Capital Territory, Campaigner for Aboriginal and Women's Rights
Ms Pat Giles, Western Australia, Western Australia's first woman trade union official, Chairman of WA Employment Discrimination Committee
Ms Leonora Howlett, New South Wales, Artist
Ms Joyce McConnell, Australian Capital Territory, National President, National Council of Women of Australia
Honourable Edna Roper, New South Wales, M.L.A. Ms Edna Ryan, New South Wales, Lifetime worker for women Ms Vi Stanton, Northern Territory, Aboriginal welfare worker (c) No Federal Parliamentarians were included in the Australian delegation to the World Conference of the International Women's Year 1975.
Mail Delivery Services
(Question No. 86)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(l) How many mail delivery runs are performed on (a) foot, (b) bicycle or (c) motor cycle in each State of Australia.
(2) How many (a) bicycles and (b) motor cycles does Australia Post currently own or lease.
(3) What are the (a) replacement and (b) lifetime maintenance and running costs of each form of transport.
(4) What criteria does Australia Post apply to the replacement of (a) delivery on foot with bicycles, (b) bicycles with motor cycles and (c) motor cycles with bicycles for postmen.
(5) Do these criteria differ in separate States; ifso, how.
(6) How many bicycles does Australia Post currently operate with (a) hub or (b) chain operated gears.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) The following table indicates, by State, the number of mail delivery rounds performed by postmen and postwomen (a) on foot, (b) by bicycle and (c) by motor cycle, as at 30 June 1980.

Answers to Questions

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 621

State

On foot Bicycle

Motor cycle

Total

a restructuring or rearrangement of a round, resulting in less distance between the delivery area and the post office.

NSW Vic.
Qld SA WA
Tas.

711

617

214

1,063

64

217

32

265

21

257

21

16

946

2,274

(5) No.

263

1,540

393 205

674 502

(6) (a) Nil.

181 103

459 140

(b) Nil.

Total

1,063

2,435

2,091

5,589

Note: As at 30 June 1980, there were also some 820 delivery rounds throughout Australia which were undertaken other than by postmen and postwomen-for example, by mail contractors. Accurate details of the mode of transport used on these rounds are not readily available.
(2) As at 30 June 1980, Australia Post owned approximately:
(a) 4,800 bicycles. (b) 3,240 motor cycles (including 310 motor scooters).
Note: The number of bicycles and motor cycles exceed the number of rounds shown in (1) above. Bicycles and motor cycles are used also for other purposes, including telegram delivery and, for motor cycles, parcel delivery. Extra vehicles are essential also to maintain service reliability in the event of breakdowns and accidents and for regular repair and maintenance cover.
Australia Post does not lease any bicycles or motor cycles.
(3) (a) The average replacement cost, at 1980 prices, is about $110 for a bicycle and about $500 for a motor cycle.
(b) A bicycle incurs an average annual maintenance and running cost, at 1980 prices, of $69 (based on a five year service life). The equivalent cost for a motor cycle is $436 (based on a two year service life).
(4) Criteria which can determine the type of delivery round in a particular area include:
length of a round extent of development distance between delivery points distance between the post office and the commencement and completion points of the'round nature of the local terrain type of roads.
Generally, a change in the mode of operation of a delivery round is implemented when an improved service or cost savings would result.
Additional factors leading to particular changes in the mode of delivery, would include:
(a) Replacement of delivery on foot with bicycle transportan increase in the length of a round beyond walking distance an increased number of delivery points restructuring of a round, resulting in commencement and/or completion points of the round being further from the post office.
(b) Replacement of bicycles with motor cyclesan increase in the length of a round beyond cycling
distance a re-arrangement of the round, resulting in com-
mencement and/or completion points of the round being a long distance from the post office. (c) Replacement of motor cycles with bicycles-
increased development resulting in shorter distances between delivery points

Mail Delivery Services
(Question No. 87)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Do any limits exist, in any State, on the length of delivery routes operated by Australia Post personnel delivering mail by (a) foot, (b) bicycle or (c) motor cycle; ifso, what are the limits in each case, by State.
(2) What limits exist, by State, on the weight of bags of mail delivered by Australia Post personnel by (a) foot, (b) bicycle or (c) motor cycle.
(3) Are these limits ever exceeded, for example at Christmas; if so, for what reasons and how often on average.
(4) What are the average length of delivery runs by Australia Post postmen and postwomen who deliver mail by (a) foot, (b) bicycle or (c) motor cycle, in (i) inner suburban, (ii) outer suburban, (iii) provincial town and (iv) rural situations.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There are no specified limits to the length of delivery rounds performed by Australia Post personnel. The length of a round can depend on a number of factors such as:
the number of points to which mail is delivered
the average volume of mail for delivery
the nature of the local terrain
the extent and nature of development in the area.
(2) The maximum weight of mail loads to be carried by staff performing delivery duties will depend on such factors as local conditions (for example, terrain) and the distance to be traversed. In general, however, weights would fall within the following ranges:

Type of staff

Walking round

Females Junior males
(under 21) Adult males All staff

(kg) 11-14
13-16 16-18

Bicycle round*
(kg) 10-13
11-14 14-16

Motor cycle or scooter round-

Front carrier

Rear carrier

(kg)

(kg)

18-23

27

622 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Answers to Questions

* Including any load carried on the person. Note: In particular circumstances, the maximum weight may be significantly lower than the maximum of the range specified.
(3) These limits should not be exceeded. If mail for delivery on any round exceeds the weight limit, the delivery officer should split the load, deliver it in part and then return to the post office to collect the remaining mail for delivery. If it is not convenient to return to the post office, part of the load can be delivered by vehicle, to a secure, pre-arranged point on the delivery round-for example, by an officer engaged in clearing street posting boxes. The mail is then collected by the delivery officer during the course of the round, when the first load has been delivered.
(4) Lenglhs of individual delivery rounds performed by Australia Post postmen and postwomen are not readily available. Route lengths vary depending on factors referred to in (I) above. However, it has been assessed that the average lengths of rounds are of the same order in inner and outer suburban areas, provincial towns and rural areas, being:
(a) on foot-about 9 Ian (b) on bicycle-about 18 km' (c) on motor cycle-about 36 km.
Industrial Relations: Tasmania
(Question No. 190)
Mr Groom asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the sudden and severe escalation in the number of major strikes affecting many of Tasmania's most important industries over recent weeks.
(2) Will he provide details of the working days lost as a direct result of strikes in Tasmania for the period I January to 26 November 1980.
(3) How many hours lost does this figure represent per employee in the workforce.
(4) What is the equivalent figure per employee for each State for the same period.
Mr Peacock-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am aware that a number of significant industrial disputes occurred in Tasmania in the latter months of 1980. In particular, one of the State's most important industries, the non-ferrous metals mining industry was affected by strikes. Statistics of'industrial disputes just released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) show a massive increase in working days lost in Tasmania in October 1980 when these strikes were in progress.
(2) The most recent statistics available of working days lost due to industrial disputes, published by the ABS on 20 February 1981, cover the period to the end of October 1980. The monthly figures relating to Tasmania for 1980 are:

Tasmania 1980

Industrial disputes*

Working days lost

('000) January 1.9 February 2.7 March 3.3
AprilMay 8.8

('000) June 2.1 Julyt4.0
Augustt 7.1 Septembert 9.7 Octobert 34.0

* Refers to all disputes in progress during the period. t Preliminary figure subject to revision.

(3) and (4) Statistics which relate working days lost to the size of the workforce are issued by ABS on an annual basis. For the 1979 year the number of working days lost per thousand civilian employees in each State was as follows:
NSW 743, Vic 1,088, Qld 677, SA 394, WA 827, Tas 435. For Australia, including the Northern Territory and Australian Capital Territory, the figure was 785.
I understand that statistics for the 1980 year are expected to be released by the ABS in June or July 1981.
Television Transmission Towers
(Question No. 214)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(1) What is the function of, and who is the owner or other such operator who benefits from using, each antenna carried on the Sydney, NSW transmission tower jointly operated by Channels 7 and 10.
(2) Can he say whether the operators of the tower refuse to permit other broadcasters to use this tower; if so, are any reasons for this refusal known to his Department and what are they.
(3) Was use of this tower for broadcast of multicultural television explored with the operators by (a) the Special Broadcasting Service; (b) the former Postal and Telecommunications Department; or (c) any other relevant body; if not, why not; if so, what was the substance of these discussions.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) television stations ATN 7 and TEN 10 transmit from the Channel 7-10 tower providing television services in the VHF band. Both channels also have supporting relay equipment for Electronic News Gathering (ENG) type services located on the tower. In addition the two commercial FM services in Sydney, 2DAY and 2MMM use the tower for their transmitting antennae.
(2) As a result of physical constraints on the tower in terms of windloading, etc, it is not possible to incorporate additional transmitting aerials, apart from those of 2DAY and 2MMM, without some structural strengthening of the tower. Consequently, it would be reasonable to anticipate that the operators of the tower have refused other potential operators access.
(3) Although discussions did take place between the Department, the Special Broadcasting Service and representatives of Channels 7 and 10 concerning the potential use of the tower for multicultural television, these discussions were of a preliminary nature only due to the tower's physical constraints.
Television Transmission Towers
(Question No; 215)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Communications, upon.notice, on 27 November 1980:
(1) What is the function of the transmitting antennae carried on the Gore Hill, New South Wales, transmission tower operated by the Australian Broadcasting Commission.
(2) Who is the owner or other operator who benefits from using each antenna carried by the tower and what rent per annum is paid for this use.
(3) What useful positions or slots remain to be utilised, within accepted margins of safety or other necessary limitations, on this tower.

Answers to Questions

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 623

(4) When is it expected that either a complementary or replacement tower will need to be built to carry transmitting antennae currently or prospectively supported at Gore Hill.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) All services with antennae located on the Gore Hill national tower are Government funded and no rental is therefore payable. The antennae and their users are detailed below in order of height starting from the top:
(a) FM broadcasting antenna (2ABC-FM)-ABC
(b) Mobile services-Australia Post, Telecom Australia, Department of Communications
(c) Television transmitting antenna (ABN-2)-ABC
(d) FM broadcasting antenna (2JJJ-FM)-ABC
(e) Microwave outside broadcasting antennae-ABC (f) Mobile services-ABC
(g) Television transmitting antenna (channel O)-SBS
(h) Mobile service-Department of Communications
(i) Television transmitter antenna (channel 28)-SBS
(3) The tower is at present fully loaded with its existing complement of antennae. Additional antennae could only be accommodated if some of those already mounted on the tower were removed or replace with lower windload models. Alternatively, a major strengthening of the tower would need to be undertaken.
(4) Plans are at present being considered for the construction of a new multipurpose tower at Gore Hill, although at this stage only initial discussions have taken place. A subcommittee is currently investigating matters associated with this proposal. However, any firm commitment would require a Cabinet Decision prior to the necessary funds being allocated.
Mr David Rofe, QC.
(Question No. 287)
Mr Morris asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice on 4 December 1980:
"Will the Attorney-General update the information supplied in answer to question 5459 in the 31st Parliament (Hansard, 19 August 1980, page 400)."
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Mr David Rofe QC. is not acting for the Commonwealth in any legal proceedings. He is, however, acting for Commonwealth officers in the following cases-
(a) Donald William Thomas v. Theofanis Argyropoulos and others:
(b) Thomas Moss v. Ian Torrance.
(2) and (3) Mr Rofe has not represented the Commonwealth in any legal proceedings from 1 June 1980 to date. In that period Mr Rofe was briefed to act for Commonwealth officers in the following cases-
(a) Donald William Thomas v. Theofanis Argyropoulos and others:
(b) Thomas Moss v. Ian Torrance.
In the absence of a clear definition of the reasons why the information is sought and as the information seems not to have been previously disclosed, publication of the amounts

paid to Mr Rofe in this period would be inappropriate. (See Senate Hansard for 16 September 1980 at pages 1109-1110).
Export ofHistoric Aircraft
(Question No. 330)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Is it a fact that the Bureau of Customs has established that a Spitfire MY 154 was exported from Australia as used aluminium sheets and strips.
(2) Has it been established by his Departmental officers that the importer of the aircraft was Robert Lamplough of 81 Bedford Gardens, London, W8, and the consignor shown on the import entry was Alderhaven Ltd., of 68A Goodhope Street, Paddington, New South Wales.
(3) Is action proposed to be taken to recover the aircraft; if so, what.
(4) Is any action proposed against either the consignor or the consignee or any other parties; if not, why not.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I)Yes.
(2) (4) Yes, prosecution action has been taken against those involved. For this reason, it would be inappropriate for me to comment further.
(3) See answer to Question 322.
Transport Cleaning Contracts
(Question No. 356)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Are any cleaning contracts for his Department currently held by Electrolux Utility Services Pty Ltd, if so, (a) what is the (i) term of each contract, (ii) value of each contract, (iii) property where each contract is performed, (b) can he say (i) who holds the share capital in Electrolux Utility services Pty Ltd, and (ii) whether the share capital or any of the share capital is held or owned by foreign interests.
(2) Is the Government continuing the approach of limiting successful tenderers for airport and other transport contracts to companies that have their share capital substantially owned by Australian shareholders; if so, when was the policy changed.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. (a)-

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

Term of contract Contract price" Location

3 years from 10.4.1980
3 years from 1.10.1978

$ 443,156 p.a.
595,889 p.a.

Sydney Airport International Terminal Building Melbourne Airport Terminal Building

" Subject to variations in accordance with movements in

awards, etc.

.

(b) (i) I understand that the share capital in Electrolux Utility Services Pty Ltd, is owned by Electrolux Pty Ltd

624 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Answers to Questions

Australia and L. W. Mathews as trustee for Electrolux Pty Ltd, Australia.
(ii) I also understand that ownership of Electrolux Pty Ltd Australia, can be traced back to A. B. Electrolux of Sweden.
(2) I believe it was a policy of the previous Government for preference to be awarded to an Australian-owned company where Australian and foreign-owned companies submit tenders which meet specifications and are equal in respect of price and availability. I understand that the policy was implemented on very few occasions.
In October 1977 the present Government introduced a policy of preference to goods of Australian origin or of relatively greater Australian content in Commonwealth procurement. The policy does not address the question of the national origin or ownership of suppliers, not does it cover the provision of services except where services are incidental to the supply of particular goods, for example certain engineering design services which may form part of the price of goods tendered.
The introduction of a further criterion of preference to Australian-owned companies would if applied generally to Government purchases raise considerable administrative problems, including the likelihood of conflict with otherimportant criteria (e.g., Australian content) and could be seen as discriminating against Australian employees of foreign-owned companies.
Any other approach might be detrimental to the Government's encouragement of foreign investments in Australia.
Moreover, I believe the Government has a responsibility to keep the costs of airport construction and maintenance as low as possible because the costs are recovered from the airlines and therefore from the travelling public. In these circumstances I believe it would be contrary to the public interest to limit eligibility for public tenders in the manner suggested in this part of the question.
Trade Training
(Question No. 368)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Did he refer in a ministerial statement to the House on 29 April 1980, to a co-operative arrangement between the Federal and Western Australian Governments whereby accelerated training of both young and older workers to tradesmen status is being undertaken to meet the demands of new development projeCts in the North-West Shelf (Hansard, page 2357).
(2) Are similar co-operative arrangements envisaged with the Queensland Government to service regions of accelerated development in that State.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The Commonwealth Government has indicated a willingness to enter into similar arrangements with other States, including Queensland but no similar proposals have been received.
Defence Service Homes
(Question No. 450)
Mr Adermann asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:

(1) Subsequent to the Government's 1980-81 budget decision to substantially increase loans for defence service homes from $15,000 to $25,000 and the reduction in the waiting period, has there been any discernible increase in the (a) number of applicants and (b) average loan sought; ifso, what are the details.
(2) What was the (a) number of ~pplicants, (b) number of loans granted and (c) average loan sought for the preceding 3 years. '
Mr Thomson---.,.The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) There has been a marked increase, in the number of applications received and the amount of loan sought since the announcement in August 1980 of the Government's decision to increase the maximum Defence Service Homes loan and reduce the waiting period.
(a) The average number of applications received per month has risen from 533 in July and August 1980 to 723 in the 5 months from September 1980 to January 1981 inclusive. The average monthly intake of applications in the period July 1979 to January 1980 was 512. The averages for periods including December are influenced by a seasonal fall in that month.
(b) The average loan sought in recent years has been about $14,200. The average loan sought ,by applicants in January 1981 was a little over $23,000.
(2) The number of applicants for Defence Service Homes loans, the number of loans granted and the average loan sought for each of the preceding 3 years are as follow:

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

(a) No. of applicants
8,151 7,030 6,092

(b) No. of

loans (c) Average

granted

loan

6,115
5,365 5,251

$ 14,339
14,186 14,209

ASEAN
(Question No. 489)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'ASEAN' links spark the ~oviets' alarm' (Age, 19 January 1981, page 8).
(2) If so, has Australia received any representations from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics regarding ASEAN political or military links with (a) China, (b) Japan and (c) the United States of America; if so, what was the substance of those representations and wh~n were they received.
(3) Has Australia responded to those representations; if so, what are the details of the response.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am aware of the article, 'ASEAN links spark the Soviets' alarm', published in the Age newspaper on 19 January 1981.
(2) No.
(3) Not applicable.

Answers to Questions

10 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 625

Coastal Surveillance: Civil Aircraft
(Question No. 567)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
How many civil aircraft flying hours were dedicated to coastal surveillance in (a) 1977-78, (b) 1978-79 and (c) 1979-80.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) 4,200 hours.
(b) 13,800 hours.
(c) 23,126 hours.
I am advised that the answers to (a), (b) and (c) do not include hours flown by aircraft chartered for special Customs response.
Curfew at Kingsford-Smith Airport
(Question No. 578)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
On which days and on what occasions have there been breaches of the curfew at Kingsford-Smith Airport during the last 12 months.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There were no breaches, that is, unapproved operations, during the curfew in 1980, which is the most recent 12 month period for which complete figures are available. However, the following aircraft were approved to operate during the curfew on the general grounds of exceptional passenger hardship occasioned by the circumstances as described:

No. of Date-1980 aircraft

January-

4

2

II

17
FebruaryI

7

21

March4

5

7

5

9

14

2

Circumstance
Weather and operational difficulties
Overseas delay, no accommodation available
Overseas delay
Weather and operational difficulties
Overseas delay due runway closure
Delay caused by aircraft accident
Delay caused by stopwork meeting in Melbourne
Delay caused by mechanical problems
Delays caused by unexpected refuellers' strike in Sydney, Melbourne and Canberra
Delay following on the above strike
Overseas aircraft which were held for passengers delayed by the residual effects of the refuellers' strike

No.of Date-I 980 aircraft

Circumstance

May2
4 June-
16
26
July5
October5
November5 8 11 13
December12 14 16 19 21 22 23 24 25 28 29 30

7 Cumulative effects of prolonged strike by transport workers in the aviation industry combined with the start of the school holidays and lightning refuellers' strike in Perth
As above
Weather and operational difficulties
Delay due to mechanical problems
Delay due to mechanical problems
Delay due to mechanical problems
1 Fuel strike 1 Overseas delay I Qantas staff strike 2 Aftermath of refueller's strike
7 Delays due to PREIA dispute 1 Delays due to PREIA dispute 2 Delays due to PREIA dispute 7 Delays due to PREIA dispute I Delays due to PREIA dispute 3 Delays due to PREIA dispute 2 Delays due to PREIA dispute 11 Delays due to PREIA dispute 10 Delays due to PREIA dispute 3 Delays due to PREIA dispute 4 Delays due to PREIA dispute 4 Delays due to PREIA dispute

Ham: Tariff Protection
(Question No. 605)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(1) Has Darling Downs production of Dandy hams ceased.
(2) Is he able to say whetherPlumrose ham ha,s a doubtful future as a producer.
(3) Are the reasons for this instability connected with the dumping of Yugoslav and Romanian ham in Australia for approximately 20c per kilogram below viable Australian production prices.
(4) Is temporary tariff protection being considered for Australian pig producers; if so, what.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Dandy brand ham is a product of Australian Bacon Ltd, not K. R. Darling Downs. Australian Bacon is not cur~ently canning ham, K. R. Darling Downs is canning but at a lower level than in the past.
(2) According to press reports, Plumrose (Aust.). Ltd has stated that it will stop local production if no action is taken by the Government to provide tariff protection to local canners against imports of canned ham and pork shoulders from' Romania and Yugoslavia.

626 REPRESENTATIVES 10 March 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) Following allegations by Australian ham canners that

canned hams were being imported from Romania and

Yugoslavia at dumped prices, the Department of BACA com-

menced an anti-dumping inquiry in August 1980. The inquiry

was concluded in December 1980. BACA announced on 20

January 1981 that the exporters in Romania and Yugoslavia

had given undertakings to the Minister that canned hams

would not be exported to Australia at less than the 'normal'

value established by .the dumping inquiry; accordingly, no

dumping duties would be imposed.

.

(4) (a) While the dumping investigation was in progress, the Minister for Industry and Commerce announced on 20 November 1980 that a reference covering prepared meat products put up in airtight containers, e.g. cans or bottles, had been sent to the Industries Assistance Commission with a request for a report to the Government within 12 months 00 the long-term assistance needs of the industry.

(b) The lAC was required to provide an interim report within 75 days on the possible short term assistance needs of ham canners. The interim report has been submitted and will be considered by the Government in the near future.

Detonation of Nuclear Device at Muroroa Atoll
(Question No. 618)

Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:

(\) Did his Department receive information confirming that a nuclear device was detonated at Murorda Atoll on 9
December 1980. (2) If so, did the Government lodge any protest with the French Ambassador; if not, why not.

Mr Street-The answer to the honourable

member's question is as follows:

.

(1) I have reason to believe that France conducted further underground nuclear tests at Muroroa Atoll in the South Pacific in the period late November to early December.

(2) Australia's opposition to France's continued nuclear testing in the South Pacific is well known. -This has been frequently reiterated. It is not, however, the Government's practice to make approaches to the Governments concerned. whenever a nuclear weapon state carries out an underground nuclear explosion. We make formal approaches to the
country concerned when an atmospheric test has been conducted.

Qantas Meat Freight to Middle-East Destinations
(Question No. 626)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(I) What quantities of meat freight were transported to Middle East destinations by Qantas in each of the years 1978-79 to 1980-81 ?
(2) From which (a) abattoirs and (b) companies was the meat taken during the same years?
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised that the information sought is of a detailed confidential nature and that its release could prejudice the commercii\1 interests of the organisations concerned. In the circumstances I am not prepared to release such information.
Income Tax Assessment Act
(Question No. 704)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 4 March 1981:
(I) Has the Government resolved all problems associated with the drafting of a new section to replace section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act; if so, when will the proposed amendments be brought before the Parliament.
(2) If not, will he consider introducing an amendment to give effect to the best formula available to the Government for a new section 260 and give ail undertaking that the section will be amended immediately with retrospective applic~ion if necessary, if, through subsequent judicial interpretation, an artificial or contrived scheme is allowed which bears no relationship to commercial practice and has as its main purpose tax avoidance contrary to the spirit of the section.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(\) and (2) Considerable progress has been made in the task of drafting new measures to overcome deficiencies in section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act and that work is, I believe, very close to completion. I expect that the Government's legislative proposals for a new provision will be made public during the current sittings of Parliament.


