House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 122, 1981 Tuesday, 7 April 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1341

Tuesday, 7 April 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will b~ referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of childrens services, which has been reduced by almost 40% in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 budget. And further, that annual budget allocations in the area of childrens services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Mountford.
P¥titions received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny Unemployment Benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.
That the level of Benefits for all unemployed people, and including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120% of the poverty line.
That future employment policies be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.
Public acknowledgement of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrDuffy.
Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That cOJ).tinued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your, petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:

Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(I) whether a product contains any animal deriyative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated., t,-,
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet- , ition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys~
Petition received.
Proposed Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 5 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned at the prospect of any legislation regarding Plant Variety Rights.
The reasons are as follows: ""

1342 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Petitions

1.. We believe it would transfer control, the key aspect of

agriculture in this country, to overseas interests not re-

sponsible to the Australian Government.

2. We believe it would restrict the growing and trading of

many seeds.

.

-3. We believe it would cause a decline in the genetic diver-

sity of crops making them more subject to destruction

by pests and diseases.

4. We believe thorough investigation of the effect of shni-

lar legislation overseas and a full public debate is

required before any decision is made.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament refrains from enacting any legislation on Plant Variety Rights.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

byMrNixon.

Petition received.

Immigration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens showeth:
That we protest at the many unwise decisions of our National Government which have resulted in discrimination against Australians in many ways.
That unwise 1mmigration has introduced into Australia crimes characteristic of certain races and which through an environmental impact is influencing the behaviour of some young Australians.
That unwise immigration has led to the basing within Australia of a number of foreign terrorist groups and the Mafia, all of whom are causing the police and citizens grave concern.
That the Government act immediately on the advice of the people as expressed through many public opinion polls and bring to a halt the present huge intake of non Angio-SaxonCeltic people, thereby retaining some portion of the fast diminishing goodwill and public confidence in that Australians have not given the government any mandate to populate the country with people of alien stock.
That the government give practical effect to the views so earnestly espoused by the recent Immigration Minister Mr M. J. R. MacKelllir (Hansard 30/11/12), ex immigration Minister Sir Phillip Lynch (Page 16 Policy book Evolution of a Policy), Ex Immigration Minister Forbes -(Hansard 17/8/12 and press statement 2/5/12) and Ex Prime Minis.ter Sir William McMahon (Press statement 4/5/12), all of which are itemised.
That the government dismiss Mr A. Grassby for his well known racial bias as indicated in parliament at the time of his appointment.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should take action to have a national referendum on the subject ofimmigration.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr O'Keefe.
Petition received.

Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the prospect of the proposed Plant Breeders' Rights legislation. The reasons are as follows:-
(1) We believe it will eventually lead to the restriction of sales of many varieties of seed:

(2) We believe it will cause the disappearance of many

useful plant varieties as evidenced by similar legis-

lation in Europe:

.

.

(3) We believe that it will cause the Australian seed industry to become foreign controlled:

(4) We believe that a full public debate has not taken place and should take place before any laws are passed on the patenting of a life form.

Your petitioners therefore humbly request that Parliament take positive action as soon as posSible to arrest the implementation of such legislation.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Peacock.

Petition received.

Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions and the ACTU, the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our National Airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and The Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and Continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
AI\d your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.

Discriminatory Legislation
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That currently discrimination in the provision of work, in appointment to jobs and in promotion exists in Australia on particular grounds including, inter alia, grounds of race, ethnic .origin, marital status, pregnancy, sex and/or sexual preference; and
That currently discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits is exercised against particular groups of individuals-in particular, against married women.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employment, in employment of individuals under federal awards, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasi-governmental organisations, and in employment of all persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal opportunity legislation should have jurisdiction; and
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons without regard to sex and/or marital status.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Spender.
Petition received.

Petitions

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1343

Family Allowances
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australiao Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
that parents with dependent children bear a disproportionate share of the tax burden;
that the recent substantial increase in the dependent spouse rebate does not go to all parents;
that family allowances do benefit all parents with dependent children.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
that family allowances be increased immediately, and that family allowances be indexed but not taxed.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Spender.
Petition received.
Australian Broadcasting Commission: Melbourne Showband
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the Australian Parliament as in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth that:
As regular viewers and listeners of the ABC Melbourne Showband we were disappointed to learn of the dismissal of seventeen members of this outstanding orchestra.
We have had a great deal of pleasure over the past eight years viewing and listening to this band's fine music. It is the only full-time light orchestra in Australia and we are disgusted to think that such talented musicians should be dismissed in this manner.
We, therefore call on the Federal Government to rescind this decision and make more money available for the continuance of the full Showband.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.
Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respectfully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone zone is not only inconvenic;ilt.~ut is affecting families, business concerns and employment in the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free.
Petition received.
Airlines Policy
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present twe;> airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.

That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor

service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visit-

ing WA and vice versa.

.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free mar)cet forces.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr McLean.

Petition received.

AUSTRALIAN WINE INDUSTRY
Notice of Motion
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House:
(1) Notes the adverse effects on consumption of such taxes as those on brandy and the consequent relative decline in those industries; and
(2) views with grave concern the possibility of the Fraser Government imposing a 15 per cent sales tax on the Australian wine industry.

DISALLOWED NOTICE OF MOTION Mr Connolly proceeding to give a notice of motionMr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will reframe his notice of motion so that it may be presented as a proposition.

AIRLINE INDUSTRY
Notice of Motion
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-I give notice. that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House requires the Minister for Transport to explain to the House why the foreshadowed inquiry into deregulation of the airline industry will not be established for two years and will not report for a further five years when he required the Holcroft Committee to report in seven months.

TASMANIA
Notice of Motion
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(1) is of the opinion that the Australian Broadcasting Commission's Four Corners program criticising Tasmania, shown last Saturday, was totally unfair;
(2) condemns the remarks made by the imported Australian Democrat on the same program as disloyal to the people of Tasmania;
(3) condemns the Tasmanian Government for allowing Tasmania to be branded the handout State;
(4) condemns a member of the National Country Party for his untimely and inflammatory remarks in this House about Tasmania; and
(5) also condemns the honourable member for Franklin . for allowing this unfortunate chain of circumstances to occur.

1344 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

I. PROJECT AUSTRALIA CAMPAIGN
Notice of Motion
'Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give .notice that, o~'the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(1 ) expresses concern that money spent on public relations exercises such as Project Australia would be better spent on real job-creating programs;
(2) condemns the Government for allocating $500,000 to be spent this year on propaganda in the guise of the Project Australia campaign.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
LEBANON
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I direct my question to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. What is the Government's response to the recent escalation of fighting in Lebanon and in particular the heavy fighting going on in and around the cities of Beirut and Zahle with appalling losses of civilian life? Has the Government taken any action to convey its views to the parties concerned? Has the Government, through its representative to the United Nations, called for an immediate meeting of the United Nations Security Council to take action with respect to the seriously deteriorating situation in Lebanon? Does the Government support the replacement of all foreign peace-keeping armies with a legitimate United Nations peace force?
Mr STREET-The Government shares the concern of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and the Lebanese community at the recent outbreak of fighting in Lebanon, particularly around the cities of Beirut and Zahle. The fighting appears to have been the most serious to take place since about 1978. We call for an immedia,te ceasefire and urge that all parties to the conflict commit themselves to negotiations leading to national reconciliation. The Government accepts that an ultimate solution to the conflict in Lebanon depends on all factions in that country, as well as the Syrian and Israeli governments and the Palestinians, making all possible efforts to avoid violence and to achieve a solution.
Australia is limited in its capacity to influence events in Lebanon directly. Our primary link with that country has always been the large and longestablished Australian Lebanese community. As I said a moment ago, we share the concern of members of the Lebanese community about the increasing violence in their homeland. Past Australian contributions to a betterment of the situation in Lebanon have been of a humanitarian nature. As honourable members will know,

Australia has a very strong record in that respect. The Government, of course, will resume its humanitarian role if it becomes necessary. We are willing to work actively within the United Nations to assist in moves to resolve the problem in Lebanon, including the consideration of any proposal for a United Nations peace-keeping force.
IMPORTATION OF MILITARY-STYLE WEAPONS .
Mr BRADFIELD-Can .the Minister for Administrative Services confirm recent media reports that the Australian Federal Police, together with State police, have called for a ban on the importation of military-style weapons? Is the Minister able to provide further details on this matter?
Mr NEWMAN-Yes, I can give the honourable member some information on that subject.
Opposition members-Ohi
Mr NEWMAN-It is a very important subject about which all honourable members should be concerned. The police commissioners' meeting in Adelaide reviewed the present laws regulating the licensing, sale and ownership of firearms. This is basically a State responsibility although, of course, my colleague the Minist.er for the Capital Territory has responsibility in the Australian Capital Territory. The police commissioners were concerned about the lack of uniformity in the relevant State laws which would lead to weaknesses in the control of the licensing and ownership of firearms.. They made particular reference to the availability of military-style weapons, such as automatic weapons and submachine guns, and pointed out that in recent times the police have actually seized such weapons from organised crime elements.
Whilst this is basically a State responsibility, the Government feels that in the wide national interest it has a real responsibility to ensure that the sort of problem that the police commissioners rightly pointed out does not exist in this nation. We do not want to go any way down the track to the situation which presently exists in the United States of America and which in recent days resulted in a most unfortunate incident. Therefore, we accept the responsibility of ensuring that there is a tighter control over the licensing, purchase and ownership of these sorts of weapons. My colleague the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs will be looking at the matter. He will try to find out exactly what is coming into the country and whether, from the Federal point of view, some customs regulations could be tightened up to ensure that those weapons cannot be

Questions Without Notice

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1345

imported. I will be raising the question of uniform approach to the licensing of fir'earms with my colleagues from the other States at the meeting of the police Ministers council which will be held on 29 May.

RUNDLE SHALE OIL PROJECT

Mr KEATING-I refer the Prime Minister to yesterday's announcement about shelving the Rundle shale oil project in Queensland. I also refer the Prime Minister to his claim of 28 February last year in announcing the Esso, Central and Southern Pacific arrangements, that it was the Government's import parity oil pricing scheme which had created 'the circumstances in which this project is economically feasible'. The quote was made without caveat. On the basis of what advice did the Prime Minister make this claim? Does he now concede that the claim was false and that he and his Government, not the Esso consortium, are responsible for creating the false expectations about the viability of' this project?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The statement

made on 28 February last year indicated plainly

on the second page 'if a pilot plant is successful'.

Plainly, with a project as large and aS$ubstantial

as this, the companies concerned needto make

sure that they get their figures right. As the proj-

ect could end up being two or three times the size

of the North West Shelf project, it would not be

surprising if some difficulties were to arise along

the way. I think it is an unhappy fact, of which the

Government had been aware for some little time,

that there were difficulties in relation to the

Rundle project. It is unfortunate if honourable

members run from a state of optimism to one of

extreme pessimism. The honourable gentleman in

his question indicated-as have some of the media

reports this morning~that in fact the Rundle

project has been shelved. I believe it is too early to

come to that conclusion. The Rundle partners and

Esso itself would not be coming to that con-

clusion. Certainly there are many matters that

need to be examined but the Rundle' partners

would still be hoping very much that a modified

project in fact would succeed.

'

I can add very little to the statement which was made yesterday in relation to these matters. Obviously, it is a matter of significant importance but also it is worth noting that what was said about oil parity pricing remains true. If it had not been for that the project would have had no chance of initial examination. The continuing examination to which the project is being put cleady would be put aside until other policies prevail. It is oil parity pricing which underpins' the totality of the

Government's approach to energy and which, at the same time, has encouraged much greater exploration and development for fuel oils and for natural gas, than was the case a few years ago. That greater exploration and development which is now under way and which is forecast over the next 12 months is encouraging indeed to those who want to see Australia's reserves expanded in the years ahead.
AUDlTOR-GENERAVS REPORT Mr DEAN-I ask the Prime Minister whether he has seen a report from the Auditor-General alleging that inadequate staff levels, particularly in the Department of Administrative Services, are reducing opportunities to effect savings to expenditure and to protect the revenue. Can the Prime Minister advise what is the Government's response to any such report?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I was concerned to see the report of the Auditor-General. I have asked the Public Service Board to give me a report on its examination of that aspect of the Auditor General's report and to let me have the Board's views in relation to it. In administering the policy of staff ceilings the Government has always insisted that, for example, over the counter services to the public ought to be maintained and ought not to be prejudiced. That has been part of the general business of setting guidelines for staff ceilings. In addition to that, on more than one occasion, for example, the Taxation Office has had substantial increases in staff ceilings so that it may pursue its efforts to curtail and prevent tax avoidance more vigorously than would otherwise be the case. We have had a very real concern to make sure that the true functions of departments are maintained and pursued ina proper and efficient way within the staff ceilings set by the Commonwealth.
What the policy of staff ceilings does on a continuing basis, and what I believe it ought to do, is to make sure that permanent heads and those in charge of various statutory bodies cast a constant and rigid eye over their priorities so that they can make sure that the priorities of government are met in the fullest possible way. Clearly there needs to be the capacity to react to changed circumstances in terms of redeployment of staff from one function to another. I repeat that I was concerned to see the Auditor-General's report. If the guidelines which have been established in recent times had been pursued as clearly as I would have wanted I do not believe that that report could have been made with accuracy. I will get a report from the Public Service Board and examine the matter.

1346 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

RUNDLE SHALE OIL PROJECT
Mr KEATING-I refer to the previous answer given by the Prime Minister today and to his play on words when he said: 'If the pilot plant is successful'. I ask the Prime Minister: Why did he say on the program AM on 20 August last year: 'The pilot plant is going ahead'? He did not say 'if it is successful' but that it was going ahead at a cost of some hundreds of millions of dollars and that the Government's objective was to have oil from Rundle coming onstream at about the time Bass Strait oil production started to run down. In the light of yesterday's announcement about the Rundle project and given the Government's failure to produce a comprehensive energy policy, from where does the Prime Minister envisage Australia's liquid fuel supplies coming after the late 1980s? What action will the Government take to provide for Australia's energy independence?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Whatever was said at the time was said on the best advice available from the companies concerned.
Mr Hayden-Come on! That is what you said about TAA only four months ago. You said that you would not sell it and you told a lie. You admitted it on Friday night again.
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Hayden-The truth is foreign to your vocabulary.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will withdraw.
Mr Hayden-What-that he--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will withdraw.
Mr Hayden-That he confessed on Friday night that he had told a lie about the sale of TAA?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will withdraw.
Mr Hayden-I withdraw.
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the honourable gentleman that if I ask him to withdraw, as a matter of courtesy he should do so forthwith and not argue. I do ask him to comply with the practice of the House. I call the Prime Minister.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Whatever was said on account of the Government at the time was said on the basis of advice from the companies concerned, and be that as it may. The honourable gentleman also asked what the Government is going to do about the future of energy policy. He has been trying to suggest that, as a result of a difficulty-albeit a significant

difficulty-in relation to Rundle, the Government

needs to reassess the totality of its energy policies,

but I suggest that the honourable gentleman has

~o ev.idence to sustain that claim. For example, it

IS estimated by the Australian Petroleum Explo-

ration Association that this year there will be a

record expenditure of $400m on oil exploration.

The figure for 1980 was $286m, but under the

policies of the Labor Administration in 1975 it

was only $65m. In addition, it is expected that in

1982 some 202 exploratory wells will be drilled,

compared with 137 in 1981 and 25 in 1975,

indicating quite plainly that under the policies of

the Labor Administration these matters were not

proceeding at all. Indeed, under the policies of

this Government I am advised that expenditure

on exploration and development will reach

$1,400m in 1981-$430m on-shore and $970m

off-shore. For 1975 the expenditure was $150m.

Quite plainly, that indicates how the policies of

the Labor Government had stifled exploration

and development in Australia and how our poli-

cies are getting this important activity moving

ahead in a very real way.

.

The policies in relation to coal and brown coal and the examination which was undertaken concerning the conversion of certain forms of coal to liquid fuels will continue. Indeed, other shale oil deposits, such as at Condor and Julia Creek, are also under examination by the people concerned. The honourable member seeks to make a total case out of the fact that there is a problem in re" lation to Rundle. From the nature of what he is putting, he seems to want to embrace doom with open arms. He seems to be in the position of hoping that the project will never go ahead.

Mr Keating-Youshould resign and give someone a go who can. If you can't run energy policy, quit.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Blaxland will resume his seat.

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable member asks a question but, like his leader, he cannot take the answer.

Mr Keating-I raise a point of order. That is an imputation against me. I do not get answers to my questions. I asked: Who told you that they were going to build a pilot plant and you said 'Esso'. They have never told you that.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member will resume his seat.

Mr Keating-That is a lie and you know it.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Blaxland will withdraw.

Questions Without Notice

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1347

Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, in deference to you, Zealand and the other sporting groups which seek

1withdraw, but it is getting very laborious.

to sustain New Zealand's full and active partici-

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member will withdraw without qualification.
Mr Keating-Without qualification and in deference to you, sir, 1 withdraw.

pation in international sport. Supporting that lab
ter group of New Zealanders are the New Zealand Government, 1 am sure a large segment of the New Zealand public, and our African partners in the Commonwealth. There are dilemmas.

SPRINGBOK TOUR OF NEW ZEALAND
Mr. HODGES-Is the Minister for Foreign Affairs aware of media calls for firm action by the Government to ensure that the successful staging of the 1982 Commonwealth Games in Brisbane is not jeopardised by the action of the New Zealand Rugby Union Football Council in inviting the Springboks to tour New Zealand? What is the attitude of the Government to these calls and what action does the Government intend to take?
Mr STREET-I thank the honourable member for Petrie for his question because it involves what has become a painful dilemma for the Australian Government and the Australian people. 1 have seen the calls which have been made for firm action. 1 accept that they reflect a view on the-part of editors that the staging of the Commonwealth Games is an honour for Australia and an exciting event which no one wants to see spoiled by the absence of significant groups of Commonwealth competitors. I believe that, in expressing these views, the Press is correctly reflecting the thinking of large numbers of Australians, particularly Australian sportsmen and sportswomen.

There is no perfect solution. 1 believe the issue can be resolved because there are encouraging signs that the magnitude of the price to be paid for the Springbok tour is coming to be appreciated by the responsible sporting authorities in New Zealand.
As I am advised, the newly elected chairman of the New Zealand Commonwealth Games Association has said publicly that New Zealand may have to keep its athletes away from the Games because, if the Springbok tour takes place, their presence seems likely to wreck the Games. That would be very regrettable indeed. Honourable members will note that the New Zealand chairman's remarks exemplify a growing recognition in New Zealand that, as matters now stand artd unless New Zealand ultimately takes some sort of initiative of that kind, Australia and Australian sportsmen and sportswomen, as well as those of other Commonwealth countries, will have to pay a very heavy price for the Springbok tour of New Zealand. 1 can assure honourable members that the Government will keep this matter under the closest possible review and will do all in its power to ensure that the Brisbane Commonwealth Games are a success. The visit by the president of the Supreme Council for Sport in Africa, Mr

The problem confronting the Government is Ordia, has been successful in drawing attention to

complex. New Zealand is our closest neighbour in the issues at stake. 1would also like to add--

every sense of the word. The degree of mutual respect and friendship between the two Govern-

Opposition members-Come on!

ments and the two peoples imposes on each side Mr STREET-I am sorry that members of the

obligations of forebearance and understanding. Opposition do not consider this issue of sensitivity

From time to time, each side has to make its views between the two governments--

known plainly to the other. 1 am sure honourable members will appreciate that, in such a close relationship, there is no room for any suspicion

Mr SPEAKER-I ask the Minister to conclude his answer.

whatever that Australia is interfering in New Zealand's domestic affairs or telling New Zealanders what to do. If I say that the Government wants to observe the proprieties of the relationship, I do not mean that remark to detract in any way from the seriousness of our concern be-

Mr STREET-I conclude by saying that I believe that members of the Press have shown great understanding and insight in their writings about the problems facing Australia and New Zealand on this issue.

cause a clear Australian interest is at stake here.

RUNDLE SHALE OIL PROJECT

Our views are being clearly stated to the New Zealand Government.

Dr THEOPHANOUS-I refer the Prime Minister to a speech made by his Minister for National

1 draw to the attention of the House that essen-- Development and Energy at the National Press

tially the dispute is not one between the AusClub on 9 October 1980 in which the Minister said

tralian Government and the New Zealand that the Rundle shale oil project was 'a classic

Government. The real dispute is between the orexample' of how Government policies were suc-

ganisers and supporters of one sport in New ceeding. The Minister went on to say:

1348 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

,And so we want not one Rundle, we want three or four in position over the decade.
In light of the fact that these and other overblown statements by the Minister for National Development and Energy have seriously misled the Australian people, will the Prime Minister now ask for the Minister's resignation?
Mr ANTHONY-As Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, I would like to answer that question. Not only has the Minister for National Development and Energy made some comments about the Rundle project but also I have made some comments about it. I have had the advantage of visiting the site of the Rundle project. Having visited the Rundle project, I have pointed out that it is a massive project which will need an enormous amount of study, that it has great complexities and that it will have problems before the massive amounts of money required for the development to take place are available. The Australian Labor Party seems to take a great joy in the fact that the Esso organisation is asking for a reassessment of the agreement that it has entered into. It is not shelving the project; it is looking more closely at the sort of plant that will be built in the initial stages.
The heads of agreement entered into between the two companies was for a demonstration plant to be put in. Having investigated the site over the past 12 months and spent $30m doing so, Esso now wants to make some alterations to that agreement. Why should it not do so, having spent that amount of money on a project which will run into billions of dollars? Why is there great joy in the fact that there has to be some alteration? Surely there is pride amongst all Australians that here we have a resource that could provide us with alternative forms of energy when our own resources tend to become depleted. That is what this is all about. I have no doubt at all that, sooner or later, this project will be developed, as will the Condor and Julia Creek projects and other projects in Queensland. Why not allow these companies to look at the question more closely so that an agreement can be entered into which will be sound and practical? Perhaps the Labor Party really does not want money to be spent on these projects. Is that what it is looking to or is it merely trying to find some embarrassment in a few words that have been spoken? I really do not think it is worth even debating in this House.
PROTECTION FOR AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
Mr GILES-I address my question to the Minister for Primary Industry. Is it a fact that the

Government has constantly argued against the protectionist agricultural policies of the European Economic Community on the grounds that the dumping of highly subsidised products on Third World markets distorts world trade and impinges on Australian markets? In the light of this, can the Minister say what the implications are for Australia of the latest decision by the EEC Council of Ministers to increase price supports for an even wider range of agricultural products?
Mr NIXON-The decisions taken by the EEC Council of Ministers to increase agricultural subsidies by $1,OOOm in the ensuing year are very serious for agriculture not only in this country but also in other countries. At a recent meeting I attended in Bangladesh, a number of Third World agricultural producers also expressed concern at the activities of the EEC in overproducing agricultural products and dumping their agricultural products on third markets around the world.
The fact is that the decision taken by the Council of Ministers amounts to an 11 per cent or 12 per cent increase in the agricultural budget of the EEC. This will lift the total amount of support of some $13 billion by another $1 billion. This does not augur well for efficient agricultural producers, such as Australia, New Zealand, Canada or the United States. Each of those countries, in its own way, will be making its views on this matter known to the EEC. The most glaring example of the policies of the EEC is the way in which sugar has been dumped, for example, on the New Guinea market which is the nearest country to the most efficient sugar industry in the world which is in Queensland. That demonstrates an example to the world of the damaging policies that the EEC is following on agricultural products. I am sure that both the Prime Minister and my colleague the Minister for Trade and Resources will keep up the level of representation that they have been making to the EEC councils on this matter, either individually or collectively, in an effort to get them to change their views. Obviously, because of that decision, other countries, with Australia, have a long fight ahead of them.
RUNDLE SHALE OIL PROJECT
Mr FREE-I ask the Prime Minister whether he now regrets his continued close identification with the Rundle shale oil project since February of last year when he announced the involvement of the Esso company in the project. Does the Prime Minister believe that his talk at that time of an eventual 6,000 to 8,000 jobs and the ultimate production of 200,000 barrels of oil a day unreasonably raised expectations amongst the Australian investing public? In particular, I ask

Questions Without Notice

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1349

the Prime Minister whether he recalls making the following statement to Parliament on 26 August last year:
Rundle is-likely to be the largest project ever undertaken in Australia and one of the largest in the world.
Given that the Prime Minister then still had some credibility among the Australian pUblic--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will not make statements like that when asking a question.
Mr FREE-Does the Prime Minister believe that some investors could have been persuaded by his rhetoric to invest in the Rundle twins, only to see the value of their share investment slashed by 40 per cent in 24 hours?
Mr ANTHONY-Mr Speaker--
Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, I wish to raise a point of order. The Prime Minister is the head of the Government of this country. He is addressed in the Parliament as the Prime Minister; he made the statements and he has identified his Government's policies. Let him answer for his rhetoric and for his misleading statements.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr ANTHONY-Australia is indeed fortunate to have many deposits of oil shale, and this oil shale will be developed in the course of time. Import parity pricing is the main ingredient in making it an economic proposition. As a result of our import parity pricing, companies have become interested in extracting the oil from this shale. Today around the world there are five similar major development projects under way. It is inevitable that these projects will be developed in Australia. They need close analysis and deep geological study to indicate how the development will take place; and that is exactly what is occurring in the Gladstone area at the moment. It is an immense project which needs close examination. That is being done, and it is not right for anybody to say that the project is being shelved or will not succeed.
Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I seek your guidance on the Standing Orders. When the Prime Minister is asked a question which affects the investing public-there have been plenty of lectures and statements from him to this side of the House about exchange rates, et cetera-then is he not obliged by the Standing Orders to answer these matters and, if he is not obliged technically, do you believe he is morally obliged, because -everyone else in this House does.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. The honourable member for Blaxland well knows

that when a question is asked it is a matter for the discretion of the Prime Minister as to which Minister will answer.

ON-FARM COSTS

Mr COWAN-I ask the Minister for Primary Industry whether it is a fact that the primary producer is becoming more concerned at the increase of on-farm costs. Would a uniform reduction in working hours-namely, -the acceptance of a
3S-hour week-mean a further rise in costs on the farm? Would it also affect exports and mean a rise in the cost of food to the consumer?

Mr NIXON-I once made a speech in which I said that those who were promoting the idea of a 3S-hour working week ought to spend a bit of their time on the end of a wire strainer. It was very well received.

Mr Hawke-What about buying shares in Rundle?

Mr NIXON-What the honourable member for Wills would know about the farming industry--

Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will proceed

with the answer.

'

Mr NIXON-The only part of the farming industry the honourable member for Wills knows about is the goat industry because it takes one to recognise one.

Mr Barry Jones-Magnificent.
Mr SPEAKER-The Mi~ister for Primary In-'
dustry will proceed with the answer.

Mr NIXON-I will either pick the box or the money, but I will not pick the honourable member. The fact is that those who are promoting the 3S-hour working week do have a rather selfish, bigoted and narrow view of life. They do not believe that, in any shape or form, other sections of the community have any load to carry. I invite those who promote the 3S-hour week to turn their attention to the farming industries which happen to be a very important part of the economic sector of this country. Some 40 per cent of total export income is earned by the farming industries. Those who are promoting the 3S-hour week ought to recognise that the money that the farmers earn is used in the main to purchase prod~ ucts produced in the factories of this country. The turn-round in the rural industries has done more to lift this economy than perhaps anything else. Those who are promoting the 3S~hour working week ought not to forget it. It is a fact, as the honourable member says, that the farming industries contribute a lot to the standards of living in this country. I think more thought ought to be

1350 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

given to the impact of a 35-hour working week on the farming industries by those who seek its introduction. I think it would be a disaster for those industries in terms of trying to maintain their competitive position internationally.
GOVERNMENT INFORMATION UNIT
Mr DAWKINS-I direct my question to the Prime Minister. I refer him to the operations of the Government Information Unit and to a statement made in the Senate by the Leader of the Government in the Senate last week. He said:
My clear instruction on political matters to the Government information officer
'Officer' being his word-
is that his job is to pursue Government information and not party political matters.
Was Senator Carrick at that time expressing Government policy? Could the Prime Minister indicate what activities the Government Information Unit carried out during the last Federal election campaign? Was the Unit authorised by him to work directly with the Liberal Party secretariat?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Government Information Unit, as its prime responsibility, makes sure that information relevant to Government decisions is disseminated in the widest possible way so that there can be the widest possible understanding of the nature of Government decisions and their impact for the well being of the broad Australian community. I would have thought that that is an objective that all honourable gentlemen would want to support.
Mrs Child-Members.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I stand corrected and I apologise to the honourable member. I thought that all honourable members would have wanted a situation in which decisions of government in relation to the activities of government can be disseminated as widely as possible throughout the Australian community. The Government Information Unit is designed to assist in this. I think it is worth noting that there are six or eight Press secretaries attached to Ministers in the present Government. The Labor Administration had, as I understand it, a Press secretary attached to each Minister, which would have meant a total of about twenty-seven.
Mr Lionel Bowen-Not true.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If the honourable gentleman checks the records he will find that, at least on the establishment of all Ministers, there was the capacity to have a Press secretary. If any of them chose not to, that would have been an individual decision. This Government has chosen a

different approach. I can see no difference in activities and purpose between Press secretaries and the operations of the Government Information Unit. I am not aware that Press secretaries during the period of any Labor Administration stopped working during the period of an election.
CLOTHING AND ALLIED TRADES UNION
Mr STEELE HALL-Is the Minister for Industrial Relations aware that last year a preference for unionists clause was granted by Commissioner Sweeney and inserted into the Clothing and Allied Trades Union of Australia Dry Cleaning and Dyeing Industry Award? Is the Minister aware of the disruption that this preference can cause to small as well as large dry cleaning businesses? Will he intervene in any other applications for preference privileges which contravene government policy?
Mr PEACOCK-Regarding the latter part of the honourable member's question, we have intervened in a number of cases on preference and I envisage that we will continue to do so. In answering the major thrust of his question, I understand that, since its inception, the dry cleaning and dyeing industry award has made provision for a form of preference in employment to be given to members of the Clothing and Allied Trades Union. In July 1980 Commissioner Sweeney varied the award by deleting the existing preference clause and substituting a more complex form of preference. An appeal to the Full Bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission was launched against this decision and it was heard last December. The Commonwealth and the National Employers Industrial Council intervened. The Commission handed down its decision on the appeal last February and, whilst it allowed the appeal, thereby quashing the preference clause awarded by Commissioner Sweeney, the Full Bench substituted a modified preference clause basically following the provision awarded by another appeal Bench in September of last year in the Uniroyal preference case. The provisions of the clause awarded by the Full Bench are clearly much more practicable for employers in the dry cleaning and dyeing industry than those previously awarded by Commissioner Sweeney. Nevertheless, it is a matter of some concern I can well understand the shackling that occurs in this way. The Commonwealth has submitted that the Commission should take account, of course, in hearings of this nature of the rights and interests of individual employees and employers in the industry. I should add finally that the Commonwealth believes that every employee

Questions Without Notice

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1351

has the right to join a union if he or she so wishes and decides. It is, however, the Commonwealth's firm submission that no improper force or pressure should be brought to bear upon an employee, whether the decision is to join an organisation or to refrain from joining it.
CANADIAN OWNED MINING COMPANIES
Mr HAYDEN-I refer the Prime Minister to the Government's announcement five weeks before the national elections last October and, very improperly, three days after the announcement of that election that the Canadian company Denison Mines Ltd would be allowed to acquire the Koongarra uranium deposits in the Northern Territory from another Canadian owned company, Noranda Australia Ltd. Is it a fact that the Koongarra deposit is located within the Kakadu National Park and that Mr Justice Fox recommended that it should not be developed, a recommendation which the Government has rejected? Does Denison Mines now hold leases to prospect land involving. the boundary of the Kakadu Park, one of the unique regions of Australia's national heritage? Does the company propose to extend this prospecting area deep into the Park? Does the Government intend to facilitate this process by amending the relevant Act in a way which will minimise the opportunity for public participation in and parliamentary scrutiny of the process of national park boundary changes in future? Finally, is this therefore another pay-off to the Government's powerful and privileged election supporters--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is not entitled to make those sorts of statements while asking a question. I call the Deputy Prime Minister.
Mr Hayden-I asked the question of the Prime Minister. He is the man who is responsible for this rigged arrangement.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat.
Mr Hayden-Which is an outrage against the principles of proper scrutiny by public and Parliament of the establishment of Kadadu and other national parks.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat.
Mr Hayden-The whole process is in train right now. It is a fix. It is a conspiracy to rig the whole thing for a wealthy--
Mr Baume-Has he finished chatting yet? Chatter, chatter.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Deputy Prime Minister will resume his seat.
Mr Hayden-You shoddy little scribe. Yoil would sell your soul to the highest bidder.
Dr Blewett-What is the use of the Prime Minister, may I ask?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Bonython will remain silent. Tempers in the House today are frayed.
Mr Hayden-The Alexander Barton of the national Parliament, the member for Macarthur.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The I.;eader of the Opposition will remain silent. I ask all honourable members to remain silent while the Deputy Prime Minister answers the question.
Mr ANTHONY-The Denison company has a lease application to develop the Koongarra uranium mine in the Northern Territory which is a prescribed area. Legislation has been passed through the Parliament enabling development to take place when approval is given. Before approval is given the project has to meet certain requirements, such as agreement with the Aborigi" nals, protection of the environment and our foreign equity guidelines. If there is to be further prospecting outside the prescribed area and within the national park, which was referred to by the Leader of the Opposition, the Parliament will have to give authority and the legislation may have to be amended. If there are to be any changes or alterations the Parliament will be notified and will need to give approval.
CANNED PEARS Mr LLOYD-The Minister for Trade and Resources will be aware that sugar is not the only commodity in relation to which the European Economic Community is contravening the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and threatening stable and fair international agricultural trade. Is the Minister also aware that the European Economic Community has introduced a massive subsidy for the Italian canned pear industry, which is almost twice the commercial payment Australian growers receive and which is jeopardising Australian canned pear exports to the EEC under the already reduced post-British accession and multilateral trade negotiations? Will the Minister take the same action with canned pears as was taken with sugar dumped by theEEC? Mr ANTHONY-An arrangement with the European Economic Community binds the tariff that it can impose on imports of certain Australian canned fruit. However, last year or late in 1979 the European Economic Community

1352 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

introduced a production bounty for the producers of canned fruit, especially canned pears to which the honourable member referred. A bounty, of course, has much the same effect of protecting an industry as does a tariff. We have made complaints to the Commission about this action. We believe that the effects of the bounty on canned pears will be similar to the effects of bounties on other agricultural products in the EEC which have encouraged an increased production and have produced a surplus. This means that not only do we find it difficult to enter the market but also we suffer the consequences of surpluses being exported to third markets.
The GATT situation is a complex one. It is not identical to that of sugar when the complaint was that the EEC was dumping surpluses on the export market. At the moment it is our' concern that the EEC is increasing its production of canned pears and decreasing the quantities that we are able to sell on that market. However, we are continuing to make representations and to protest. Certainly we will take the matter before GATT to protest against the introduction of new measures of assistance to EEC industries, making it difficult for us to sell.
RUNDLE SHALE OIL DEVELOPMENT Dr EVERINGHAM-My question is directed to the Deputy Prime Minister. He will recall replying to me on 4 March last, on behalf of the Minister for National Development and Energy, to a question which I asked that Minister. He said that the Government had not been consulted by the Queensland Government on the terms of the Rundle Oil Shale Agreement Act and that the environmental impact statement had not yet been prepared by the partners. I remind him that the reply ignored that part of my question which asked whether the Australian Government had the power, by virtue of its control of foreign investment, exports and environmental matters, to demand that Queensland allow the public to challenge decisions on land use. I now ask the Minister whether he has an answer to that part of my question. Mr SPEAKER-Before I call the right honourable gentleman I indicate to him that a question asking for a legal opinion is out of order. There may be some elements of the question which the right honourable gentleman wishes to answer without giving a legal opinion. I ask him not to give a legal opinion. Mr ANTHONY-I do not like to miss the opportunity, as learned as I am. I give an undertaking to look up the reply I gave to the honourable

member on 4 March. I do not think I will venture into legal areas.
NEW SOUTH WALES DROUGHT RELIEF
Mr SAINSBURY-Has the Minister for Primary Industry fulfilled all his commitments to New South Wales with respect to drought relief?
Mr NIXON-I will check the record insofar as applications from the New South Wales Government in respect of assistance to individual farmers are concerned, but I would think that almost without exception we have agreed to the proposals put by the Government of New South Wales. Apart from the assistance to individuals, the Government has not picked up the suggestions made by the New South Wales Government that it ought to introduce a part unemployment scheme in rural areas, and it 'has done so for broad reasons that I will not go into at the moment. I should say to the honourable member that I have made suggestions to the Government of New South Wales as to what additional assistance could be given to people in rural areas. It took me a long time to get New South Wales up to the mark in respect of the individual assistance of $20,000 which has. been given for a long time in Queensland and other States. In addition, I suggested to the Government of New South Wales that it should consider giving assistance to small business in the drought-stricken areas of New South Wales, as is already given iIi Queensland. The Government of New South Wales has not taken up that suggestion.
All in all, I can only say that the Government of New South Wales has been parsimonious in its approach to individual assistance. It has tried to play politics with the drought problem in New South Wales throughout the year. I might say that it has not been anywhere near as reasonable as. Queensland, for example, which has been very reasonable in its dealings with the drought problems of individual farmers and its dealings with the Federal Government.
DEPARTMENT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF Mr SPEAKER-I understand that the honourable member for Lilley wishes to seek detailed information from me regarding one of the parliamentary departments. Mrs DARLING-Yes, I seek information in relation to the operation of the Department of the Parliamentary ReportingStaff. Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member should hand her question to the Clerk. If it is in

Southern Bluefin Tuna Fishery

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1353

order, the question will appear in Hansard and I will reply to it in due course.
AUSTRALIAN PLAGUE LOCUST COMMISSION
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Australian Plague Locust Commission annual report 1979-80.
REGISTERED MEDICAL BENEFITS AND HOSPITAL BENEFITS ORGANISATIONS
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health)-For the information of honourable members, I present the operations of the registeredmedical benefits and hospital benefits organisations annual report 1978-79.
ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR INTER-GOVERNMENT RELATIONS Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal Affairs)-Pursuant to section 7 of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Act 1976, I present the fourth annual report of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations for the year ended 31 August 1980.
COMMONWEALTH TEACHING SERVICE MrFIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)-
Pursuant to section 52 of the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, I present the Commonwealth Teaching Service annual report for 1980.
ASTRONOMY ADVISORY COMMITTEE Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-For the information of honourable members, Ipresent a report by the Astronomy Advisory Committee entitled 'Astronomy in Australia: Developments in the 1980s'.
SOUTHERN BLUEFIN TUNA FISHERY i\.finisterial Statement
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-by leave-Honourable members will recall that on 30 March 1976 the then Minister for primary Industry gazetted a notice. under the Fisheries Act, 1952 concerning the taking of southern bluefin tuna in certain waters off New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia by the pole and live bait method of fishing. The effect of this notice was to freeze the number which had fished there in the 1974-75 season-about 70 vessels. The freeze was intended as a. temporary measure to allow an assessment of the situation in the fishery, and to

stabilise investment, following two bad seasons when catches were poor and prices low. The industry felt recovery would be helped by controlling the number of vessels entering the fisher:)". The freeze was reviewed in 1977 and again in 1978, by which time studies had been completed and better fishing seasons experienced. In 1979 the Australian Fisheries Council recommended to me that the freeze be lifted.
I met with industry representatives in January last year. They drew my attention to the interacticm which had developed between the tuna and south-eastern trawl fisheries-many fishermen operating their vessels in both fisheries. Largely because of this I deferred lifting the tuna freeze, announcing that it would be lifted on 31 March 1981, and that in the meantime my Department would update the earlier economic survey to see if there was. a need for any continuing management regime. The Australian Fisheries Council met again in September 1980 and reaffirmed its earlier recommendation that the freeze be lifted. The economic study has been completed and does not provide any basis for concluding that the freeze should continue, or that management of the tuna fishery per se is necessary.
Recently there have been a number of meetings within the industry, between industry representatives and State departments,my Department and the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation. I have also met with the Federal president of the Australian Fishing Industry Council and had extensive discussions with him. I think it fair to say the industry is divided, both within the processing and fishing sectors, as to the need for the freeze and its effectiveness. After considering the advice of the industry, my own Department, and the CSIRO, I am satisfied that the freeze has been ineffective in achieving its objective of stabilising investment in the fishery. I therefore believe the Australian Fisheries CounCil recommendation to lift the freeze was well based. Furthermore, I am concerned about Australians being prevented from fishing for southern bluefin when we have an agreement enabling Japanese fishermen to do so. Another point is the need for Australians to expand their fishing activities to take other species of tuna, such as skipjack. It seems to me that this will not be facilitated by retention of the freeze.
I do not expect there to be any significant increase in the number of new vessels in the fishery. New entrants, if any, will not be able to establish access rights under any future management regime on the same basis as fishermen who have operated in the fishery to date. Accordingly fishermen planning to enter the fishery should not base

1354 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Southern Bluefin Tuna Fishery

their expectations of profitability on taking southern bluefin tuna. I have concluded that I should endorse the Australian Fisheries Council's recommendation and lift the freeze, and the necessary fisheries notice will be gazetted forthwith. However I will require the South Eastern .Fisheries Committee to immediately undertake a study of the tuna and trawl fisheries recommended in my Department's economic study and require it to report its conclusions to the Australian Fisheries Council in September. In the meantime operations in the tuna fishery will be kept under review by my Department to ensure that I am immediately informed if a situation develops which requires more urgent attention, and I have sought, and confidently expect to obtain, the immediate co-operation of my State colleagues in implementing any action necessary.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa)-by leave-I have not really had the time to check out all the implications of this statement or the view of the industry; that is, the fishermen. At first reading this is a very poorly thought through document. It uses a survey which did not come to any firm conclusions as a justification for certain actions which the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) has announced. The only interpretation of the statement that I can make is that it is allowing the entry of the multinational firm Heinz into the southern bluefin tuna fishery. The Minister's statement backs up the industry's worries; an industry which the Minister has admitted in his statement is divided. Honourable members are aware that at present protection in the industry takes the form of a freeze on new entrants. The Government will reduce protection by lifting the freeze but the main beneficiary will be Heinz. That word does not appear anywhere in the statement but anyone who is aware of debate within the industry would know that this is the concern.
There do not seem to be any economic reasons to which the Government is reacting. In January 1980 the Government said that after an economic survey of the tuna industry, it would consider lifting the freeze. The survey said little either way, economically. The local industry-the cannerssides with the fishermen. The Government has not really consulted the fishermen. I am sure that the Australian Fishing Industry Council will not be pleased by this statement, which ends the freeze, creates a vacuum and argues by way of contradiction. Recently the manager of Safcol said:
And all this nonsense about lifting the freeze has been to a great extent a cloak and dagger business that is completely unnecessary. The Federal. Government should bring it out into the open.

Safcol and Port Lincoln Tuna Processing have withdrawn from the Australian Fish Canners Association. That means that two out of its five members, representing three-quarters of the Australian catch, have withdrawn. The Minister's statement has said nothing about the fact that planning for any expansion in an industry such as the tuna industry should be based on reliable knowledge of profitability limits and its influence upon the state of exploitable biological resources. Knowledge of profitability is very important because we have here a fishery that overlaps the Japanese industry. We do not know what the relevant figures are. There is no word in the statement about further studies that need to be undertaken to investigate potential implications before any major expansion takes place.
I propose now to consider the statement piece by piece. The first paragraph deals with the pole and live bait method of fishing for southern bluefin tuna. No mention is made of purseseining, which is of major concern to the industry. At a later point, the statement refers to the Australian Fisheries Council recommending that the freeze be lifted. It does not say on what basis that is proposed. In the next paragraph the statement says that the Minister met with industry representatives. Who were they and of which industry does he speak? Is he referring to the canners, the fishermen or the Australian Fishing Industry Council? Quite a range of organisations is involved. At the bottom of page 1, the Minister states that the Department would update the earlier economic survey 'to see if there was a need for any continuing management regime'. I wish that the Minister had been more explicit because the very bone of contention now in the industry in terms of the future, is whether there will be a management regime. I will refer to that again in a moment.
On page 2 of the statement, in the second paragraph, the Minister says:
The economic study has been completed and does not provide any basis for concluding the freeze should continue, or that management of the tuna fishery per se is necessary.
That is right, but neither does the survey say that the freeze should end. AFIC, the fishing industry and the fishermen would say that management of the resource is necessary. In the next paragraph of the statement the Minister says that he has spoken to Mr Connell, the Federal President of the Australian Fishing Industry Council and has had extensive discussions with him. What is the view of AFIC? The Minister has not told us. In the next paragraph he says that he is satisfied that the freeze has been ineffective in achieving its objective of stabilising investment in the industry. Of

Southern Bluefin Tuna Fishery

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1355

course that is so, but surely that was not the main objective.
In the last paragraph on page 2, the Minister states that he is concerned about Australians being prevented from fishing for southern bh.iefin when we have an agreement enabling Japanese fishermen to do so. What this really means is that it will let in the American firm, Heinz.
On the next page of the statement the Minister tends to contradict himself. He indicates that he does not think that there will be any significant increase in the number of vessels engaged in the fishery. That backs up my argument, that mainly this statement is directed at allowing Heinz into the industry. The survey did not say anything one way or the other; so the Minister can certainly argue that there will not be a significant increase. The Minister says also that the fishermen should not base their expectation of profitability on the survey. Again this is true, but the survey does not really give us any ammunition to argue one way or the other. It did not come up with any strong recommendations.
In the concluding part of the statement the Minister says that he-would require the S'outh Eastern Fisheries Committee to undertake another study. Of course, this Committee is already on record as saying, 'No freeze'; so I do not know where we are getting. The whole statement really amounts to a justification for opening up. t~e industry to Heinz. It is quite true, as the Mllllster says, that not a lot of profitability is involved; that not a lot of new participants will be coming into the industry. I believe that only Heinz will do so.
The very important question that has to be answered by the Minister relates to whether there is to be a management regi~e. For example, does the Government intend to allow the industry three months to come up with some plan for a management regime, that is, a freeze for a further three months? The questions that should be asked relate to the profitability of the resource, the biology of the resource and the management of the resource. As it is, this statement only amounts to a rationale for allowing more entrants lnto an industry. It does not address itself to the p"roblems inherent within the industry.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1981.
Commonwealth Banks Amendment Bill 1981.

JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
Reports
Mr CONNOLLY (Bradfield)-I present the 185th, 186th and 187th reports of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts.
Ordered that the reports be printed.
Mr CONNOLLY-by leave-The 185th report is the Department of Finance minute on the Committee's 176th report on the Auditor General's report for 1977-78. The Committee is satisfied with the explanations provided by the Department of Finance.
The 186th report concerns our inquiry into the Advance to the Minister for Finance for 1979-80. The Committee obtained explanations from departments and authorities in relation to 128 items of expenditure from the Advance. Public inquiries were held into four departments. I am pleased to be able to inform the House that we are satisfied that in most cases the use of the Advance in 1979-80 was justified.
The 187th report relates to inquiry by the Committee into the criticisms made by the Auditor General in his reports for 1978-79. It has been a long standing practice for this Committee to select items from these reports and inquire into some of the issues raised. In our 187th report we have made recommendations on some administrative and financial aspects of the departments of Defence, Primary Industry and Social Security.
The inquiry into the Department of Defence arose out of comments by the Auditor-General in 1977-78 and again in 1978-79 relating to the practice within the Royal Australian Air Force of removing serviceable components from aircraft to remedy defects in other aircraft. Investigations by the Committee revealed that this practice, although in itself wasteful of limited resources, is a symptom of wider problems of the RAAF maintenance supply system. We discovered that as a result of delays in bringing an up to date computerised supply system into operation in the RAAF and the decision in 1973 to abolish buffer stocks or supply margins of aircraft spares, the RAAF supply system has become too finely tuned to provide the necessary logistics support to the RAAF within reasonable time constraints. Therefore we made a number of recommendations aimed at'the more timely. provision of spare parts, including a 'Once off' expenditure of around $20m, to re-establish the spares supply margin and the development of a more accurate mechanism for assessing future spare parts requirements.

1356 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

The Committee also noted related aspects of may have led to significant payments in excess of

the availability of skilled manpower in the RAAF entitlement. Accordingly, the Committee. ex-

and local industry participation in aircraft mainamined the procedures for payment and review of

tenance. We discovered that the RAAF is experipensions and other benefits, reciprocal payment

encing considerable difficulty in retaining adarningements with other governments, staffing of

equate numbers of skilled tradesmen and overseas offices and the internal audit procedures

engineers. Accordingly, we are presenting a applying to overseas payment functions. Whilst

number of recommendations aimed at improved the Committee has noted the actions taken by the

efficiencies in this area. These include better marDepartment of Social Security to strengthen its

gins for skills, increased re-enlistment bonuses and procedures following the Auditor-General's re-

overseas recruitment.

port, it is concerned that this action was not taken

The inquiry into the Department of Primary Industry concerned the Auditor-General's criticisms of the procedures relating to the management and disposal of forfeited foreign fishing vessels. During this inquiry the Committee became aware that the realisable value of many of the forfeited vessels and catches was low, whereas the

earlier as the growth in overseas payments has markedly increased the scope for improper or excess payments. Savings of nearly $700,000 were achieved by a special review conducted by the Geneva office over the 12 months to March 1980. This clearly demonstrates the need for regular investigations.

cost of storage and maintenance prior to disposal

was high. Additionally, local harbour authorities were concerned that the prolonged storage of apprehended vessels posed considerable inconvenience and danger to harbour operations, and that the often considerable delays between apprehension and disposal led to increased costs. In ad- . dition, we believe that there had been considerable ecological and environmental effects as a result of illegal fishing, particularly with the taking of clams. Confiscated catches of clam meat individually have amounted to several tonnes with one particular catch being in excess of 11 tonnes which would represent the destruction of over 22,000 clams.

The Committee has also made a number of recommendations aimed at achieving greater efficiency and economy in this field. We have recommended that most payments to pensioners overseas should be made by the Central Office of
the Department of Social Security. Centralisation of control will facilitate eligibility checks. In addition, the Committee believes that, in order to minimise the number of overseas payments, pensioners on short term visits should be actively discouraged from using the overseas payment system
and instead should have their payments made into bank accounts for transfer overseas using normal banking facilities. We also recommended that the

The Committee is satisfied that the DepartDepartment pursue the possibility of extending

ment's new manual of procedures will overcome reciprocal arrangements, similar to those with

many of the Auditor-General's criticisms and Britain and New Zealand, under which

should result in greater decision-making at the administrative functions and controls over pen-

local level, considerably reducing the delays and sion payments would be exercised by the authori-

costs associated with the disposal of these vessels. ties in the countries where payments are being

A vessel ordered to be forfeited in January this year is currently being destroyed in Cairns in accordance with the new procedures. It is estimated that considerable savings have been achieved as a result.

made. In some cases conditions are such that it would be appropriate also for additional officers to be posted to those posts, especially in southern Europe, where a significant number of pensioners reside.

The Committee also inquired into deficiencies mentioned by the Auditor-General in the procedures for payment and review of pensions and benefits overseas. Since May 1973 persons leaving Australia, either permanently or temporarily, have been entitled to receive their Australian pensions and benefits under substantially the same conditions as if they were residing in Australia.
There has been a rapid expansion in recent years in the number and value of these payments and the Committee was concerned that the deficiencies mentioned by the Auditor-General

Mr BEAZLEY (Swan)-by leave-In support of the remarks made by the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly) as Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts,l would like to deal particularly with chapter ~ of the 187th report, which deals with the question of repair and overhaul of aircraft which is under the responsibility of the Department of Defence. The Committee has made a series of useful recommendations on overcoming shortcomings in the Royal Australian Air Force's logistics supply, system.

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1357

The Committee noted that there had been unnecessary delay in installing improved computerbased logistics management systems. The Committee has been concerned for some time with effective data processing associated withm4p.llg~ ment in all departments. We noted in the cas~ of the Defence Department that relevant systems were 10 to 15 years old and were fully used. Consequently, it has not been possible to improve the RAAF's inventory management techniques, over the past four or five years. From time to time, problems are encountered in the production of reviews of stockholdings. We noted that some efforts were being made to install systems to overcome this and we want the process hurried up. In looking into this aspect we are taking up issues that we have been interested in for some time. However, public interest in this question has been focussed not on management problems but on so called cannibalisation of some aircraft to keep other aircraft flying and the availability of skilled manpower to service them. We were rather cautious about the use of the term 'cannibalisation'. The meaning of that term envisages the disappearance of the aircraft cannibalised. We found that, strictly speaking, this situation was not occurring. We noticed, however, that there was delay in getting in spare parts to restore the aircraft on which the process of cannibalisation might be said to have commenced. We recommended, therefore, that the Department should re-introduce a six month's buffer stock system to supply a margin of spares. We noted that the current situation means that only 50 per cent of the FIll aircraft and 60 per cent of the Mirage aircraft were available for missions at any time. In the case of the FIll aircraft, this is better than the United States Air Force figure of 40 per cent. However, we operate from a very much lower base and have no alternative strike aircraft available. In the case of the Mirage aircraft, the Committee's report suggests a figure of operational aircraft probably somewhat lower than the 84 suggested by the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) in his statement the week before last. We believe the record could be improved by improvements in buffer stocks.
The Committee was also concerned about the retention rates among skilled categories of Air Force technicians. At the moment, re-engagement is only about 50 per cent to 60 per cent of trained personnel. Clearly, salary rates are inadequate to compete with non-service salary possibilities. The current practice of leave in lieu of overtime is not dealing with the problem. This is a useful report in an important area of our defence effort.

Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-I seek leave to make a very short statement.
Leave not granted.
(Quorum formed).
GOVERNMENT'S ENERGY STRATEGY: RUNDLE PROJECT
Discussion of MaUer of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Mr Speaker has received letters from the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating), the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly) and the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) proposing that definite matters of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion today. As required by Standing Order 107, Mr Speaker has selected the matter which in his opinion is the most urgent and important; that is, that proposed by the honourable member for Blaxland, namely:
The failure of the Government's energy strategy as illustrated by the shelving of the Rundle Project.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (3.37)-Before the quorum was formed there was hardly a Government supporter in the House, yet we have heard for so long about the great Rundle project. Indeed, it was the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) who announced the arrangements between the Esso organisation and the Central Pacific and Southern Pacific companies-not the companies. No announcement was made by the two companies about what they intended to do in evaluating a deposit. No, the Prime Minister had to push his frame in and announce to the world that all this was going to happen under the auspices of the Fraser Government. On 28 February he stated that the project was to go ahead. He said:
The policies of the Commonwealth have been of fundamental importance in creating the circumstances in which this project is economically feasible.
No caveats just the word 'is'--
The viability of the project is underpinned by the Commonwealth's policy on import parity pricing for crude oil.
He went on to say:
The project would not have been able to proceed without the Commonwealth's import parity pricing.
In other words, he was trying to take the credit for a project in fulfilment of the cargo cult mentality that we have to have big solutions for everything; not the fact that two companies were just inves~ tigating a deposit-an important deposit, no

1358 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Energy Strategy: Rundle Project

doubt-which is a reasonable thing for an energy company like Esso and the companies which held the deposits, that is, the Central Pacific and SOllth Pacific companies, to have done. No, the Government had to rush in with its mouth open.
The Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick) said that the Rundle project'is a classic example of how the Government's policies are succeeding. We have been told and told that Rundle is the basis for the Government's import parity pricing policy, that we need a high priced policy for substitution and synthetic crudes, that Rundle was the first of a long line of synthetic projects. We did not hear a statement, from Senator Carrick, the Minister for National Development and Energy, in the last year which did not refer to Rundle in some way. Rundle has been the linchpin of the Government's policy. We were laboured with it throughout the election campaign last year. What do we find now? We find that there was no economic justification for the Prime Minister's statements. These statements were made by the Head of Government, not by some company. When the Head of Government, the Prime Minister, lends his name to such statements it is no wonder the investing public of Australia start to buy Central and Southern Pacific shares and involve themselves in the Rundle project.
We do not see 'any decent Government energy policy about utilising natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, electricity, coal or the other energy benefits and assets that we have. The development of a comprehensive energy approach, a national energy policy, together with the States is too hard; it is too mundane. The Government wants the big symbolic approach-the easy solutions, the big projects, the cargo cult. Appearances rather than results motivate the Fraser Government. Other countries have looked at a decent energy policy. Australia should use the fuels which it has in abundance. The fact is that Australia is a gas-prone continent. We are exporting 1t million tonnes of LPG. We have very large reserves of high grade coal. We can have cheap electricity, but the Government has no national policy for electricity or power generation. It has no natural gas policy and no policy on liquefied petroleum gas, other than a patchwork scheme which is changed every couple of months. It has no national energy policy. It just relies on big projects.
The Government has the same disease which afflicts Sir Charles Court and Mr Bjelke-Petersen. They consider that if they can announce a big project and try to claim the credit for it they can let the economics worry about themselves later.

That is what we have seen with Rundle. The Government is trying to talk up how it is developing Australia and saying that it is responsible for the boom in exports. The Government says that the people should not trust the Australian Labor Party because it is supposed to be against exports. The Government says that it can be trusted because it gets everything done.
It is not the Government that gets everything done. On the basis of what we have seen today, the Government is incompetent. Not only is the Government incompetent but also it has cost Australian investors a lot of money. The shares involved were at the $60 mark; they are now down to less than $10. Which people does the Government think have lost their money? Ordinary Australians have lost their money. Why? They have lost their money on the say-so of the Australian Government. They have lost their money not on the say~so of Esso or Central and Southern Pacific but on the say-so of the Australian Prime Minister. The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony), who is sitting opposite me at the table, wants to mine everything. He adopts a policy of letting anyone have uranium. He does not care who they are. He will let anyone have iron ore. It does not matter if the market is swamped with uranium. He wants to see uranium mined and projects started. He considers that the more projects the merrier. As soon as someone says, 'Hang on, there will not be a market for that, there maynot be, a price for that, we may flood the market, we cannot develop that in time, the economics are 110 good', the Government says that those people are prophets of doom and gloom and are against development. The Government tells those people that they should vote for it because it will give them prosperity. The truth is that the Government is incompetent and cannot be trusted with Australia's resources. The Government has led the Australian public into believing in a false situation. The important thing is that the Prime Minister said, as part of the Government's energy policy, that 250,000 barrels of oil would come from Rundle in the early 1990s when Bass Strait production runs down.
I ask again, as I did at Question Time: Where is the oil coming from to replace the 250,000 barrels which is equivalent to half the production of Bass Strait? If the Government were relying upon Rundle for oil at that time, where will the oil now come from when the Rundle time frame development is put further and further back? When we asked the Prime Minister where the oil was coming from he talked about exploration. Not one Commonwealth dollar has gone towards exploration in the last four or five years. This year

Energy Strategy.~ Rundle Project

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1359

the Commonwealth will collect $3.5 billion from the crude oil levy, from the petrol tax-the pump tax. Everyone is socked through their pay packet by paying high prices for petrol. Not one dollar of Commonwealth money has gone to the oil exploration industry. Ministers have told the Australian Petroleum Exploration Association conference how everything is going well. But the Government has done nothing.
When.the Prime Minister was questioned today about the replacement for the oil to be produced at Rundle and asked where the 250,000 barrels a day will come from in the 1990s, a time when the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries is unlikely to be supplying us with oil, he talked about exploration. What humbug! The Government has never had an energy policy. It would not know how to construct one. The Deputy Prime Minister, who is the gigolo for any foreign interest which wants to come to this country, has no semblance whatsoever of the national interest and runs around the country giving crazy forecasts. I ask honourable members to look at the headline I have in my hand. It reads: 'Bonanza in shale oil. Enough for 12,000 years, says Anthony'. The article reads:
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr Anthony, estimated Australia had enough shale oil for 12,000 years. Speaking yesterday after visiting the Rundle shale oil deposit near Gladstone, Mr Anthony disclosed that the deposit could contain up to 5,000 million barrels.
Yesterday Esso told us that, after spending $30m, there is only 2,500 million barrels. The Deputy Prime Minister says that there are 5,000 million barrels of oil and that that is enough for 12,000 years. That demonstrates the sort of nonsense we have heard from the Government about shale oil. We could go over and over what has been said. Let us look at some of Senator Carrick's lalapaloozas. He said:
The company--
that is Esso-
has given clearly to the public an undertaking of a multibillion dollar investment,in this project.
The Minister for National Development and Energy has advised the Australian public that the company has given a multibillion dollar commitment. The company has made no such commitment ever. This show~ the kind of misleading statements which come from Government Ministers. Let us look at another statement of Senator Carrick. On Monday Senator Carrick said:
The fact that EXXON, the world's biggest oil company, andits Australian partners were investing in Rundle was adequate evidence that the project would be successful,
He said that it would fill the gap. In other words the mere presence of Esso near this development

guaranteed its commercial viability. That ha§ been proved to be nonsense. If Ministers in any other country lent themselves to statements like these they would be called upon to resign. There is no integrity in this Government. When the Budget of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) was leaked it was said that it was someone else's responsibility and not his. If statements are made which are misleading it is said that it is someone else's responsibility. When we look at ministerial accountability and responsibility we see that this Government is culpable. Not one Minister will ever resign if he or she misleads the public. There is no morality in this Government. Ministers of the Government will do what they must to try to talk up their sagging political stocks.
Senator Carrick, the Minister for National Development and Energy, has committed a number of other atrocities. The National Energy Research, Development and Demonstration Council's report No. 12 concerning alternative liquid fuels talked about producing shale oil. It said that the prospects were moderate and that production would take eight to 10 years. When Senator Carrick made a speech a day or so after the presentation of that report he changed the time of eight to 10 years to 15 years and then classified the prospects as good. That shows manipulation by Senator Carrick of one of the Government's advisory bodies. No matter where we look we see no energy policy for Australia. Just a week ago we saw a report which stated that the Japan National Oil Co. was looking at the Condor shale oil deposit. No doubt the Deputy Prime Minister will go through his jingoism with the Japanese and tell them when the project will be developed. We will hear about that project as the next election looms. There are so many brown coal projects on the drawing boards in Victoria that, if Australia were prepared to let it happen, half of Gippsland could be dug up. Nobody knows abou.t the technologies involved or whether the projects are economic.
We are absolutely at the frontier of energy technology with synthetic crudes. Australia does not have to be in that position. Australia is well endowed with energy. It has reasonable prospects for further oil discoveries. We have gas everywhere. The only reason it is not being pulled out is that the Government does not have a decent national natural gas policy. We have coal and electricity. We are very well endowed. We do not have to commit ourselves to the frontiers of liquid fuel technology. What would happen if these projects were set up at a certain price per barrel within the parameters of present OPEC prices and OPEC reduced the price? What would happen to all these synthetic industries starting in the

1360 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Energy Strategy: Rundle Project

United States, West Germany, South America in Government to a feasibility study which had the

Brazil, and Australia if there was real competition public believing it was a final evaluation. It is a

Cpr OPEC and OPEC responded, like any other gross distortion and a disgrace. But, what is more

group of producers, with competition. As the disgraceful is that the Government has no energy

Fraser Government does not have the sense, the policy. The Prime Minister admitted that today at

presence of mind or the competence to develop a Question Time. He said:

national energy policy, what would happen with . . . the Governme~t needs to reassess the totality of its these white elephants sitting around the landscape energy policies . . .

of Australia, these massive investments with this dubious technology? The Australian public would have to pick up the bill. Soon we would be hearing about a new absorption scheme to take up the expensive crude. Who would pay for the expensive crude? It would be the Australian public. There is no forethought, there is no evaluation and there is no planning.

After five years in government, the Prime Minister said that today at Question Time. The Government will need to reassess the totality of
its energy policy because it has all been built around pie-in-the-sky synthetic fuels. It is a disgrace and the Government deserves the censure
of the country.

I would have thought the Prime Minister's
statements about how this project would be economically viable would have been based on advice

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)--'- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

from his bureaucracy, from the Department of Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for

National Development and Energy. It was not Trade and Resources) (3.53)-1 suppose it is

based on that at all. He tells us today that it was understandable that every time the honourable

based on information from Esso and from the member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) gets up to

companies. The companies said only that they speak he becomes quite hysterical if the matter

were moving into an evaluation of a shale oil deals with mining and energy problems. Having

deposit-nothing more and nothing less. Instead been one of the shortest lived Ministers in Aus-

of that, we get these bullish statements. We see a tralian history, I suppose he has reason to get all

whole change in the speculative nature of the excited. Certainly he does get into a frenzy, but he

Australian stock exchanges. Rundle is the has reason to do that. Honourable members might

Poseidon of the 1980s. It has been built on ask: Why is that? It is because the policies of the

Government statements, not corporate stateAustralian Labor Party were utter and complete

ments, and now it has collapsed. It is said that the failures. The Opposition cannot deny that. One of

pilot plant will be left out and will be continued to the reasons for the rejection of the Opposition in

a completion stage. That is nonsense, and the 1975 was that the economy became stagnant as no

Deputy Prime Minister knows it. If the companies development was taking place. Members of the

do not build a pilot plant, they will not go on Opposition have to live with that. What a terrible

under the present arrangements. Have honourlegacy it is. The honourable member also gets

able members seen the price of a pilot plant? It " rather upset because of his policies at the last elec-

will cost $2,000m to produce 20,000 barrels of oil tion. He tried to deceive the Australian people

a day. The cost has escalated from $700m to with his energy policies but they did not make any

$2,000m. The Esso company in its statement yesimpact at all. The Australian people rejected

terday said that the project cost had increased by them because they knew they were false. He has

a factor of three. What does that make the project been exposed because of their falseness. He thinks

worth-$30 billion? Who would say that Rundle he makes an impact with the sarcastic remark that

would be economic at a cost of $30 billion? One I am a Minister who will mine and develop any-

million tonnes of earth have to be moved each day thing. I am very proud of the development that is

at Rundle. That is over twice the amount involved taking place in Australia today. It is leading to the

in the mining operations of the five iron ore mines recovery of the economy. There are great

in Australia combined, and it is all on the one site. prospects and there is a great confidence in this

A million tonnes has to be retorted every day. The country because of those developments.

retorts would be 17 storeys high and there would be 49 of them in a row. Can anyone imagine a
mining operation of that scale?

The attitude of the Labor Party is one of sour grapes, and we have to recognise that and put up with it. The honourable member for Blaxland

To predict now that it will b~ economic at curtalks about being concerned about shareholders.

rent oil prices is a gross distortion and the Prime Heavens above, can he not be a little more accu-

Minister deserves the censure of the House and rate in bringing forward a matter of public im-

the nation for lending his name and that of his portance than to say that the project is being

Energy Strategy: Rundle Project

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1361

shelved. That is not true. The project is not being shelved. The honourable member does himself no credit by making such a statement. It is for political mileage and for no other reason that he makes that statement. This project is far too important to be treated in this manner. It is of great importance to Australia and it has to be looked at in a responsible way, not in the flippant way in which the honourable member has handled it today. He is trying to condemn the Government as if it has no energy policies at all and as if it has done nothing in the fields of gas and electricity. I refer honourable members to the extension of the natural gas lines, to the assistance we have given, and to the subsidies on liquefield petroleum gas. What about the taxation concessions on conversion to electricity. There is the matter of using condensates. for fuel. The Government has encouraged the Cooper Basin developers to use their condensates for liquid fuel purposes. All these policies are working and are having an effect and the Australian people realise that.
When I visited the Rundle site in February 1980 I said that the project being launched presented many problems which had to be overcome. I said that companies in many countries were grappling with the technical and economic difficulties of unlocking the energy potential trapped in oil shale. I said-I still believe it to be the case-that, because of the size of the project and because of the contribution it would make to our liquid fuel requirements, the successful development of the Rundle oil shale deposit could lead to a vast new industry of greater significance for Australia than any other mining project that has taken'place. I caution the honourable member for Blaxland against writing off the Rundle project too quickly. We are looking at potentially the largest project ever undertaken in Australia. It would make a major contribution to our fuel requirements. I am confident that sooner or later this oil shale project, along with other oil shale projects, will be developed. From what I have seen and heard of the statements by Opposition members they seem to take delight in the fact that this project might not go ahead. All that is happening at the moment is that the project is being reappraised.
Mr Holding-Oh yes, what does that mean?
Mr ANTHONY-The project is being reappraised; the companies have to re-evaluate the terms on which they decided to join up with the two Australian partners in the first place. The honourable member for Blaxland tries only to undermine confidence. He talks about jeopardising the Australian stock exchange and the value of shares. Nothing would jeopardise the share

market more than a Labor government. In particular, a Labor government's resource tax would soon' put an end to confidence on the stock exchange in Australia, so honourable members opposite should not make remarks about any comments the Government might make. What did Esso say yesterday in its statement? It said that additional work was needed to define a practical and economic approach to the development of the Rundle deposit. It said that it would be submitting to the other participants a proposed work plan that would seek solutions to technical problems. It said that the prime objective of this' program would be to reach a sufficient level of technical and economic confidence to allow a decision on whether to proceed in due course to a commercial plant without building a demonstration plant.
Do these statements mean that Esso is pulling out? I do not believe one can accept that in any way. There is no reason why the statement should be interpreted as indicating that Esso is withdrawing from this project. Of course, there is no guarantee that the project will proceed. There has never been any such guarantee. The whole of the work under the project so far-remember that Esso has spent about $30m over the past year in evaluating it-has been on the basis of proving the economic and technical viability of the project. Only after the feasibility is proven or otherwise, can there be a firm decision one way or the other on whether to go ahead. It will be an immense, huge project. Yet the honourable member for Blaxland today is doing everything he can to spell the death knell for this project.
Mr Keating-That is untrue. Mr ANTHONY-It is true. The statements the honourable gentleman makes and the way he makes them are discouraging companies which want to participate in developing these huge deposits. He knows that we cannot develop them ourselves because of their magnitUde, the finance involved and perhaps even the technical knowledge and skill which we have to acquire from other countries. The two Australian partners in the Condor deposit, another huge deposit, are at present negotiating with the Japanese National Oil Corporation to see whether it might be involved in yet another huge project in Queensland. What will this discussion do to help? I really believe the Australian Labor Party delights in seeing that these developments do not go ahead because it knows that if they proceed there will be more jobs, more employment and more prosperity for Australia. That is not favourable for its political wishes at the moment.

1362 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Energy Strategy: Rundle Project

Mr West-Anyone would think it was our f\lult, not yours.
Mr ANTHONY-Who does the honourable gentleman think stopped all the developments during that period of 1972 to 1975 when we had all these resources and yet not one project went ahead. It was the behaviour and the attitude of the Labor Government. That is all honourable gentlemen can put the blame on. They should not ever point a finger at our party.
Mr John Brown-Couldn't you think of something more imaginative than that in five years?
Mr ANTHONy-It will take a lot longer than five years to forget that period and the damage it did to the development of the mining industry in this country. This Government is fostering policies which are comprehensive in their nature in meeting our energy requirements. Our policies are to develop the search for more oil, to lead to. conservation and the development of our oil and gas reserves.
Mr West-This is a dreadful effort.
Mr ANTHONY-I thank the honourable member very much. He obviously does not like it. We are developing all of these policies. No area is more significant than what is taking place in respect of the exploration development of this country and the development of oil wells. The forecasts that were released this week by the Australian Petroleum Exploration Association indicate that more than 300 exploration and development wells will be drilled in Australia in 1982. At least 202 of those wells will be exploration wells, compared with 25 wells drilled in 1975.
Mr MacKenzie-How mahy?
Mr ANTHONY-There were 25. The Opposition says that our policies are not working or that we have not got a policy. If we have not got a policy, something is working darn well. APEA forecasts a rapid increase in exploration over the next five years. The expenditure on exploration was $228m in 1979 and $355m in 1980. It is expected to reach $400m this year plus another $1 billion on development work. In 1982 exploration expenditure is expected to be substantially higher. Next year over 30 on-shore and at least nine offshore rigs are expected to be at work looking for oil and gas in Australia. This hardly represents a picture of neglect as the honourable member for Blaxland has been trying to make out. The honourable member is making out that the Government has been concentrating too much on synthetic fuel. The Government makes no apology for encouraging the development of synthetic

fuels. To do otherwise would be grossly irresponsible. Our fuel policy has been and will remain one for overall development of Australia's alternative forms of energy. Certainly synthetic fuel is an important part of that. Indeed, in yesterday's statement, the Rundle project participants emphasised that favourable energy development policies had been the key consideration in the initiation of the Rundle development studies and said that a continuation of these policies remained an important consideration in the future development of the resource. To suggest that a reappraisal of the Rundle project somehow means the Government's energy policies are wrong is clear nonse,nse. ThC(re are a number of these oil shale deposit developments taking place around the world. It is a major alternative form of energy. We have the deposits here. We need to capitalise on them and to utilise them.
At present, developments are taking place by Union Oil of California which is one of the pioneers of the extraction of oil from oil shale. It is pushing ahead with the project in Colorado. Paraho Development Corporation is planning a project in Utah; Petrosix of Brazil is expanding its existing output; Occidental is constructing a project in Colorado. These projects are going ahead. Oil shale projects are a reality. I am looking forward to the time when Australia will be a major producer of oil for oil shale. The massive scope of the Rundle project has always been known, but the evaluation work done so far has shown the scope to be far larger than was originally contemplated. There have been geological problems, there have been problems relating to the cost and there have been' problems relating to the manpower, water and electricity required. All of these matters have been assessed during the period of evaluation over the past 12 months. The companies are now looking at how they might rearrange their approach to developing this project. For the future of this country and for future Australians, we have to find alternative forms of energy, as do other countries around the world.
If there have to be some changes, as suggested by the companies in the last 24 hours, then we should not look at the project in a disparaging way as is being done by the honourable member for Blaxland, who is doing nothing other than trying to undermine confidence in people wanting to push ahead with these sorts of devdopments. He seems to take a great deal of joy from the fact that the project might be shelved or might not go ahead. The project will go ahead at some time. I do not know when. It is a massive project. I think all of us hope that the sooner it commences, the better it is in Australia's long term interest.

Energy Strategy: Rundle Project

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1363

Mr Keating-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) said that I and the Opposition were making statements to undermine-and destroy the Rundle project. No such statement has ever been made by me in the time since that study was undertaken. I certainly never said thattoday.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- There is no point of order.
Mr ANTHONY-The project is not being shelved. You have said that yourself.
Mr Keating-Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will remain silent. Mr Keating-The Deputy Prime Minister misrepresented me. I am illustrating where the misrepresentation was and addressing myself to it. I have never made such a statement. I do not believe the companies have done anything wrong. They have looked at a feasibility study, which they are entitled to do, and are entitled to revise it. The Government is not entitled to talk the project up in the way it has. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member has made his point. He will resume his seat. Mr Anthony-I also raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I think I should clarify the situation. The urgency motion says that the project has been shelved. The project has not been shelved. Mr Keating-I stand by that statement. It has been shelved. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (4.9)-It is a semantic exercise for the Australian people for the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) to rest his somewhat dilapidated case in a situation where the Government's energy policies are in tatters by saying that this project has not been shelved. If it has not been shelved, what has happened to it? Mr Ian RobinsonYou tell us. Mr HOLDING-I propose to tell the honourable gentleman. The difference between the approach of the Opposition on this matter and the approach of the Government is very simple. For year after year the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating), as spokesman for the Opposition on energy matters, has pleaded with the Government to adopt a national and comprehensive policy on the whole question of our energy resources, including oil, brown coal deposits, liquid

petroleum gas and oil shale deposits. Time and again this Government has rejected any such comprehensive approach and preferred a panacea for all of our future energy problems-the projected development of the Rundle shale oil deposits. When Esso Australia Ltd became involved in that project, that not only was lauded by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) but also were gross and misleading statements made by him, by the Deputy Prime Minister and by the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick). They led the Australian people and many members of the investing public to a completely false sense of expectation.
The Prime Minister did not have any doubts at all about the future of the project. The statement, and his certainty about this project has already been quoted by the honourable member for Blaxland. The Prime Minister was quite certain about the future of the deposits and he followed that belief up when on the AM program he said:
But under policies you know the great Rundle shale oil deposits; the pilot plant is going ahead at the cost of some hundreds of millions of dollars and the objective is to have oil from Rundle and other shale oil projects coming on stream about the time Bass Strait's starts to run down significantly.
When the Prime Minister was questioned in the House today about his statements, what was his answer? He regretted that the project had now run into some difficulties. What are those difficulties not described in any detail by the Prime Minister? They are first of all that feasible technology in respect of this project has increased in price three times to a total of $2,100m. That is three times the original estimate. The directors have further stated that problems in the geology of the deposit would make sections difficult or impossible to mine. As a result of this, as of yesterday, Esso is not going to build phase one of the project. It wants to re-negotiate the agreement. The members of the public, who have been urged by the public statements of the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for National Development and Energy to invest in this project, have seen the value of their share investments slashed by 40 per cent in 24 hours.
What is the Government's response? At Question Time, the Prime Minister, having described there as being some difficulties, retired hurt and did not answer any more questions. He handed the matter over to the Deputy Prime Minister, knowing that he will say anything at any time, and who is known with benign good humour, throughout the Middle East, as: 'Have mouth, will travel'.
Mr Young-You should say that about the honourable member for Denison.

1364 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Energy Strategy: Rundle Project

Mr HOLDING-He is the deputy 'have mouth, will travel'. Listen to this: If honourable members were members of the investing public what would they think about this statement of the Deputy Prime Minister in which he estimates:
Australian has enough shale oil to last 12,000 years.
He said:
. . . that the deposit could contain up to 5,000 million barrels of oil.
At least let me say this for the Age reporter: He was prudent enought to say:
Mr Anthony's estimate is also 3,000 million barrels more than the recoverable reserves announced to stock exchanges by Rundle twin owners.
SO, this is the accuracy of the Deputy Prime Minister. He is an incredible man. He goes on to state:
But even more important, the successful commercial" exploitation of the pilot technology which has already evolved elsewhere will put Australia in the forefront of what could be one of the world's most important new industries.
When Mr Anthony talked about 12,000 years supply, again we ought to be grate.ful to the Age reporter who points out:
Mr Anthony drew the estimated figures from a committee report which warned that most of Australia's reserves of oil shale were uneconomic even though they total 2,850 thousand million barrels.
So Mr Anthony did not merely over-estimate the figures which were some millions of barrels in excess of those even claimed by the companies in their wildest dreams; he drew on reports using figures which were totally inaccurate and misleading. Why would the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia do that? Why would the Prime Minister talk about a pilot project going ahead when we were told yesterday by Esso that there is no way in the world that it is doing ahead.
Mr O'Keefe-That is rubbish.
Mr HOLDING-I am sorry; the honourable gentleman is quite wrong. Why would the Minister for National Development and Energy say that the fact that:
. . . Exxon, the world's biggest oil company, and its Australian partners were investigating in Rundle was adequate evidence that the project would be successful. He said it would fill the gap.
Fill the gap! What is the reality? Confronted with-honourable members cannot even call it a policy-a set of statements that is in tatters, the Prime Minister today answers one question and retires hurt and does not deal with the other three. The Deputy Prime Minister tries to make the best of it, but he was used as spokesman in this situation by the Government because of his known capacity to quote figures that are demonstrably wrong, demonstrably inaccurate and demonstrably misleading.

What does Senator Carrick say when asked by the Press about this matter? This was the man who was saying:
Ever since Rundle was projected and Esso was involved it was the answer; it was the linchpin of Government policy.
That was before this week. How is he quoted in today's newspapers? The Brisbane Courier-Mail states:
He sought also to diminish the importance of Rundle to Australia's future energy requirements.
Honourable members have just heard a quotation from the man who went around Australia telling all Australians that their hopes had been fulfilled, that Rundle was the panacea for all our energy problems. The Courier-Mail r,eports that Senator Carrick said:
'We are now more "confident that we will be able to find moderate supplies of raw oil, particularly in Bass Strait and elsewhere', he said. 'We're finding significant discoveries of gas and we can get that energy balance by one way or the other'.
Does that sound like a Minister whois saying, as the Deputy Prime Minister endeavoured to say today: 'Have no fear; Rundle will proceed'? Not a bit of it! What the Minister is saying is that he knows he is wrong and he has been caught out. He knows that he and the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister are now being seen by the public of Australia as guilty men on this issuemen who have been misleading the Australian people and who have raised false--
"Mr Hodgman-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. Clearly the honourable member for Melbourne Ports is making an imputation against both the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister, contrary to Standing Orders, and that imputation should be withdrawn.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The honourable member for Melbourne Ports has sorely tested the Standing Orders and I ask him to take greater care in his remarks.
Mr HOLDING-I am winding up. I am saying that the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for National Development and Energy stand condemned as guilty men who have falsely raised the expectations of the Australian people. This Government--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Melbourne Ports will withdraw the reflection on the two right honourable members in this House.
Mr HOLDING-I am sorry, Mr Deputy Speaker. To say that the Prime Minister has falsely raised the expectations of the Australian people is perfectly within the Standing Orders and I do not propose to withdraw it.

Energy Strategy: Rundle Project

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1365

Mr Hodgman-It is a criminal offence.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat. In the course of his remarks, the honourable member for Melbourne Ports stated that the people had been misled. That in itself was not an offence against the Standing Orders because it could be an innocent misleading. The two sides of this House are constantly diametrically opposed and clearly one side or the other must be wrong, but it is an innocent misleading. By the use of the word 'guilty' there is a connotation which suggests that on judgment the right honourable members would be indicted as wilfully misleading; and, on that basis, the Chair required the honourable member to withdraw the reflection on the right honourable members.
Mr HOLDING-With great respect, what I said was that the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for National Development and Energy had falsely raised the expectations of the Australian people. I said that they stand condemned as guilty men; that is, they were guilty--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! That is precisely the Chair's understanding of the honourable member's remarks. The honourable member for Melbourne Ports might well accommodate the situation by withdrawing on the construction that the Chair places on his remarks. In the ultimate the Chair must determine these matters.
Mr HOLDING-In deference to the Chair and to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, I withdraw.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (4.20)-The proposition put forward by the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) is preposterous. He says two things and both of them are nonsense. He says that the Government's energy strategy has failed. That, obviously, is not true. The Government's energy strategy is working with great success. On every front our policy is proving to be correct and effective. The search for oil has picked up very strongly as a result of our policy. Honourable members should note that 140 wells have been drilled this year in the search for oil and gas. Compared with the disaster of the policies of the Labor Government, there has been a complete revival in the search for oil and gas. The Australian Petroleum Exploration Association is now forecasting very large increases in expenditure-$400m on exploration and $1,OOOm on development. If we do not find more oil, we will be forced to do one of two things: Either we will have to import more and more oil, if we can get it, and import it at very high prices or we will have to develop alternative kinds of fuel. That is why the Rundle project is so important.

The second piece of nonsense we have heard from the honourable member for Blaxland is that the Rundle project has been shelved. No doubt that is what the honourable member would like to see happen, but it has not happened and I hope and believe it will not happen. Certainly there have been very significant changes in the forecasts of what the project will cost. But, despite what the two Opposition members have said in this debate, the Rundle project will go on. Spokesmen for Esso and the two Australian companies involved strongly reject suggestions that yesterday's development will lead to the cancellation of the project. Esso spokesmen have stated: 'It is a reappraisal and reassessment. We need to do more work and have more time. The project will go on'.
The companies-Southern Pacific, Central Pacific and Esso-are to undertake a further program of studies so that they can make a proper assessment of the future of the project in the light of the latest information. But it is quite wrong for the honourable member for Blaxland and the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) to say that the project has been shelved. That is a damaging thing for them to say. They have said it only to undermine public confidence in the Rundle project. It is irresponsible of them to do so. They should be looking for ways of making a constructive contribution to the debate, not doing all they can to destroy confidence and to undermine Australia's chances of developing a new kind of fuel. So on two counts the honourable members are wrong. They were wrong to talk of the failure of the Government's energy strategy because it has not failed. They were wrong to talk of the shelving of the Rundle project because it has not been shelved and I do not believe it will be.
The key element of Australia's energy policy is fuel pricing. No one likes to have to pay more for his fuel. This policy is not a popular one, and that is understandable. But the Government's responsibility is to do what is right and in the best long term interests of the nation, not just to seek popularity. Australians are now paying the true price for their fuel. That means that the circumstances have been created in which we can look at the development of alternative fuels. They will not be developed if our pricing policies are unrealistic. The Rundle venturers have always made it clear that realistic fuel pricing is absolutely essential if their project is to succeed. Despite the difficulties that have now emerged they are still making clear, as they did in yesterday's announcement, that the project cannot go ahead if the Government does not maintain correct energy development policy.

1366 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Energy Strategy: Rundle Project

The Labor Party seems quite happy to take a defeatist attitude and say that the Rundle project is finished before it has even started. I note that Ilot one member of the Opposition is in the House at the moment. This attitude might be good enough for the Labor Party, but it is not good enough for the Government and it is not good enough for Australia. There has to be an intensive effort to see that the Rundle project does go ahead if at all possible. We cannot just write it off. It is too important to this nation. Australia will need every drop of liquid fuel it can get from whatever source it can get it. We will face crippling financial burdens in the future if we have to import large quantities of oil. We will need an all-out effort to develop oil from coal and shale if we are to meet our future needs. I believe that the Rundle project holds promise as a source of a major part of our fuel needs. I say that even though problems are apparent now that were not obvious a year or two ago.
In a recent report on Australia's energy outlook the Esso company said that unconventional sources of oil must be developed. Esso also said that this was necessary because there could be no guarantee of finding more conventional oil in sufficient quantities to prevent loss of our present self-sufficiency. The company said that the projected development of synthetic crude oil could account for nearly half of Australia's oil production by the year 2000. Esso pointed out that there were very real commercial risks in committing huge amounts of capital to developing the technology and the facilities to produce these synthetic crudes. It said that if Australia is aiming at becoming self-sufficient in oil the Government must maintain policies encouraging both conventional oil exploration and synthetics development. That is perfectly true. That is exactly what the Government is doing.
It is interesting to note that Esso said that progress on both fronts-conventional and unconventional oil-could be made if the risks were reduced by clear bipartisan policies. What hope is there of bipartisan policies when the Labor Party is determined to knock and to be destructive? The Rundle project is of tremendous significance to Australia. I hope that the problems which have arisen can be overcome and that, in a relatively short time, oil from the Rundle project will begin to increase Australia's self-sufficiency in fuel. The Government, unlike the Labor Party, will be working to that end.
The Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) made reference in his speech to there being 12,000 years' supply of shale oil. The Minister did not determine this figure himself, as he was

accused of doing. He quoted an estimate published by the National Energy Advisory Committee, which said that Australia's total reserves of oil shale-not just from the Rundle project, but our total reserves-at current rates of usage represented 12,000 years' supply. If honourable members opposite want to question this estimate they should take their dispute to the National Energy Advisory Committee.
This Government has certainly encouraged expertise and know-how from overseas to explore for energy in this country. The policies set by the Government are having outstanding results. For instance, the liquefied natural gas project on the North West Shelf will involve $5,000m. Companies involved in the project include BP, Shell, Woodside, Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd and Asiatic Petroleum. This project is being developed under the auspices of this Government. These companies have been prepared to develop the project because the Government has made it so attractive. Great development has taken place in our coal industry. The Minister for Trade and Resources has been able to arrange contracts for our coal during his many overseas visits. There is great development in the coal industry at present in my electorate of Paterson. Again, overseas companies with expertise and know-how have come in and invested money in our coal projects. ObViously they have in mind liquefaction from coal. They are not taking over the mines entirely but they are investing money. The Foreign Investment Review Board has strict guidelines and the main investment is Australian. Shell, BHP, Esso and Caltex are coming in and investing money in these mines. The are protecting the energy industry in which they have invested millions of dollars. The Government's policy in this area is bringing great results for the nation. I deplore the remarks made by members of the Opposition in this debate.
Mr Katter-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I seek information from you at this stage?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the honourable member wishing to make a point of order?
Mr Katter-Mr Deputy Speaker, it is a point of order in a way. I seek your guidance as to whether it is a point of order.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I will give the honourable member a brief period to establish the fact.
Mr Katter-Mr Deputy Speaker, I thank you for your indulgence. What is the situation when a matter of public importance is brought forward

CSIRO Marine Laboratories, Hobart

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1367

and not one member of the Opposition is in the House?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr Les Johnson-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a pointof order. Since there are only 10 or 11 Government members in the House I draw your attention to the state of the House. (Quorum formed).
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The discussion is concluded.
Mr Bourchier-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. Is it a fact that not one member of the Opposition was in the House? .
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
CSIRO MARINE LABORATORIES, HOBART
Reference of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources) (4.31)-1 move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: CSIRO Marine Laboratories, Hobart, Tasmania.
In April 1980 the Government decided that a marine laboratories complex should be established in Tasmania. This decision was aimed at strengthening Commonwealth support for the fishing industry and upgrading oceanographic research following the declaration of the 200-mile Australian fishing zone. The proposal is to accommodate the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation divisions of Fisheries Research and of Oceanography in new premises at a site adjacent to Castray Esplanade at Battery Point in Hobart.
In order to pursue an enlarged research program CSIRO has formed two separate divisions from the former Division of Fisheries and Oceanography which has its headquarters at Cronulla, New South Wales. Existing facilities are inadequate for modern marine research. They are overcrowded, the site is unsuitable for redevelopment, and there are no adequate berthing facilities for research vessels. The site for the marine laboratories at Battery Point does not have these disadvantages.
The proposed works will. comprise: Fisheries and oceanography research laboratories; offices; workshops and stores; conference rooms and a

lecture theatre; staff amenities; and servicing facilities for research vessels. The Battery Point area of Hobart is of historical significance and the site is subject to special planning constraints. The proposed marine laboratories will comply with these requirements. The estimated cost of the proposal at February 1981 is $1O.7Sm. I table plans of the proposed work.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (4.3S)-As member for Denison in this House it gives me very great pleasure to support the motion just moved so capably by my colleague, the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) . I wish briefly to recount the history of the matter to d~te and to state what we hope will now follow as a result of today's motion. Back in January 1976, I spoke with the then Minister for Science, Senator the honourable James Webster, as to the possibility of some form of Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation marine sci- , ence research activity being located in Tasmania. Senator Webster explained to me that problems had arisen in relation to the continued occupation of rented premises at Cronulla at which the divisions of Fisheries and Oceanography of the CSIRO were currently ensconced. The factual situation was that the premises were inadequate, it was inhibiting forward planning and, quite unbeknown to me, the Department, together with the CSIRO had been looking at alternatives. Following that initial discussion in January 1976 a number of strong representations were made by myself.
I wish to pay a special tribute both to Senator Webster and to the present Minister for Science and Te<;hnology, (Mr Thomson), for the interest that they have shown in this proposal. In April last year the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced in this House that the Government had taken a decision to establish in Hobart what would eventually become known as the National Marine Science Research Centre comprising the CSIRO Divisions of Fisheries and Oceanography and the other facilities referred to by my colleague, the Minister for Housing and Construction. This indeed is good news. It is an initiative which I believe will be applauded. It brings to Hobart, Tasmania, not only the Australian headquarters of the Antarctic Division but also, with the forwarding of this proposal to, the Public Works Committee, a National Marine Science Research Centre. Last week the Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Bill which was so capably handled by the Minister for Housing and Construction in his capacity ,as Acting Minister for Science and Technology stated that

1368 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

CSIRO Marine Laboratories, Hobart

Australia had become the first nation to ratify the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources which Convention provides in Article XIII, sub-article 1:
The headquarters of the Commission shall be established at Hgbart, Tasmania, Australia.
I place on record my gratitude to the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom), the former Minister for Housing and Construction for his assistance and co-operation, to the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman), and to my good friend and colleague, the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck), who has supported this project since its inception. I also wish to take a few moments to place on record my gratitude to the following members of the various departments who have proceeded with some expedition to enable this motion to come before the House today: Mr Ian Preston of the Department of Administrative Services; Mr Allen McKenzie, the Controller of Housing and Construction in Tasmania and all members of the staff in the Department of Science and Technology in my home State; and to the CSIRO, particularly Dr Paul Wild, and Sir Victor Burley and all the others. I believe the initiative which comes before the Parliament today is one which will ultimately lead to the establishment of a Marine Science Research Centre of international standing. In addition to the buildings referred to in the motion, it is further proposed that the $9m Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation vessel, which I hope the Government will be able to commission at the earliest possible opportunity, will also be based in Hobart. The entire complex would provide employment for some 250 persons. The value to the economy of southern Tasmania would be indeed significant, but it is the bringing together in Australia's southernmost capital, in Australia's only island State, of the Antarctic and marine resources of this nation, which is of international significance. That gives me as a Tasmanian particular pride and pleasure. I know that my Tasmanian Liberal colleagues in both the Senate and the House of Representatives are equally proud.
Last but not least, I commend the Chairman of the Public Works Committee, the honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey) and the Secretary of the Committee, Mr Dick Fenton, for facilitating the early hearing of this reference in Hobart. That will take place in the week commencing 18 May. Because of the efficiency of the Department of Housing and Construction, the display model has already arrived in Hobart. It is on display and has attracted a lot of attention. As

proposed, it is a superb architectural structureone that will also be scientifically superb. Aesthetically it is very attractive and will not in any way disrupt or interfere with the traditional beauty of the Battery Point area.
I wish the Committee every success in its deliberations and look forward to its speedily reporting back to the Parliament. I will support any necessary expediency motion in order that early expenditure on this magnificent total complex may be speedily approved. I understand that ultimately the complex will cost in the order of $25m and will be of international standard. Its being established in Hobart, Tasmania, will be to the benefit of the people of Australia and indeed the peoples of the world for many years to come.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
DESIGNS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Thomson, for Mr McVeigh, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (4.42)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Designs Amendment Bill 1981 is a further development in the Australian industrial property system. It introduces the first substantial changes to the designs legislation since 1906, when the Act was first passed. Its aim is to encourage innovation and industrial design within the community. To this extent the Bill reflects the Government's continuing commitment to reforming Australia's industrial property system. It seeks to make industrial property more responsive to our needs in developing and exploiting Australia's innovative technology.
Designs are probably the least understood of the possessions collectively known as industrial property rights. Many people are only vaguely familiar with the meaning and advantages of patents, registered trade marks and copyright rights. The availability of design protection often surprises manufacturers and importers, distributors and retailers. Yet these are the very people who benefit by being able to suppress unfair competition or who could take steps to avoid infringement of another's design rights. This lack of understanding is particularly unfortunate when a business is founded on a new or improved product as its only real asset.
Designs, in the sense of eye-appealing, industrial creations as opposed to mechanical contrivances, can be protected in Australia by a registration procedure which has existed for 75 years.

Designs Amendment Bill

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1369

Industrial designs have been created by manufacturers who consciously sought to enh~nce the sales appeal and competitiveness of their products through ornamentation. Nevertheless, functional considerations have tended to predominate. It is, however, only in comparatively recent times that industrial designing has intensified. It has been encouraged by the need to exploit wider markets; by domestic and overseas competition; by increased media advertising and display; by the discovery of many new processes and materials; and by the higher level of community education.
If good design is to flourish, those responsible for producing it must be protected. To this end, industrial designs have been safeguarded by legislation through registration. Anyone who produces a new or original design may protect it by registering it at the Designs Office. The ri~ht given by registering a design is a monopoly and can be infringed without copying taking place. The monopoly conferred by registration is, however, subject to review by the courts, which have the power to declare any design registration invalid. Thus registration is the only prima facie evidence that the design is valid. This Bill recognises that in this country changes to designs legislation can greatly improve the incentives for innovative design.
In 1970 the Government set up the Designs Law Review Committee to determine what changes would be appropriate to Australian conditions. It advocated the inclusion of new provisions in the designs legislation. The report has been widely circulated and has received support from those using the design system in Australia. Under the new legislation, designs will be registered initially for one year. This period can be extended so as to give the owner of a design a maximum of 16 years protection. This will apply provided the Registrar is not made aware, either from members of the community or in any other way, of any matter affecting the registration's validity. This Bill introduces a specific provision empowering the Registrar to undertake searches to establish the newness or originality of the design for which registration is being sought.
Another significant change is the abolition of the present requirement to register according to a class system. The abolition of this system will give wider protection to designs without affecting the test of novelty or originality.
The legislation also incorporates a new definition of design which is coupled with a new provision. The combined effect is to make it clear that design features serving a functional purpose should not be taken into account by the courts in determining whether the design is valid. This will

allow registration of shapes which enable. \tn article to perform a particular function. The function itself will not be registered, merely the shape or feature needed to achieve the function.
I should stress that the benefits provided by the Designs Act apply only to designs registered under the provisions. Whilst the benefits of registration outweigh those of non-registration, the Act clearly requires that a design must be new or original and unpublished in Australia before a registration application is made. In return for satisfying those conditions the owner obtains a monopoly for up to 16 years.
Australian industry, as well as overseas industry, favours the system of Australian design registration. This is apparent when one considers the wide range of articles registered as designs by Australian industry. Design registrations being sought and obtained range from air conditioners, barbecues, boat hulls, chairs and display cabinets to roof tiles, toys, wash-basins and yo-yos. The Government is seeking to encourage Australian innovative effort in every possible way. Since 1975 the rate of design lodgments in Australia has increased by 50 per cent. Approximately 70 per cent of all applications for design registration have come from Australians. This indicates a greater awareness of the need for, and the benefits of, statutory protection for industrial property rights. The Government is well aware of this. This Bill is another of the measures introduced in the last three years to provide a more conducive climate for innovation in the Australian community. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
PATENTS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Thomson, for Mr McVeigh, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (4.51)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill corrects inadequacies in procedures for obtaining a patent for an invention. Although the procedures are technical and sometimes complex, the principles behind them are basic to industrial property protection. In particular this applies to provisions of the Bill concerning time limits for certain actions necessary while a patent application is pending. The main purpose of a patent system is to stimulate industrial invention and innovation by granting limited monopoly rights to inventors and by increasing public availability of

1370 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Patents Amendment Bill

information on new technology. Patent procedures must achieve a balance among competing interests while remaining administratively workable.
The primary purpose of time limits is to enable industrial competitors to operate with some certainty about whether they are impinging on someone else's patent rights. A set time limit ensures that third parties can act in the sure knowledge that an applicant has obtained or has foregone his rights. Time limits should not, however, be inviolate. An applicant who fails to observe them may incur the loss of all or part of the potential rights to a patent.
Provisions already in the Patents Act allow the Commissioner of Patents, under certain conditions, to extend the times laid down. The most important of these is section 160, which allows time extensions in circumstances beyond control or through an error or omission by the person concerned, or his agent or attorney. It was a long standing Patent Office practice to grant liberal section 160 time extensions. Recently this liberal approach has been challenged, resulting in inadequacies becoming apparent in three areas. The first area relates to the time within which the Commissioner may accept a patent application. Acceptance marks the stage when the Commissioner grants an application. The problem is that no explicit provision allows section 160 to extend that time.
The second relates to the Convention period which is derived from the Paris Convention and concerns the priority dating of patents lodged in Australia but which originated from other member countries. Again no express provision allows section 160 to extend that period. The third area relates to extending the 12-month period for lodging what is called a complete-afterprovisional application. It arises where an applicant lodges a patent application with only a provisional specification. This is in order to retain a priority date corresponding to the filing date of the provisional specification. There is no express provision in section 160 to extend the 12-month period.
Recent decisions by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and the Deputy Commissioner of Patents mean extensions of the Convention period or the acceptance period cannot now be granted. There is also doubt about the validity of Complete-after-provisional extensions. The seriousness of the problem became apparent in mid-1979 when an industrial dispute at the Redfern Mail Exchange delayed a large number of patent application documents in transit. As well

processing delays could often mean that the time limit for accepting applications has passed. Under these circumstances patents would be irretrievably precluded from being granted. The Government decided on remedial legislation, and this Bill ensures extensions of time in appropriate circumstances. The Bill now provides specific sections to supplement the inadequately worded section 160. Apart from time extensions, provisions also allow for protecting third parties adversely affected by extensions. Additionally, there is the opportunity for opposition to extensions exceeding three months. The Bill also contains a catch-all provision to cope with late lodgments of documents attributable to postal delays.
Another problem arises from the findings that some extensions were invalid. The Attorney General's Department advises that a patent granted after an invalid extension of the acceptance period is itself invalid. In the case of the Convention period, an invalid extension means that the Convention priority date is lost.
The Bill therefore includes provisions retrospectively validating extensions of time purported to have been granted in the past and which are now held, or might be held, to be invalid. All consequences flowing from such extensions are also validated. The only exceptions are those extensions which have been questioned in proceedings under the principal Act. It would be unjust to legislate retrospectively arbitrarily to remove rights established in those proceedings. As far as extensions of the acceptance period and of the time for lodging the complete-afterprovisional specifications are concerned, grounds for seeking an extension are the same as those in section 160. However, divergent views exist about the availability of extensions to the Convention period. Because of these conflicting considerations, the Industrial Property Advisory Committee was asked whether the Patents Act should provide for extending the Convention period. The Committee recommended and the Government accepted that: Firstly; extensions be granted where the applicant can show he intended filing within the 12-month Convention priority period; secondly, the failure to do so was beyond the control of the applicant, his agent or his attorney; and, thirdly, under no circumstances should the extension exceed three months.
Other points covered by the Bill include easing the restrictions imposed by time limits for lodging divisional applications, inclusion of more wideranging regulations on professional conduct of patent attorneys, and provisions which enable Australia to carry out its obligations under the International Patents Co-operations Treaty.

Governor-General's Speech

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1371

In conclusion, this Bill aims to resolve a procedural defect which has been uncovered in the patent system. That defect has not only put obstacles in the way of obtaining a patent but also rendered many existing patents defecti~e, and even void. This Bill corrects those defects. The rights of applicants and patentees, and also of competitors in industry, are now safeguarded. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
GOVERNOR-GENERAL'S SPEECH
Address-in-Reply
Debate resumed from 2 April, on motion by Mr Spender:
That the following Address-in-Reply to the Speech of His Excellency the Governor-General be agreed to:
Mayit please Your Excellency:
We, the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled, desire to express our loyalty to Our Most Gracious Sovereign, and to thank Your Excellency for the Speech which you have been pleased to address to Parliament.
Upon which Mr Kent had moved by way of amendment:
That the following words be added to the Address: " but note that the Government:
(1) has failed to adequately respond to-
(a) record unemployment;
(b) a high and worsening level of inflation;
(c) reduced and falling family living standards, and
(d) the highest taxation burden in the nation's history;
(2) allows unsatisfactory administration of foreign investment guidelines which permit an uncritical and opendoor policy to the takeover of Australian industry and resources to continue, and
(3) makes no long-term provision for assistance to manufacturing industry and farming industries, which are likely to be severely disadvantaged as a result of successive exchange rate revaluations and substantially increased imports in the context of resources development' .
Mr FRY (Fraser) (5.0)-1 welcome the opportunity to take part in this debate. I wish to voice my concern about a number of decisions taken by the Government which confirm fears that I have had-they are fears held by many people in Canberra-that the Government is intent on carrying out a vendetta against Canberra people. I am very pleased that the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) is present to hear what I have to say. I hope he takes the opportunity to respond to it. 1refer firstly to the blatant double standards of the Minister in going along so enthusiastically with the heavy subsidisation of air

fares to Tasmania while at the same time not Iifti~g a finger to protect Australian Capital Ttmitory residents from the savage 30 per cent increa~e in their air fares. Many people feel, as I do, that the Minister has let the people of Canberra down.
We have then the rather reactionary legislation of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) in which he is endeavouring to change the structure of the Capital Territory Health Commission in a way which will exclude the elected members of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly from the decision-making body. These representatives were elected specifically by the people of Canberra to carry out a constructive and responsible role in the interests of those people. This Government obviously believes that the people of Canberra do not have a right to be heard on these authorities which deal with very important matters concerning the quality of services available to them.
Probably the most serious concern of all is about reports which I have heard recently that the Minister for the Capital Territory has attempted to interfere with the Australian Capital Territory Milk Authority in carrying out its responsibilities. I know that this is a very serious allegation. I hope that I am wrong and I hope that the Minister will tell me if I am wrong. I understand that the Minister in fact put pressure on the Australian Capital Territory Milk Authority to re-negotiate an existing legal contract which the Authority has with Bega Co-operative Society Ltd in order to increase arbitrarily the price of milk to Canberra consumers. I understand that the Authority, to its credit, refused to be a party to this disgraceful deal and that the Minister was considering using the reserve powers contained in the Authority ordinance in order to override the opposition of the Authority to this devious proposal.
I do not blame the dairy farmers for wanting to get a few more cents for their milk. I know that they have been through a difficult time. I do not blame their elected representative for trying to achieve that end for them. But I think the Minister should remember that he has a very serious responsibility to protect the interests of Canberra people. I hope that on this issue he will take that responsibility seriously and put first their interests and not the interest of a minority group outside the Australian Capital Territory. I am very concerned about these allegations. 1 hope that they are not true. I hope that the Minister will respond. I think that the people of Canberra are just beginning to realise how blatantly this Government and the Minister are prepared to discriminate against Canberra.

1372 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

I have heard disturbing reports that the Government is considering selling the Canberra Commercial Development Authority; that is, the Authority which owns and runs the Belconnen Shopping Mall. I understand that the Government is considering selling the Mall to private enterprise. Again, I would like the Minister to clear the air and say what is happening in this respect. We have just cause to be apprehensive about these reports because the Government has a pretty good record in flogging off government owned enterprise to private enterprise. We have already seen the historic government sawmill sold off-a mill which was responsible for the sawing of timber for many of the fine old buildings in this city. We have seen the modern brickworks sold off for a fraction of its real value. Last year, of course, the Government was negotiating to sell the Mugga quarry, again a facility, a resource base, which has been used to build a lot of the buildings in Canberra and which has given very fine service to the city.
We still have to face up to the devastation of the so-called Lynch razor gang. Again, we have cause for great concern for the future of Canberra. No doubt, that committee will continue the process of total disregard for the interests of Canberra people. I think the people of Canberra are entitled to know what is the Minister's intention with regard to future milk prices. They are entitled to know what is the Government's intention with regard to the possible sale of the Canberra Commercial Development Authority.
I turn to another area of government policy which concerns me greatly; that is, the blind obedience which our Government seems to have to following the foreign policy progressions of our great and powerful friends. I refer particularly to two very important areas of foreign policy: One concerns our policy towards the problems in Indo China and Kampuchea and the other concerns the problem in El Salvador. Despite mounting criticism, the Government is continuing to support the United States involvement in the El Salvadorean civil war. The Government has remained oblivious to both internal and international criticism of this facet of United States policy. It is important to remember that what really motivates the Reagan Administration may be substantially different from its public statements. Since the humiliation of the hostages in Iran, the United States has been itching for an opportunity to show that she still has the military muscle and the willpower to do what she likes. This mood, of course, was compounded by the impotence that the Americans felt during the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, which the Opposition

condemned in exactly the same way as the Government.
President Reagan fought much of his highly successful election campaign on the irrational issue that the US had somehow lost control of the world situation and that tough action was necessary to stop further deterioration. The very tough rhetoric of President Reagan has been backed up by his choice of several hard line staff-Vice President Bush, Haig, Weinberger and people of that nature. Their number one foreign policy aim appears to be to confront progressive peoples' governments and movements wherever they appear, no matter who their opponents are, and to support regimes that protect US overseas business interests, no matter how brutal or repressive they are or how they act towards their own deprived people. Some of these regimes have been totally repressive-for example, the Pol Pot regime-brutal and totally unjust and have inflicted total poverty on their people. This has led the Administration to support such diverse groups as the Pol Pot murderers, the Moslem insurgents in Afghanistan and the junta in El Salvador. This means, in effect, that the US expects the Soviet Union to stay well clear of America's back yard-that is, El Salvador-but at the same time she does not seem to apply this principle to her own activities. The US policy towards El Salvador must be seen against this background.
It is disturbing that the Australian Government has been so uncritical of the motives of the Reagan Administration. With the presumption that the US wanted the opportunity to show her strength, the proof offered by the Department of State may well be good enough for American internal consumption but it should not be good enough for level headed governments elsewhere in the world, including the Australian Government. We should have an independent attitude towards these problems. If we listened to the voice of people in Australia on the situation -in El Salvador, I think we would have a different policy. The American action in El Salvador is rationalised by the claim that Cuba, East Germany, the Soviet Union and many other members of the international communist conspiracy are funnelling huge amounts of modern weapons to the left wing guerrillas. This claim is similar to the ones by the US before intervening in the affairs of Guatamala and Cuba in 1961-the Bay of Pigs invasion. The American State Department has now made public documents which purport to prove this claim. This collection of documents, entitled 'Communist Interference in El Salvador', is dated 23 February 1981.

Governor-General's Speech

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1373

When one looks at them one sees there is very little in the documents which would give them authenticity or credibility. Several of them are undated. Several use only first names when referring to alleged leaders. Most contain information which cannot be checked. The arms listed are predominantly of American manufacture, which I think is -irrelevant. If people want the arms it really does not matter where they come from. The few photographs accompanying the documents are inconclusive and bear no source. To sum up, there is very little in the documents that could not be a clumsy forgery. They contain little substance. Because of code words, first names and acronyms, it is difficult to interpret much of the evidence at all. FurtheJ;, the report does not come to. grips with the quite plausible explanation that the guerrillas are buying weapons from international arms dealers. I say that it is irrelevant where the arms come from. When people are being shot at, repressed and killed, naturally they will get arms, but the revolutionary front is poorly armed compared with the military junta in El Salvador.
The Reagan Administration has tried to claim that a win fOJ; the leftists in El Salvador would cause all Latin America somehow to go over to the socialist camp-the old domino theory. This generalisation seems to be supported by our Government. The leftist opposition forces in El Salvador joined together on 18 April 1980 to form the Democratic Revolutionary Front. The United States is simply wrong in portraying this front as a hard core Marxist-Leninist party. It is a political alliance of many diverse individuals and groups. It cQntains many people who have been associated with previous ruling groups in El Salvador, including Social Democrats, members of the Socialist International, former Christian Democrats, peasants, intellectuals and unionists. It is, indeed, a revolutionary front. The current President of the Front, Mr Ungo, resigned from the present ruling junta as late as January 1980. Foreign policy generalisations are very dangerous. Writing for the now defunct Australian International News Review the honourable member for Wannon (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the present Prime Minister, in July 1965-this is an it:lteresting extract-said:
<-- !The war Australians are fighting in Vietnam is not a civil war, as the left wing tries to tell us. It is an invasion from the north, as it was in Korea . . < if Mainland China is allowed to push her domination down through Vietnam, Thailand, Malaysia, and if we find South-East Asia and Indonesia all swayed and dominated by communist regimes, then our position would be bleak indeed.
How wrong the Prime Minister was. These generalities can now be truly recognised as absurdities. The Prime Minister and his Government

today seem to be following much the same line towards El Salvador. Again they seem to have swallowed the American line without even considering that the United States is simply looking for an opportunity to indulge in some welIpublicised bUllying to satisfy internal political demands.
The present Government has demonstrated that it has no foreign policy will of its own. It can only follow the lead of Washington. It is incredible that our Government is again preparing to folIowa nation whose recent foreign policy defects are now, fortunately, a matter of public record. Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Chile and Angola are cases that spring readily to mind.
The only beheficiaries of American involvement in El Salvador are sections of the United States itself and the brutal, repressive, fascist regime in El Salvador which is financed and controlled by 14 families oflandowners, supported by the United States, whose wealth has come from keeping the majority of the population impoverished. Any member of parliament who saw the film on El Salvador shown last week would have seen how brutal that regime is. It is worth noting that although we invited all members of parliament to watch the film-it was a World Council of Churches film illustrating what is going on in El Salvador-of the approximately 30 people there only one Government supporter thought it worthwhile to come along to find out what was happening in El Salvador. Not one member of this House came to look at the film. Only one Government senator came.
Mr Ruddock-I was not circulated on it.
Mr FRY-I know that other things were happening and that some Government members would have liked to come but no member of this House came to see the film even though an invitation was issued to all of them. If the Australian Government is to persist in encouraging President Reagan's venture, it should at least call for economic rather than military aid: As with other Third World countries, supplying weapons will not help the situation. Weapons cannot destroy the root of the violence or social and economic conditions which force people to take desperate measures. The President of the El Salvador Legislative Assembly himself said: 'We can have the best army in the world but it is of no use if the people are starving. We waht socialreform and economic aid, we do not want weapons'. This Government would do well to look at the independent evidence of the situation in El Salvador rather than relying on United States handouts. Most Latin American and European nations have treated United States

1374. REPRESENTA1JVES 7 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

claims with scepticism. Such a healthy attitude would benefit our Government. By turning a blind eye to evidenc;e contrary to that offered by the Reagan Administration, the Australian Government is doing a great disservice to the people in El Salvador, to humanity and the people of Australia.
The folly of blindly following the United States can be seen in our attitude towards Indo-China. The Americans have decided that Chinese foreign policy aims are acceptable and those of the Soviet Union are not. Of course, Australia has followed this policy blindly. One of the most important regional repercussions of this assessment is that until recently the Government, without any shame, maintained diplomatic recognition of the Pol Pot regime. Many of the people referred to as like-minded people, with whom the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) had discussions recently, represent governments that still recognise the brutal regime of Pol Pot, such as the people in Thailand, China, the Philippines, America and Singapore. These are the people to whom we are looking for advice. We do not seek advice from people who may think a little differently from us. We continue our tunnelled vision and follow blindly United States foreign policy..
The logic of the recognition of the Pol Pot regime was that remnants of the Pol Pot forces continued to fight Vietnamese troops who had saved the Kampuchean people from a regime which was worse, in some ways, than the one Hitler imposed on Eastern Europe. The Vietnamese are allies of the Soviet Union. Hence the overthrow of the barbaric Pol Pot regime was equated with Soviet expansion. This was seen as a greater evil than a regime which caused immense suffering and destruction to over one million people and a peace-loving country. Of course, there are good reasons why Vietnam and the Soviet Union became firm friends. Western countries, led by the United States, ceased all aid and left the Vietnamese to their own devices to rebuild their shattered nation. For more than a decade the United States, aided by a number of other countries, including Australia, attempted to destroy Vietnam with high explosives, napalm and defoliants. They did not succeed in destroying the will of the people but they left the economy and the countryside in ruins. The damage caused by B52 bombers .flying in from Thailand and the Philippines, by naval ships bombarding the coastline and by ground fire was immense. However, the long-term results of the defoliation campaign are probably even more harmful, as many Australian servicemen and their unfortunate children

are now discovering. The terrific results of chemical warfare have been magnified many times over on the Vietnamese people themselves.
The lack of humanity of successive American administrlitions has been shown not only by a refusal to grant unilateral aid but also by the obstruction of American representatives on international financial bodies. It is small wonder that the Vietnamese turned more and more to the Soviet Union for desperately needed assistance in reconstructing their country. They had no option but to turn to the socialist countries. The association of the Vietnamese Government and the Heng Samrin regime with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is very much an artificial construction. The Vietnamese and Kampuchean governments are far from Soviet puppets. In fact, they have introduced economic reforms far more liberal than anything in the Soviet Union. In both cases there is scope for free enterprise. There is a free market sector in both Vietnam and Kampuchea. In Vietnam it is possible for groups of up to 20 employees to work for themselves. Much the same is true in Kampuchea. I think this is an interesting development of most socialist regimes. The political systems of both countries are flexible and dynamic. Because of a lack of understanding, particularly on the part of the United States, they are lumped together with a monolithic Soviet Union. This is far from the truth.
What is so shocking about the Government's attitude towards EI Salvador and Indo-China is its ignorance. The Government knows little about what is happening in those places; yet it exhibits no desire to broaden its horizons. It is happy to rely on second hand American information and to repeat, parrot fashion, the comments of the United States President and the Secretary of State. It is incredible that this Government can still trot out the same sorts of glib generalisations that got Australia into such a mess some 15 years ago. In particular, it is surprising that the Prime Minister continues to accept so uncritically information from the United States when doing so previously involved us in the tragic farce of Vietnam. The wilful ignorance of this Government is to be condemned. Australia is a sovereign State and should conduct itself as such. A foreign policy of fawning after friends with big muscles will earn this nation nothing but contempt.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
MrRUDDOCK (Dundas) (5.20)-TheHouse is debating the Address-in-Reply to the Governor General's Speech. The Governor-General

Governor-General's Speech

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1375

directed himself to matters of foreign affairs and he stated:
The past year has seen a significant heightening of international tension and uncertainty. While we must hope that it turns out to be mistaken, it must be recognised that the consensus. of informed opinion, at present, is that the period encompassed by the life of this Parliament is likely to be a troubled and tense one in international affairs.
The foreign policy priorities of my Government are clear. It is very conscious of the need for a strong and united Western stance towards the Soviet Union and to this end it will work to maintain its already strong ties with its traditional allies, and in particular with the United States. It should be clearly understood that it will do so out of an appreciation of Australia's needs. and interests and for no other reason.
That comment is relevant because of the remarks of the previous speaker in this debate, the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry), who suggested that some honourable members, particularly in relation to their own attitudes on the matter of certain interventions in El Salvador, Vietnam and Cambodia, or Kampuchea, have tunnel vision. I suggest with respect that the only person with tunnel vision is one who can direct himself to what is happening in those parts of the world without also directing his attention to the important events which have taken place in other parts of the world. I will endeavour to give the honourable member's address some balance and also to highlight problems in parts of the world which are of particular concern to rue. One need only look at Afghanistan to appreciate that it is not only the United States which has ambitions in this world. The Soviet Union also has very clear ambitions. They may be predicated on its own self-interest but certainly they have consequences for individuals. One reads of the remarks of informed observers about the forces of the Soviet Union using gas in one form or another and equipping themselves to deal with gas warfare in that region against people who are not well equipped or well armed, and who certainly have not been armed in a significant way from the outside in the same way that insurgents-if I may call them that; as that is what they were at the time they were fighting against: legitimate governments-were armed from outside when fighting in Vietnam and in Kampuchea, or Cambodia as it then was. We should consider the approach of the Soviet Union in Poland and the people who are in its so-called sphere of influence. Heaven knows that South America and Central America were frequently seen to be in the United States' sphere of influence, but what is happening today in the Soviet Union's sphere of influence certainly gives cause for concern and highlights the words of the Governor-General about this uncertain world in which we are living. In today's Australian newspaper it is stated:

Warsaw Pact troops yesterday continued to surround Poland, despite a dramatic rejection by Moscow of speculation the Soviet President, Mr Brezhnev, had called a 'mini summit' of allies on the crisis, under the cloak of the 16th Czechslovak Communist Party Congress in Prague
Intelligence sources yesterday said there were now more than 25,000 troops in the gigantic Soyuz 81 exercise.
The buildup in the past 24 hours includes tanks, communications units and troop transports.
One could go on. The report continues:
In the past 24 hours Moscow has again unofficially warned that intervention wiJuld result in trade boycotts by the West, and immediate demand for the repayment of Poland's out-
standing $28,000 million to West7rn nations.
In what could be regarded as a warning to dissident groups inside Poland and other Warsaw Pact countries yesterday, the East German news service ADN broadcast details on early troop movements to the Polish border, saying they had come 'from deep within home territory'.
This must concern every honourable member, as it does me. I know that some honourable members on the other side of the House are very much concerned with what has been happening in Poland. In this debate I wish to direct my attention to the involvement of other countries in the activities of another independent nation, the Lebanon. I am particularly concerned about what has been happening in the Lebanon and I have my own views as to why it is happening at this time. I believe a sinister involvement of other forces in the Lebanon is taking advantage of the uncertainty generated as a result of the events in Poland. Notwithstanding the efforts of many to bring peace to that area, I am most concerned that the interests of the outside players in that country are not really to bring peace to it. I regard the present situation as the most serious since the 1975-76 civil war, which was followed by thb establishment of the Arab League force in the form of. a preliminary Syrian presence.
It needs to be understood that over a long period there have been diverse interests in the Lebanon. There have been Christians, Muslims and more recently Palestinians. They have lived together in that country and have managed to develop systems for handling their different interests. They were able to live in a country in the Middle East which would have been regarded as the most prosperous and certainly one of the most advanced in that area. Yet, we now see a situation which to all intents and purposes can only be regarded as most alarming. In today's broadcast of the A.M. radio program Steve Cosser interviewed Asher Walfisch who, in part, commented on the situation in the Lebanon. He made some comments about Israeli attitudes, and said:

1376 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

Israelis are not at all surprised at the admission by the Soviet Ambassador in Beirut that five Soviet military intelligence experts are with the Syrian troops attacking the Christian Arabs in the beseiged Lebanese town of Zahle. The number of Soviet experts inside Lebanon is probably much higher. Reports from Lebanon monitored here, say that fighting erupted fiercely during the day after a fairly quiet night. The reports say that Syrian aircraft joined the artillery in pounding away at the town of Zahle. The Syrians have said publicly that their aim is to clear Zahle of all Christian Falan-
or gist militia fighters. The casualty toll in half a day for Zahle
alone came to 30 wounded, many them children, serious . shortages of medicine, food, electricity, fuel and blood for transfusions have again been reported. A team of French volunteer physicians has arrived in Lebanon to help handle the wounded and the French Government has offered to send two ambulance planes to Lebanon to fiy wounded back to France for treatment. The ruler of Kuwait in the Persian Gulf has offered to mediate between Syria and Lebanon, his offer has met with no response so far.
Many reports in today's newspapers must be equally alarming to. honourable members as that A.M. report. That report mentioned-I believe it is clear-that the threat of escalating civil war is being used by those who wish to intervene and who have some purpose for intervening. It worries me greatly, when I become aware of the closer relationship between Syria and the Soviet Union, that it, with its very large force in the Lebanon, is the one that is threatening the lives of so many Lebanese people at this time. I will recount some of today's reports. In the Australian today it is reported:
The warning came against a background of increasing violence in Lebanon, where warring factions have increased the likelihood of a full-scale Syrian military takeover.
In Zahle, Phalangist radio said Syrian MIG fighters buzzed the city while Syrian gunners pounded the town with tank fire, rockets, mortars and artillery.
In today's Melbourne Age we saw:
A blockade of the largely Christian city of Zahle, 50 kilometres east of Beirut, by troops and tanks of the Syrian Arab Deterrent Force today entered its sixth day.
Residents reported by telephone late last night that intermittent shelling and the sound of machinegun fire echoed through the blacked-out city in Lebanon's fertile Bekaa Plain.
Despite four ceasefire announcements, prospects appeared bleak for a truce between militiamen from the Right-wing Falangist Party and the Syrians.
It went on:
Lebanon's United Nations representative Mr Tueni said the country had reached the limits of survival and the sudden upsurge in violence had taken it closer than ever to partition.
He called for the 30,OOO-strong Syrian force to be replaced by a more diverse Arab peace-keeping body including UN troops 'within a comprehensive security plan that will allot an ever-growing role to Lebanon's own armed forces'.
This week we saw a report of the comments of the American Secretary of State. The report stated:
. . . Haig urged all elements in Lebanon to show restraint and to lend their support to the Government of President Elias Sarkis.

It must concern all honourable members that since 1975-76 we have had a long-standing situation in which the Lebanon has lurched' from a situation in which it had a very sound government, with a very sound structure and an adequat~ b&lance between Christian and Muslim interests,.' to a situation in which continued factionalism and the growth of militias has brought this country to a position very short of civil war. Yet one can only suspect, as I do, that it is the outside influences using the Lebanese people that has helped to create this problem. Part of our legacy in Lebanon at this stage is a huge refugee problem, not only the refugees who came as a result of the displacement of Palestinian people, but also the people who are now refugees in their own land, the Lebanese people-Muslim people in some areas and Christian people in others. Lebanon' is occupied, in fact, by what is called a peacekeeping force. This is a force of some 30,000strong Arab League troops, but principally Syrian forces. Some 6,000 members of the United Nations interim force have been in the Lebanon since 1978, in the south where there had been previously Israeli activities.
, Efforts have been made in the Arab League to try to resolve this problem, to bring forward proposals which might help solve Lebanon's problems. To this point there seems to have been little in the way of efforts which might result in an acceptable solution to the different interests that are evident in the Lebanon itself. Towards the end of last year we saw a statement from President Carter. He called for an international conference under the aegis -of the United Nations in which delegates from the United States, France, Israel and those Arab nations with an interest in the situation in the Lebanon should take part. In my view, there is a role for Australia in such discussions if they are initiated. I hope that Australia will take an active role in all international forums and will pursue the very well chosen remarks and calls for peace in that region uttered today in this House by the Minister for Foreign Affairs. All honourable members need to know that terrific hostilities have been taking place over a long period in the Lebanon. I am personally concerned at the extent to which there is an absence of reports in the Australian media. It is only when large numbers of people are killed that these matters seem to come to the fore in the Australian Press. I will give honourable members some idea of the numbers of people involved. In a paper prepared by the Legislative Research Service of the Parliamentary Library it is stated: .
On 6 October, Lebanese police were reported to estimate that the victims of the fighting between Christian militia and

Governor-General's Speech'

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1377

Syrian troops had amounted to at least 1,000 dead and 1,700 wounded .
That was in a period of some six months. It continues:
A Spanish Red Cross official who visited Beirut went further, reporting in addition to this that 5,000 dwellings were destroyed and one half million persons displaced as a result of this fighting.
All honourable members would appreciate that in that situation, where such disastrous events are taking place, it was not at all surprising that a large delegation of Lebanese people was in Canberra today. The members of that delegation brought a submission to honourable member's of the Government and honourable members of the Opposition, a submission which, again, spoke of the hostilities, but called for action on the part of Australians. They said in their statement:
We are abhorred and alarmed by the indiscriminate artillery bombardment of civilians, which this week left 300 people dead and 620 wounded in the Capital City Beirut and the central Lebanese city of Zahle. Since 1975, thousands of civilians have been killed by conflicts between parties, both internal and external, including the Syrian troops stationed in Lebanon as members of a peacekeeping force under the auspices of the Arab League.
They called for certain action on the part of this Government, on the part of the United Nations and on the part of the Arab League. The action they called for was in the following terms:
I-An immediate ceasefire agreement covering all of Lebanon.
2-Cessation to the senseless killing and maiming of civilians, especially women and children, and the indiscriminate shelling of hospitals and public utilities.
3-Removal of 'the Syrian peacekeeping forces, and their replacement by members of the Regular Lebanese Army and the United Nations Forces.
4-To put an end to terrorist organizations operating in Lebanon.
Those objectives outlined in that statement from the Lebanese people, the delegation here in Canberra today, are well worthy of support. I was pleased, therefore, that at Question Time the Minister for Foreign Affairs responded to a question from the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). He had this to say:
The Australian Government is deeply concerned by the recent outbreak of fighting in Lebanon, in the cities of Beirut and Zahle. The fighting appears to be the most severe to have taken place since 1978. The Government calls for an immediate ceasefire, and urges that all parties to the conflict commit themselves to negotiations leading towards a national reconciliation.
The Minister went on to comment that this matter is one in which ultimately a solution should be found in Lebanon. It is necessary for the various interest groups in the Lebanon, including the Syrian and Israeli Governments as well as the Palestinians, to make efforts to avoid violence and

to seek a solution. While Australia has a .limited role, 1 believe that it has a significant role to play. There are very many Lebanese people and people of Lebanese descent living in Australia and those people have a real interest in what is happening in that part of the world. For that reason, 1 believe we have a real part to play in encouraging all nations of the world-in particular all participants in that part of the world-to come to a realistic solution, to call upon those external forces to stop involving themselves in the future of Lebanon and to play out their own games.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5.40)-1 began my Address-in-Reply speech by paying tribute to the previous speaker. It is not very often that the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) and 1see eye to eye on things, but 1certainly support everything he had to say in his speech. I am sure that those Lebanese people who congregated outside this House today, exhibiting concern for the people in their homeland, will also be very pleased with what he had to say.
One of the strange traditions of this parliamentary system is the Governor-General's Speech, when, at the opening of each parliamentary session, the Governor-General comes into the Senate and mouths a speech that is written for him by the Prime Minister. On this occasion, when 1saw Sir Zelman Cowen reading the speech I felt rather sorry for this man, who has done so much to restore dignity to the post that he now occupies, after the atrocities committed against democracy by his predecessor. It is now considered what it should be-a post of high respect. But 1 felt that the task that was given to the Governor-General by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in that speech was really insurmountable. If I may use the expression, the Governor-General was called upon to put a human face on liberalism. It is almost like putting a smile on a corpse, almost an impossibility. To see this decent, honest man, this man above question or reproach, having to mouth the hypocrisy, the cant, the hyperbole, the almost downright dishonesty of the Prime Minister's prepared speech, was something that almost made me sick. But it was not only what the Prime Minister had the Governor-General say that worried me. 1 was concerned also at what the Speech did not say. Search as I might through the Speech, I can find no reference to jobs for the boys. Strange to relate, since the last election three jobs have been found for the boys.
Mr Humphreys-What are the boys' names?
Mr JOHN BROWN-Next Saturday the electors of Wentworth in Sydney have to go to the

1378 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

polls to elect a successor to the previous incumbent, Mr Bob Ellicott. Someone asked: 'Who were the boys?' The first one was Vic Garland; the second was John McLeay; and of course the third one was Bob Ellicott. In referring to them. I thought that I would dig out a report that I remember reading in the Age last June. It was called: 'The end of term report'. It was a sort of half-way summation of the activities of the Ministers at the time. Perhaps I can quote a couple of these things. The report refers to:
Garland, Vic, the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, has a higher reputation in the Party than he deserves; an accountant with all an accountant's defects but pleasant enough.
Well, high recommendations for the post Of High Commissioner in London, might I add. Then the article refers to John McLeay, who has been appointed to the Consul-General in Los Angeles. If Los Angeles can put up with Disneyland, I guess it can put up with John McLeay. The newspaper report says this:
John McLeay, Minister for Administrative Services, would have to be on everyone's short list for the least intelligent member of Parliament; quite a nice bloke though.
No doubt Government members were very pleased to get rid of him.
Mr Ruddock-Who said that?
Mr JOHN BROWN-It is a report in the Age last year. TheJ;e is some question as to who wrote it.
Mr Ruddock-Who said it?
Mr JOHN BROWN-Some fingers have been pointed at some members of the Government, actually. I am not going to suggest who wrote it, but I must say that the descriptions were pretty accurate. Now we have the spectre of Mr Ellicott going to the Federal Court of Australia. So now we need a by-election in Wentworth on Saturday; it will be the third by-election since last October. But none of this was anticipated in the Governor General's Speech. It will cost the people of Australia approximately $500,000 to get three people to fill those seats.
One of the statements in the Governor General's Speech was:
The programs developed in the context of the International Year of Disabled Persons 1981 to assist the education of severely handicapped children and to increase employment opportunities for the disabled.
While the Government has been spending $500,000 on three by-elections, as my colleague, the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson) pointed out in the House last Thursday, it has not found one zack for the International Year of Disabled Persons. There is one quote that

was not made about jobs for the boys and one that was made about the International Year of Disabled Persons. But what sort of disparity do we find there in the action of this Government and what does it say for the Government's honesty?
While I am on the subject of Saturday's by-election, what have the poor people of Wentworth, the poor Liberals of Wentworth, the silvertails and the blue-rinse set, been handed as a candidate? Talk about a modern day Lazarus; poor little Peter Coleman. He was thoroughly rejected by the people of New South Wales as the Leader of the State Opposition and has now been reincarnated as the Liberal candidate for Wentworth. Poor little Peter Coleman! Funnily enough, with this by-election on Saturday, no statement has yet been issued by the razor gang, the gang with which the Prime Minister has set about pruning Government policies, we believe, to the extent of $300m. It should have reported last week. A terribly funny thing-a sinister thing almost-is that the report has not yet been produced. I wonder whether that is because the by-election is on Saturday. I wonder whether the reason why the Premiers Conference has been postponed is so that the Prime Minister will not have to tell the Premiers the terrible news about the cuts in State funds. Is that because the by-election is on Saturday? I wonder whether he is terrified that the State Premiers would then have to reintroduce some State taxes to make up for. the shortfall in Commonwealth funding. What an opportunity the people will have then to talk about the human face of Fraser liberalism.
Having referred to a quote that did not appear, I give now a few of the quotes that do appear. The first one I speak about concerns Aboriginal health. The Governor-General's Speech talks about the commitment to improve Aboriginal health standards. There were some very eloquent statements made in the last couple of weeks by Professor Fred Hollows, the head of the National Trachoma Eye Health Program. He was interviewed on the PM radio program one evening. Some of his remarks make very good listening.
We all know that Professor Fred HoIfows recently received an Advance Australia award for his contribution to Aboriginal health. He has claimed:
That millions of dollars of taxpayers' money is being wasted by both State and Federal Aboriginal health authorities, particularly the Western Australian Government.
Professor Hollows has just completed a three-year treatment and study program across the Australian outback.
Mr Ruddock-Have you read the report?

Governor-General's Speech

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1379

Mr JOHN BROWN-He claims:
that the misuse of funds by health authorities has meant that Aboriginal health problems are just as bad as they were 25 years ago.
In answer to the honourable member for Dundas, yes, I did read the report. I wish to quote some of the matters the Professor mentioned on PM. He said:
What is happening is that a lot of money is going into an expensive white bureaucracy that spends money that taxpayers think is going to alleviating Aboriginal health problems. Most of it is not going to where it should. Taxpayers' moneys from the Department of Aboriginal Affairs to the tune of $6tm is spent on a big white health bureaucracy that is S)lpposed to be providing primary and preventative care for Aboriginal people there.
The questioner asked him:
What is this money actually being spent on then?
The reply is very interesting:
It's spent on white nursing sisters, 4-wheel-drive motor cars, two-way radios, hospitals, clinics, audits, the Aborigines of Western Australia have been measured and counted and had their blood done and there's been millions spent on a service like that but it's not spent on the way World Health recommend monies to be spent.
He was then asked:
Why isn't the recommendations of the World Health Organisation in this area being followed? Is it a matter of ignorance, indifference or perhaps even worse, racism?
This is what he said:
It certainly looks very racist. There seems no Aborigine is employed by the Western Australian Health Department at any significant level. Aborigines do not get an opportunity to put an input into direction and policy making in Western Australia. Of recent years they've employed some up to 200 Aboriginal health workers at the most basic level in their service, whereas I know, and have personally met and received very good advice from, scores of Aborigines in Western Australia who could be part of direction giving and could stop this scandalous waste of money on Aboriginal health in Western Australia.
So, there is one claim made in the Governor General's Speech about how this Government was going to improve Aboriginal health and here is a man of Professor Hollows' eminence suggesting that Aboriginal health has not improved in 25 years.
Another area of government involvement very dear to my heart is the area of sport. I would like to quote the Government's claim in this respect in the Governor-General's Speech. The Governor General said:
. . . commitment to encourage excellence in a number of fields-for example, to provide greater support and imprOVed facilities for research, to encourage the arts and to provide greater opportunity for young Australian athletes.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I ask you to cast your mind back to the period last year when the sorry chapter of the Moscow Olympic Games raised its

head in this Parliament. I do not think the Australian people need to be reminded of what this Government did, but I will remind them anyhow. It put enormous pressure on young Australian athletes not to go to the Moscow Olympic Games. All of this Government's retribution against Russia was placed in terms of a ban on the movement of our athletes to the Olympic Games. In the period of this Government's argument with Russia our trade with that country has quadrupled, yet the Government saw fit to try to prevent our athletes from going to Moscow. Fortunately, to the eternal credit of the Olympic movement in Australia, that did not happen and our athletes went to Moscow. But, in order to assuage public revulsion at the Government's move against those sportsmen, the Government decided to introduce suddenly-from nowhere-the Institute of Sport, which was to be the panacea for all sport in Australia. In the last week or two the truth has been revealed about this Institute, to the extent that the Canberra Times published an article under the headlines 'Doubts over the future of the Institute'. That article recounts how Don Talbot, the Director of the Institute who had been lured back from Canada where he had a very lucrative position as a swimming coach, is furious about the broken promise of providing sports facilities and giving the Institute priority use of existing facilities. Don Talbot is now in the situation of saying things like this:
If I was a gambler . . . I would not bet on the institute surviving . . .
The damn thing is only six months old. It was set up to paper over the cracks that appeared in the Australian Government's relationships with the sporting fraternity of Australia. It appears that it was a very shallow ploy to see that Australia's revulsion would disappear. It will not disappear. I do not intend to quote everything that has been said, but it appears that the Institute's budget to the end of the financial year in June is $1.1m. The Institute has budgeted for more than that next year-it has budgeted for $2.3m-but it gives the impression of not being over-optimistic about getting it. Don Talbot believes that the Government lacks a genuine commitment to the Institute and to sport in general, despite the high sounding phrases in the Governor-General's Speech. Since Mr Ellicott's departure for the Federal Court, no priority has been given to the Institute's development. Mr Talbot described the position as being in limbo. Sport just does not stop when a bureaucrat says so; it does not work like that. This is just another example, taken from the Governor General's Speech, of the hypocrisy of this Government. Although I am against the tradition

1380 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

of a Governor-General's Speech, at least it gives us an opportunity to know in advance the sort of government with which we are dealing.
The other area I would like to speak aboutthis is also mentioned in the Governor-General's Speech-is the area of welfare benefits, and it comes under the heading of caring for people. What a contradiction in terms! Does any honourable member believe that this Government cares for people? Let me read to the House what the Governor-General was compelled to say in this respect. He said:
In what I have said about unemployment, youth and the economy, I have stressed my Government's concern with the human dimensions of the issues involved. It believes that the only legitimate yardstick for assessing any policy is not conformity to an ideology, not the strengthening of the state, but the effectiveness of that policy in enhancing the lives of people. This is the fundamental concern of my Government.
Mr Deputy Speaker, let me refer you to a very pressing social policy. As you are the incumbent of the seat of Chitley, which is situated alongside my seat of Parramatta, you would know of the problems I face in Parramatta. Two hundred young people under 18 years of age live on the streets there. These young people are required to exist on the dole level of $36 per week which was provided in 1976.
Mr Ruddock-You could put them up at home. Your place would be big enough.
Mr JOHN BROWN-I have plenty of kids at home. I have five of my own. I think I am fulfilling my obligations there. The kids on the streets of Parramatta all fall into the same category. They are homeless, rejected, unloved, lacking family support, despairing and in most cases unemployable. But, given the pittance they are paid by this Government, is it any wonder that we are seeing the manifestations of this problem, even in the city of Parramatta? I refer to child prostitution, drug taking and youth alcoholism. These kids have become lost in a sea of hopelessness, despair and loneliness, and all this Government does is forecast that it will review the situation of those under 18 years of age. The Government plans to review the education, training and employment of schoolleavers. We know about reviews. We know of the practice of this Government of saying: 'It is only a review'.
How short and how frail does this Government think our memories are? We remember what the Government said in respect of Medibank. We remember the softening up of the community in order to implement its views on Medibank. In the first place the Government told us that Medibank was sacrosanct, that it would tloat some ideas about an alternative proposition and that it would

carry out an economic examination. But then, as we all knew was inevitably the case, down came the hatchet and hundreds of thousands of Australians were disadvantaged. That is the track record of this Government and that is the only measuring stick we have to go on. That is precisely what is happening with those under 18 years of age. The Government talks about a review of the situation of this group. In this seemingly innocuous proposition the Government is merely asking people to examine a possible alternative. On the Government's track record we are perfectly entitled to assume that this is the first step towards removing whatever meagre dole exists at present for these defenceless kids of 16 alld 17 years of age who are already suffering shamefully under this Government. The meagre suppert which they are given has diminished in real terms by over 40 per cent since 1976.
The Government decided that it would get kids back to work by attrition. By not increasing the dole over those five years it thought the kids would go back to work. I ask the Government to tell me where they can go back to work. Has the Government done anything about creating any jobs for them? Not at all. All the Government can do is institute a review to see whether it can cut out the meagre, miserly pittance that it is giving to these kids. There are 200 of these kids on the streets of Parramatta at this stage. At the present rate of progress, in another two years there will be 400 or 500 on the streets. What is the Government to do about them? What is it to do about this whole generation of young Australians who are lost in despair?
I will cut my remarks short because I know that the Government Whip is anxious to conclude this debate. But let me give the House one little quote which is contained right at the end of the Governor-General's Speech and which is the only thing of significance that I can find in the Speech. The Governor-General said:
I now leave you in the faith that Divine Providence will guide your deliberations and further the welfare of the Australian people.
I hope to God he is right because there is no hope of any welfare for the Australian people under this Government. It will be only with the intervention of Divine Providence that there will be any hope for the Australian people.
Question put-
That the amendment (Mr Kent's) be agreed to.

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr J. L. Armitage)

Ayes

44

. Noes

68

Majority
AYES
Beazley, K. C. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, V.E. Jacobi, R.

24
Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. BaumejM.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier. J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Br~ithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman,H.G.P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.D. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Fire,W.C.
Fishe~, P. s. (Teller)
Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Howard, J. W. Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W.

Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Killen,D.J. L1oyd;B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E.
Nixon,P.~.
O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C. W. Viner,R.I. White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. D. C.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1381
Sitting suspended from 6.6 to 8 p.m.
PROPOSED REDUCTIONS WITHIN FEDERAL BUREAUCRACY
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)-I ask leave of the House to move a motion to enable Notice No. 39, General Business, to be called on forthwith. (Quorum/ormed).
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The Minister has sought leave to move a motion. Is leave granted?
Mr Lionel Bowen-In view of the fact that Notice No. 39 is an indictment of the Government, we grant leave.
Leave granted.
Motion (by Mr Fife) agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Order be suspended as would prevent Notice No. 39, General Business, being called on forthwith.
MrGROOM (Braddon) (8.3)-1 move:
That this House-
(1) expresses disappointment that, in 1981, public expenditure is estimated to increase in real terms by 3 per cent, and that receipts will be higher, as a percentage of GDP, than in any previous year, and
(2) is of the opinion that the Governlllent should move quickly to substantially reduce the size and costs of the Federal bureaucracy, so as to allow a cut in personal income tax giving ordinary Australians greater incentive and more discretion over how their earnings are to be spent.
This motion spells out very clearly the greatest single challenge facing this Government at present. The motion contains the ingredients that should distinguish honourable members sitting opposite from those sitting on the Government benches. The alternatives of big or small government, more or less government regulation and increased or reduced levels of taxation separate the Liberal Party and its coalition partner from the Australian Labor Party-a party which obviously needs high levels of taxation and a heavy reliance on powerful interfering government to fulfil its socialist objectives. These differences must be emphasised by the present Government, not just in words but also in policies, decisions and actions.
It is now clear that the economy of this nation has improved significantly since the Fraser Government came to office in 1975. Most of the economic indicators now point to a strengthening of the economy in the early part of the decade of the 1980s. I warn the Government that it must not be complacent. It cannot afford to sit back and relax. It must now resolve to pursue its philosophy with greater vigour and determination than it has shown to date. I criticise the ad hoc nature of so many of the decisions that have been made over

1382 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

recent years. There has been a tendency to respond to pressure from vocal interest groups and to find the most expedient political solution. I believe that this is the wrong approach. Rather than respond to political pressures, the Government needs to re-examine and to understand its basic philosophy, and to respond to the needs of that philosophy. There is no point in a party's being in government unless it has a clear philosophy and some sense of political purpose or goal, and relentlessly and vigorously pursues that philosophy or goal.
I was very pleased to see that the Government, following the last election, established the so called razor gang under the chairmanship of Sir Phillip Lynch, the Minister for Industry and Commerce. That Cabinet committee has had the task of examining the role of all the Commonwealth Government departments and the various organs and agencies of government. What a massive task that has been. The report of the razor gang gives a golden opportunity, perhaps never to be repeated and certainly not to be repeated in the foreseeable future, to loosen the grip of government and to rekindle the free enterprise spirit that can make this country as successful as any in the world. I trust that the Government will not allow itself to be pressured and to be overborne by the officialdom that surrounds it but that it will act with strength and courage to slash the size, the influence and the cost of the Federal bureaucracy. I believe that this is a reasonable option. It can be achieved if we have the courage and the will to do so. If we can get rid of the red tape, free up the system and take away the great burden borne by our taxpayers the sky will be the limit for our economy.
There is no doubt that with our immense energy and mineral resources we have the potential to become the strongest economy in the world. I can understand why what I am saying upsets honourable members opposite who are trying to interject. All we need is a truly free enterprise economy with an abundance of incentive and opportunity.
Mr Hurford-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I ask for your guidance. The honourable member and every qther Liberal member from Tasmania made enormous capital at the last election out of the amount of government spending in their electorates.
Government supporters interjecting--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member will resume his seat.

Mr Hurford-Can you hear me out? I ask your guidance.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I remind honourable members that interjections are out of order. Every honourable member has the right to be heard in silence when called. The honourable member for Adelaide will come quickly to his
point of order.

Mr Hurford-The guidance that I require relates to this aspect: Every Tasmanian Liberal member, including the honourable member for Braddon, made enormous political capital at the last election out of the amount of government spending they alleged had taken place in their own electorates. Is it in order for the honourable member to move, hypocritically, a motion such as
the one he has moved?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order.

Mr GROOM-I will be referring to Tasmania in a moment or two. If we do not cut the size of government, if we do not care about this issue and if we relax, the economic recovery that is clearly now under way will be placed at risk. The fat that undoubtedly surrounds essential and necessary organs of government must be slashed away now before it is too late. If this can be achieved we will save money and will then be able to provide for those in real need of community support. This is an important point. I am certainly not saying that those who are in real need should be ignored. Of course they must not be. It is a fundamental responsibility of government to provide a basic level of support for the less fortunate sections of our community. But if we can get rid of all the regulatory bodies and all the commissions, boards, councils and committees which serve no real purpose other than that of clogging up the system with useless red tape, we will be able to give more help to those who are in genuine need.

Mr Leo McLeay-Well, they got rid of you and that was a good start.

Mr GROOM-Honourable members opposite

have not got rid of me yet. This is not an attack on

public servants. If anything, it is an attack on

government. Governments are responsible for

creating the monster we now live with. Govern-

ments-I use the plural-create the problems in

the system, not the public servants. In this country

we are over-governed. Not only are there too

many public servants. There are too many

politicians.

.

Mr Leo McLeay-Resign.

Mr GROOM-As an example, I refer to Tasmania. In my State we have 49 councils run by

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1383

505 councillors. There are 49 elected wardens of our seven marine boards.
Mr Leo McLeay-You did not say this when--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-1 warn the honourable member for Grayndler.
Mr GROOM-We have 35 members of the House of Assembly, 19 members of Legislative Council, 10 senators and five members of the House of Representatives. That represents a grand total of 623 politicians for a population of 400,000, or one for every 642 Tasmanians. That is one reason why we need so much help in Tasmania. There is enormous pressure on governments to expand their operations and to spread their tentacles further and further. From my own ministerial experience I know that Ministers are expected by their colleagues, by commentators and by those close to government, to produce initiatives. They are expected to churn out new ideas, new programs, new legislation, and departments and authorities are judged in the same way. They must all justify their own existence. So we have this sausage machine with a broken stop button that cannot be switched off. Glossy reports, legislation, rules and regulations, new committees and other bodies, new programs and policies are oozing out all over the place. It is far easier to create some new, expensive initiative than it is .to abolish some activity of government or rescind a piece of legislation. Once a single seed is germinated the weed quickly spreads.
I invite honourable members to consider the history of the Industrial Relations Bureau, the Prices Justification Tribunal and even the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, to name a few. That is probably burning my bridges. Ministers are defenders of their own departments and advocates for the programs they administer. I believe that these attitudes are all wrong, and attitudes are a large part of the problem with which we are now confronted. They must change if we are to get the size of government down. It must be understood that a Minister's first priority is to the government and to the community at large and that the responsibility to defend the interests of his department, if it exists at all, is secondary. There are signs that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Government are determined to do something about this major problem. If the razor gang lives up to its name government will be cut back and there will be scope for substantial tax relief.
Mr Scott-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. A previous interpretation was given

from the Chair regarding the razor gang. I ask that the razor gang be named.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- There is no point of order. I call the honourable member for Braddon.
Mr GROOM-I think all honourable members know what is meant by the term 'razor gang'. The present tax burden is far too great. It retards growth, inhibits enterprise and destroys the opportunity for individuals to decide their own destiny. The tax system certainly fails to give proper support to the family unit. The legitimate family is the foundation of community life.
Mr Good luck-Are your wife and five children listening tonight?
Mr GROOM-They are, as I am sure are the wife and five daughters of the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck). The legitimate family is the foundation of community life and should be given every possible encouragement. Much more concern must be shown for families. Families have been neglected especially the ordinary mother who stays at home working hard for the sake of her children. She cannot strike. She does not get dirt money, compensation or long service leave. It is time that governments-I use the plural again---cforgot about some of the trendy social issues and directed more of their efforts to protecting and encouraging the Australian family, the housewife, the mother, the father and the children. We should not discourage Australians from having larger families. This country can support a much larger population and I believe that it makes sense for Australians to help build our population to its optimum level. I would like to see people encouraged, by the provision of financial support, to have more children. I ask the Government to give the benefit of any cut in the size and cost of government to Australian families. The Government should examine all of its economic and social policies which have an impact on the family and carefully study the benefits or disadvantages that they bring to family life. I have in mind such aspects as taxation policies, rebates and deductions--
Mr Leo McLeay-You have developed a conscience all of a sudden.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Braddon will resume his seat. The honourable member for Grayndler will remain silent. He has been warned. I am reluctant to take further action because it is quite some time since an honourable member has been removed from the chamber but I give the honourable

1384 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

member for Grayndler his final warning and direct him to resume his seat. I call the honourable member for Braddon.
Mr GROOM-I have in mind such things as taxation policies, rebates and deductions, family allowances, social security pensions and allowances, education assistance, child care and employment schemes and policies.
In addition, the Family Law Act should again be reviewed to determine its impact on family life. I doubt that it has been as beneficial as its original protagonists suggested it would be. Out of this examination, should be produced a national family policy which is directed towards: Firstly, providing adequate economic support for the family unit, especially while the family is supporting dependent children; secondly, encouraging child birth and larger families; thirdly, supporting the family unit during marital problems or other crises; fourthly, facilitating the role of the woman at home; and fifthly, placing special emphasis on the provision of adequate housing.
One of the Government's first priorities should be the provision of additional tax relief for the single income family, especially the couple with dependent children. I would like to see the dependent spouse rebate substantially increased. Alternatives that have been mentioned by various people include increased family allowances and income splitting for taxationpurposes. If we managed to cut away wasteful expenditure, this would not wreck the Budget. The effect of such a step would be twofold. Firstly, it would provide much needed tax relief for the family battling along with children to support on a modest income. Secondly, because the tax relief would be means tested, it would also encourage married women to leave the work force and so provide increased job opportunities for young females. Presently, we have an absurd situation in which, in some cases, the mother is working while the daughter remains at home receiving unemployment benefit and doing the housework that her mother would normally have done. I do not deny that married women should have the opportunity to work but I also say that if they wish to remain at home to look after the home and the children they should be provided with suitable economic opportunities. Many married women want to work, and like to work, but I believe that many do so only because their economic circumstances require it of them. There is no doubt that the movement of females, especially married women, into the work force has had a major impact on the unemployment figures and has reduced job opportunities for young people. The startling fact is that one in four of the Australian work force is a

married woman compared with one in 14 only a generation ago. If we can give greater support to the family unit and more incentive for the wife to remain at home, if she wishes, we could create a very large bank of jobs for our young people.

The young single person in regular work, the two-income family and, I suggest, even the average pensioner does not have as much trouble making ends meet as the single income family with young children trying to exist on a low or modest income. (Quorum formed). I repeat the point I was making that the young single person in regular work, the two-income family and, I suggest, even the average pensioner does not have as much trouble making ends meet as the single income family with young children trying to exist on a low or modest income.

People are not only upset by the amount of tax they pay but also clearly disillusioned with the present tax structure. I must express some disappointment that the Government has already announced that it will not now consider alternative methods of tax collection. The reason given is the possible effect on the consumer price index of any new indirect tax. It is a matter of disappointment that somehow the Commonwealth Statistician could not be persuaded to alter the nature of the CPI basket so that the CPI does not increase because of indirect taxes where offsetting cuts in personal tax occur. This may not be easy to achieve, but it should be possible. Professor Russell Mathews, when addressing the Australian Institute of Political Science Summer School in January oflast year, stated:

A tax system will only remain-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Motion (by Mr Wilson) put.

That the honourable member for Braddon be granted an extension oftime.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

58

Noes

40

Majority

18

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Boufchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M.
Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey,M.H.

AYES

Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Killen,D.J. L1oyd,B.
Lusher, s. A.
MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller)

Reductions Within Federal.Bureaucracy

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1385

AYES
. Burr,M.A. : Cadman, A. G. i Cameron, Donald
Cameron, Ewen Carlton, I. I. Chapman, H. G. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dobie, I. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. ! Fife,W.C. 'I Fisher,P. S.
Giles, G. O'H. I Good luck, B. I.
Groom,R.I. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.I. Hodges, I. C. (Teller)

McMahon, Sir William
McVeigh, D. T. Moore,I.C.
Newman, K. E. Porter, I. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, I. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. I. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R.1. ",hite, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, I. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel
Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Child,I. Cross,M.D. Darling, E. E.
Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.I. Everingham, D. N. Free,R.V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. I. L.
Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (TeUer) Hurford, C. I.

Iacobi,R.
Ienkins, H. A. Iohnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry
Jones, Charles Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E.
McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les
Mildren, I. B. Milton,P. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, I. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, I. L. UreD, T. West,s. I. WiIlis,R.
Young,M.I.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr GROOM-I thank the House. As Professor Russell Mathews said when addressing the Australian Institute of Political Science's Summer School in January 1980:

A tax system will only remain administratively feasible and politically acceptable if it meets the requirements of certainty and social justice. Neither of these conditions now holds.

The problem is that personal income tax has become largely a tax on wage and salary earners as other income groups, at both the upper and lower ends of the income scale, take steps to avoid or evade tax, I hope that the Government will take a further look at our tax structure to see whether changes might be made in the foreseeable future. As I said before, the work of Sir Phillip Lynch and the razor gang has given the Government a golden opportunity to be true to its philosophy and slash away the fat of government. This can be done without causing any harm to those people in the community in genuine need of help and support. When this is done it will give added momentum to the economic revival now under way. Here is an apportunity for the Government to avoid the wasteful expenditure of taxpayers' money, an opportunity to provide much needed tax relief,and

an opportunity, in particular to give encourage-

ment and support to Australian families. The

Government must show that it has the courage to

make tough decisions so vital to the future well-

being of this nation. I ask honourable members to

show where they stand on lower taxes and smaller

government by supporting this motion.

.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-Is the motion seconded?

Mr Good luck-I have great pleasure in seconding the motion. I reserve my right to speak.

Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (8.32)-The .motion now before the House is a reflection of the fact that the Government has no legislation to bring before the House and so it is turning it into a talk shop. It is interesting to note that this is a precursor to the report of the razor gang, which was referred to in the speech of the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom), who rnoved the motion. It is very interesting indeed that this motion has been moved and seconded by honourable members from Tasmania-the most subsidised State and the State which would have the most to lose if the Government were really to hack into government expenditure. The two honourable members are selling their own areas down the drain by supporting a move for hacking away at public expenditure. If it is done in a fair and reasonable way, they have more to suffer than any other area of Australia. So the honourable members are selling out their electorates by moving and seconding this motion.

The razor gang's report is of importance because, as I have said,.it will come before the House in a few weeks and maybe even sooner than that.
The razor gang consists of a group of Cabinet Ministers. It started off at about half a dozen of them and now includes the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony). The committee was given the task-after the election, of course; the matter was never mentioned before the election-of examining the means of reducing public expenditure. Apparently this body has been meeting quite often over the last few months. There have been various leaks and hints as to the recommendations which it is likely to give to the Government and which, presumably, will be adopted by the Government, particularly since the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister are now part of that group of Ministers.

The kinds of measures which we can expect are apparently the abolition of various regulatory bodies, such as the Prices Justification Tribunal and the Trade Practices Commission; the abolition of various government advisory bodies;

1386 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

further cuts in Public Service staff numbers by further reductions in the staff ceilings; the sale of government enterprises-we have seen already some moves towards the selling of Trans-Australia Airlines; and the transfer of various activities or services to the States-the prime example there appears to be in the area-of health services with the Jamison report certainly giving some basis for that concern. A wide variety of expenditure cuts by this Government is possible; one could even say that it is likely. The motion moved tonight by the honourable member for Braddon sets the scene for such action.
The impact of previous cutbacks is something that should be looked at and borne ih mind in considering further possible cutbacks in government expenditure. We have already seen five years of Fraser Government in which there have been continuing attempts to reduce the level of public expenditure. So we should look back at this time and see what impact those reductions in public expenditure have had. If we do that we will see that they have been substantial. They have involved the abolition of various programs introduced by the Labor Government, especially in the welfare field and the urban and regional development field. They have involved a reduction in the level of expenditure in many areas, especially in capital expenditure areas related to the social infrastructure, such as public housing, public transport, roads, schools and so on. Indeed, a frightening figure to contemplate is that the real level of government capital expenditure in 1979-80 was 10 per cent less than it was in the last year of the Labor Government. A 10 per cent reduction in the real level of government capital expenditure has been brought about by these cutbacks. That cutback in capital expenditure is concentrated in the areas of social infrastructure.
There have been reductions in the number of public servants by the arbitrary-I stress, arbitrary-imposition of staff ceilings. Since 1975 the number of public servants under staff ceilings has been reduced by over 10,000, according to a speech made by the Prime Minister a week or two ago. These reductions have not occurred without cost. They have had a substantial impact on people in need. In the time available I cannot do more than point to a.few examples. Let me give a couple of examples. The allocation this year for aged persons' accommodation is only 36 per cent in real terms of what it was in 1975-76. Let us look at welfare housing-a very important area. The allocation this year is only 47 per cent in real terms of what it was in the last year of the Labor Government. The allocation this year for Aboriginal health services is only 57 per cent of the 1975

figure in real terms. So in these areas, which are all

areas of great importance to people in need, there

have been dramatic cutbacks.

.,

It is sickening that these areas were given in the Governor-General's address to Parliament last year as examples of the Government's caring for the people. It is a hell of a way to care for people to cut back so drastically in areas of undeniable need! There is no doubt that there have been cutbacks in government expenditure which have adversely affected people in real need. More generally, cutbacks in expenditure on the capital stock of our cities, our essential services and our transport systems have most effect on those on lower incomes, that is, those most in need. There is no doubt that the reductions in the staff ceilings have clearly caused increased inefficiency in various areas of the Public Service. For example, there have been various protest bans by Public Service unions as a result of the fact that inad-
equate staff are available to. perform required functions. An example of that is the ban on the collection of various Commonwealth Employment Service statistics in Victoria for up to six months.

The Auditor-General's report, which came out only recently, contains numerous examples of situations where shortages of staff and other resources have led to inefficiencies in the Public Service. The staff shortages were said by the Auditor-General to have created problems in the Department of Finance, the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs, the Department of Administrative Services, the Department of Primary Industry, the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Department of Education, the Department of Health, the Department of Foreign Affairs and the. Department of Communications. The Auditor-General says that staff ceilings are causing problems in each of those areas by not enabling enough staff to be there to perform the allocated tasks of their departments. Slashing the number of public servants rather than promoting efficiency is quite clearly promoting in efficiency. If one establishes staff ceilings in a totally arbitrary way, if one in no way relates the reduction in staff to some change in the functions of a department, it is to be expected that one will get that kind of result. Perhaps this attack on public servants is to be expected from a Government that is severely prejudiced against the public sector as this Government most certainly is. Thus, the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has expressed his admiration for the thoughts and writing of a former United States Treasurer, William Simon. Apparently the Treasurer has read the book A Time for

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1387

Truth, written by William Simon in 1978.. In that book he states:

Bureaucrats should be assumed to be noxious, authoritariim parasites on society, with a tendency to augment their own size and power and to cultivate a parasitIcal clientele in all classes of society.

With those kinds of sentiments being approved by

the Treasurerof this nation it is not surprising

that we have this outright attack on the public

sector, and on public servants in particular. It is

interesting to note that along with this attack on

the public sector the-Fraser Government has

failed, nevertheless, to reduce the size of the pub-

lic sector. The total public expenditure as a pro-

portion of the gross.domestic product shows that

the size of the public sector has not fallen under

this Government despite all these attacks on it. It

is strange but true and one finds it surprising in the

light of what has happened that Malcolm Fraser

presides over--

.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member will refer to the
Prime Minister as such.

Mr WILLIS-The current Prime Minister presides over a larger public sector than the previous Prime Minister. That is the fact. The public sector outlay as a percentage of GDP in 1975-76
was 38 per cent, last year it was 38.1 per cent and the estimate on the Budget figures for this year is 38.5 per cent. During the three years of Labor the
figure was 35.6 per cent but in the five years of the present Government it has been 38.6 per cent. Clearly, the public sector is bigger under the
Fraser Government. That is partly because Commonwealth cuts in government expenditure have forced the States to increase their expenditures, so there has not been a total reduction in government expenditure to the extent one would have expected in some areas, and partly because cuts in government expenditure have reduced the overall rate of economic growth. With gross domestic product growth reduced, the government expenditure as a proportion of GDPdoes not decline as much as it would if there were a faster rate of growth of GDP. Honourable members should note the importance of government expenditure in regard to inducing economic growth. As mentioned in the motion put by the honourable member for Braddon, Government expenditure is estimated to rise by 3 per cent in real terms in 1981, after an el(:ction year when the Government allowed itself this aberration for political purposes. Professor Neville, of the University of New South Wales, has estimated that that 3 per cent real increase in public expenditure this year will add 1.5 per cent to the rate of growth of the non-farm gross product.

So, we have a 1.5 per cent increase in the growth rate attributable to this 3 per cent growth in public expenditure, which the honourable member for Braddon condemns. Ironically, presumably the Government will vote along with him tonight and will virtually condemn its own Budget. That will be a curious exercise. I look forward to seeing honourable members opposite all line up to vote on a motion that appears to condemn their own Budget, to deplore the 3 per cent increase in real government expenditure. More importantly, this is likely to add 1.5 per cent to non-farm gross product this year, according to Professor Neville, who is a real authority in these areas. Yet, the Government says: 'Isn't it great, our policies are working; there is an increased rate of economic growth'. As Professor Neville says, that is largely attributable to this increase in real public expenditure which the Government now deprecates and deplores. There is no logic at all for its position. Members of the Government want it both ways. They want to rejoice in the increased economic growth and deplore the increase in public expenditure which is partly the reason for that increased rate of economic growth.
Another point I wish to make relates to the neoconservative anti-public sector ethic which lies behind this motion, this Government's economic policy and the policies of conservative governments all around the world. They are based on several alleged truths, the first of which is that the reduction of the public sector will increase the level of human freedom or liberty. This is held to be because public services are not decided by the market, but by government fiat, and the lower public sector will enable lower taxes and so more freedom to taxpayers to spend their own money. The mere fact that public goods are not provided by the market does not mean that they are less necessary than private goods. Indeed, it is quite the contrary. We can ask which is more necessary, schools or television sets. One is provided by the public sector and one by the private sector. Also, public goods and services are absolutely essential to the poor who otherwise would have to do without. The wealthy also can always afford to pay, so the abolition or a cutback in government expenditure is of less concern to the wealthy since they can afford to pay and, anyway, in many cases they do not use services such as state schools or public transport.
The argument of the freedom to spend one's own money is usually put in terms of the taxpayer, but what about the welfare recipients of all sorts and their dependants? What about their freedom which is associated with the income

1388 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

which they get from government welfare payments? That freedom and liberty which they get from that income is infinitely more important to them than some marginal change in taxation is to the welfare and liberty of a taxpayer. Therefore, it is extremely important to bear in mind that we are talking about liberty and freedom. We have to take into account the freedom and liberty of welfare recipients who are utterly dependent on the Government for the freedom which the minimal amount of income which this Government gives to them provides. If we move to take that away, as we have done in regard to unemployment benefits, the liberty and freedom of the unemployed will be reduced drastically. I dare the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) to deny that point because it is absolutely undeniable that that is the case. It is crucial in terms of this pseudo argument which is put about liberty and freedom. The liberty and freedom of the people who depend on public expenditure is also tremendously important~indeed, it is more important than the liberty and freedom argument which is related to tax changes.
The second point I wish to make~ unfortunately time is against me~is that the public sector is held to be bad because it reduces the market sector, which is held to be good, and by excessive regulation the public sector interferes with the free operation of the market. All this depends on a totally unreal view of the market, as though it is some centuries old market instead of the market of today which is not featured by a vast number of small units but instead is dominated by large companies, with oligopoly and monopoly being rampant, particularly in relation to transnational corporations. That fact alone undermines the whole monetary thesis which lies behind this Government's policies. In conclusion, I move:
That all words after 'House' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
(1) noting (a) the damaging impact of Government cutbacks in public services on economic growth, the social infrastructure and on people in need, and (b) the inefficiences created in the Public Service by the Government's imposition of severe staff ceilings;
(2) condemns the damaging economic policies which have brought about these results and calls for the adoption of policies which will provide an adequate level of public services and staff and reallocation of public expenditure so as to ensure justice and equity in the use of public funds'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~Is the motion seconded?
Mr Hurford~I second the motion and reserve my right to speak.
Mr HYDE (Moore) (8.48)~I support the motion of the honourable member for Braddon

(Mr Groom). In doing so, I remind the House of the terms of that original motion. It states:
That this House-
(1) expresses disappointment that, in 1981, public expenditureis estimated to increase in real terms by 3 per cent, and that receipts will be higher, as a percentage-of GDP, than in any previo~s.year, and
(2) is bfthe opinion that the Government should move quickly to substantially reduce the size and costs of the Federal bureaucracy, so as to allow a cut in personal income tax giving ordinary Australians greater incentive and more discretion over how their earnings are to be spent.
I am surprised to see that motion spoken to by the honourable member for Braddon. I support almost every word that the honourable member said in speaking to the motion. It is a new honourable member for Braddon, as he recently experienced a very considerable conversion, one th&t might be compared~so complete is it-with that of St Paul on the road to Damascus.
I read from the speech of the honourable member for Braddon, made only a few days ago. He said:
. . . I do not generally favour subsidies. As a true liberal I do not generally favour subsidies but there are always exceptions to that general rule. I have looked carefully at this decision of the Government-
I interpose that the decision was to subsidise Tasmania with $Sm~~
I believe in a critical way, and I have decided that it is right, because it is in the interest of the people that there should be a subsidy in this case. I made the same decision as far as Mount Lyell was concerned.
I point out that Mount Lyell is in the honourable member's electorate. However, I would not wish to belittle the conversion. I am very glad that, at long last, the honourable member for Braddon has seen the light that, in fact, one cannot have reduced taxes without reduced expenditure. Reduced expenditure will affect people like the honourable member for Braddon.
I want to make some observations about the circumstances Australia is experiencing at the time this motion is being debated, firstly, in relation to large government. The last Federal Budget was, in real terms, the biggest in Australia's history. In the past five years there have been more regulating ordinances and very few have been repealed. At this juncture, let me welcome the Government's decisions in relation to the airlines and to express the hope fervently that it will see them through so that ultimately, having had all the appropriate inquiries and reaching a point where we have an appropriately informed Australian public, we can move to a deregulated airline system. In six years the Government has sold only one major enterprise.

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1389

As far as taxation is concerned, the last Federal Budget provided for the largest ever tax take of any Budget either in real terms or as a percentage . of gross domestic product which, I suggest, makes nonsense of the recent words of the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis). The deficit is relevant to this motion since it alwayssflihds between taxes and expenditure. The Commonwealth deficit has been reduced during the time of the Fraser Government to $1 ,566m. This has been achieved partly by transferring the borrowing requirement to semi-government authorities such as Telecom Australia and to State and local government authorities. Nonetheless, there have been some real cuts. This has partly been achieved by increases in taxation, particularly in the oil levy. The limits in growth in the public sector have been entirely with the Commonwealth public sector so that the total public sector deficit, that is, the States, the Commonwealth and local government, is only a marginally smaller proportion-of gross domestic product than it was in 1975. Clearly, the discipline of constraint or restraint has not been evenly shared between the arms of government.
I wish to say something about the fiscal problem that Australia must consider very seriously tonight and face up to within the next few years. Oil revenues depend on the world price and are, therefore, unpredictable. The proportion of Australian production that will be classified as old oil and, therefore, be subject to the well head levy that yields considerable revenues to the Commonwealth coffers, will decrease. Under present rules, it is likely that real oil revenues have already peaked and by 1984 will be in a state of substantial decline. The income tax base is in difficulties. It is becoming increasingly difficult in spite of considerable efforts on the part of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and his Department to collect the taxes that are duly and properly levied. I assure honourable members that it has not been for want of trying on the part of the Government that some of these taxes have not been collected. It is likely that, because of demographic changes, social welfare payments will continue to grow in real terms but will not growing rapidly until about the turn of the century. Commitments already made will ensure that defence expenditure continues to grow.
I draw the attention of the House to a matter that ought to be quite obvious, but is too often ignored in this place; that is, that the laws of arithmetic are not within the control of the Government. It is a sad fact that those laws are given and no amount of political rhetoric or the passage of legislation will remove them. We might as well

face up to budgeting accepting the fact that they exist and will continue to exist. In other words, revenues must be raised either by taxes or by borrowing to cover expenditure and it is not possible to spend more and tax less without more borrowings. It is not possible to pretend that that simple fundamental which most of us learnt in second grade has suddenly disappeared because we have all become members of parliament. There are other arms of government that seem to have forgotten those simple laws of arithmetic. There are members of Parliament, the member for Braddon sometimes would be one of them--
Mr McLean-Yes, and the Premiers.
Mr HYDE-Yes, and the Premiers who seem to complain about high levels of tax and then, for one reason or another, demand increasing levels of expenditure. The Government is awake to these circumstances. It understands the philosophical base of liberalism that says that decisions, as far as is practicable, should be made by private individuals on their own behalf because they are the best judge of their own welfare. I would like to quote two short excerpts from the Governor General's Speech. It reads:
My Government will give particular attention toencouraging the growth of the private sector and to increasing the freedom of choice of taxpayers in spending their own incomes. It will be an important policy objective to continue to restrain public expenditure so as to provide scope for reducing the burden of taxation.
That is simple.
Mr Shack-A good speech.
Mr HYDE-The Governor-General's Speech is a very good one. It is very important that at the beginning of this Parliament the intentions of the Government should have been put down in such clear terms, so that we, the members of Parliament, might understand them and the Australian public might understand them. The Governor General's Speech says elsewhere:
My Government will continue to ensure that Common-' wealth activities are concentrated in areas of greatest need-
Bearing that undertaking in mind, the Government has instituted a committee dubbed the razor gang.
Mr McLean-The 5 o'clock shadow.
Mr HYDE-It is known as the razor gang, with respect to the honourable member for Perth. The committee will inquire into public expenditure in order to reduce it, so that having done that we may reduce taxes and Budget deficits. The Government is faced with a choice between axing and taxing.
Mr McLean-Choose rhetoric.

1390 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

Mr HYDE-It seems that the Government has chosen-picking up the words of the honourable member for Perth as far as rhetoric is concerned-the axe option. I have listened to some of the words of the honourable member for Gellibrand and to this extent I agree with him, that there is no point in suggesting that one can make big savings by cutting a few civil servants off the Government payroll. That cannot yield big money.
Mr Shack-Cut functions.
Mr HYDE-The Government might consider whether the staff ceilings are as appropriate as cash limits in order to induce efficiency within departments. The important thing is--:-as the honourable member for Tangney has just interjected-that we must cut functions. Programs have to go.
Mr Milton-Especially welfare programs.
Mr HYDE-We should means test welfare programs so that the benefits go to people who need them and so that we can afford to pay enough to those in need. We should not waste the resources by throwing them to those who do not need them. In the time that I have left to me I will list a few programs that might well be cut. I do so to demonstrate that it is easily possible to find programs. The first is the Isolated Patients Travel and Accommodation Assistance Scheme, which is proving a nightmare to administer and is not working.
Mr Howe-What about the family allowance?
Mr HYDE-The family allowance should be means tested. That would yield an amount of $400m or $500m. We should raise the allowance and means test it. The unemployment benefit and the special benefit should also be means tested. Why should a person on a high annual income such as a cray fisherman, a shearer or a cane cutter, draw the unemployment benefit for a small portion of the year? Those are resources that are now not available to people who are genuinely poor. Home savings grants amount to $100m. Those home savings grants are directing capital formation in a country that forms more capital than the average Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development country, away from resource developments-so much so that some say we have a foreign ownership problem. It does not make economic sense. There is an amount of $100m from the Budget involved there. A minor one is the Australian Capital Territory sewerage and garbage grant. There is an amount of $5m for that. Why the devil should not the people in the Australian Capital Territory pay for the disposal

of their own sewage and garbage? Next is multicultural broadcasting, which is a program that does not seem to be wanted by its supposed beneficiaries. That is an amount of $21.2m.
Mr Ghodluck-What about Tasmania? How much did you give to Tasmania?
Mr HYDE-The honourable member wants all the Tasmanian ones; right. The Tasmanian freight equalisation scheme is $30m. It is hardly fair to a potato grower in Victoria who finds that the price of Tasmanian potatoes undercuts him in the Melbourne market because of this scheme. It hardly makes economic sense and it is a waste of $30m. To quote an example where I am affected, I mention the fertiliser bounty of $51m. I advise honourable members that I am a wheat grower and I use a lot of fertiliser. There is no way that I should be subsidised to do so. It is a waste of public resources, and it is money that could be used for cutting taxes. The next is the export expansion grants in the sum of $200m. That amount tends to go to beef producers who are selling to quotaed markets, so not one additional tonne of beef can be sold. It also goes to cray fishermen, fishing from a controlled resource so that not one additional crayfish can be taken as a result of it. The petroleum freight subsidy. of $123m flies completely in the face of the fuel parity pricing policy and causes extra petroleum to be used. That does not make sense. It is easy to find programs that could be cut. What it needs is political leadership and political will.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (9.3)-How much hypocrisy there is on the other side of the House is indicated when one sees the kind of exchange that has taken place between the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) and the honourable member for Moore (£vir Hyde). Here is a Government which claims that it has a philosophy written down in the Governor-General's Speech. Then the honourable member for Braddon comes in-it has taken him a while to get around to finally understanding what the Governor-General was on about-and shows that he has forgotten the pork barrelling that he was supporting only last week. It is quite extraordinary.
The proposition of the honourable member for Moore-I want to talk about it in terms of the philosophy that he has been espousing-is essentially one that would propose a reduction in taxes and a commensurate reduction in public expenditure. This will suppose~ly-at least in terms.of the Governor-Gerieral's Speech-increase initiative and help to boost the economy by enabling the private sector to inv~t in the most profitable areas of economiyactivity. Of course this kind of

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1391

thinking is quite naive when one considers the reality of monopoly capital in the present age. The notion of an open economy is essentially a matter of arguing that justice is in the interests of the stronger. Few conservatives would admit that that is a proposition that they are about But that indeed is what they really are about.
Why then cannot we reduce public expenditure? It is essentially because the free market system will not look after the people who cannot look after themselves or who in one way or another are the victims of that system. The extraordinary growth of the welfare state not only in Australia but also in every developed society is the product of an ever-growing list of needs that are not catered for within the capitalist system proper. They are not looked after because they are inherently unprofitable activities.
Tonight I take the example of health. There is no doubt that, health expenditure is expanding in all Western countries. It is expanding more rapidly in countries which have retained private medicine or fee-for-service with a major role. The reasons for this expansion are complex, but in part they flow from the fact that the type of society we have created, or the type of society which is typified by Western industrial capitalist societies, is conducive, I would argue, to ill health. We have not sought to organise a society in a way which will maximise people's sense of health and well-being. Thus the causes of ill health are now deeply imbedded within the structure of society. I emphasise that point because the Government is spending a great deal of money on public relations campaigns in relation to health. I believe that those campaigns are a quite useless waste of public expenditure. This expenditure will do nothing to improve public health because health is essentially a matter of the way that society functions, the structure of society and the values which exist in that society. It is not a matter that can be influenced one way or the other by public relations campaigns.
There are several examples of the reasons why we have a great deal of ill health and therefore very large health bills in our society. I take for example the emphasis placed in our society on private mobility. This results, of course, not only in thQusands of motor car deaths each year but also in countless injuries. It adds up to a massive health bill simply in terms of the physical accidents which result. But as well as the physical accidents that occur, in association with the value that we place on private mobility there is also the associated psychic stress. So a system which is organised in a way which is primarily determined to achieve private profits does not result in a

rational transport system and it has associated with it enormous externalities which result in a quite massive health bill.
So, what is true of our methods of mobility or of our transport system is also true of the mode of production or the methods that we use to produce goods and services. Just as we do not choose the most rational methods of transport, so we choose, forms and methods of production which are often inherently dangerous to people's health. This has been recognised in the level of industrial accidents and the massive sums of compensation which must be paid to enable people who have suffered serious industrial injuries to survive economically. This results in a massive cost which governments indirectly or directly are involved in meeting.
Much more is lost in terms of economic income-no-one from the other side of the House spoke about this-productivity and the costs associated with health. For example, last year as a result of industrial accidents, more was lost than in the last 10 or 15 years as a result of industrial strikes which is something that people on the other side of the House have an obsession about. Again one can take the example of indirect costs associated with industry a,nd which, in a sense, are costs which are generated by the way that the private sector operates its business or by the way that industry operates in the private sector. But the effects of that activity, in terms of people's health, are generated within the community at large. I take as an example the problems of quite widespread pollution which may affect the Western suburbs of Melbourne and Sydney. The costs of that pollution are borne by the public sector which pays the health bills occasioned by respiratory diseases, cancer or whatever. That bill is then paid by the public sector, but that cost has really been generated by the way that the private sector organises its economic activity.
I turn to another area which is associated with what I have just been alluding to, namely, the area of environmental health. One of the major problems of health-it is a problem not just simply of last year but of the twentieth century-is associated with the increase in the incidence of cancer, which has become a disease of the twentieth century. A great deal is said about the problem of cancer. A great deal of money is spent on it. Governments contribute enormous sums to research into or treatment of cancer as a disease. It is now being generally seen, I think, that up to 80 per cent or 90 per cent of cancers are formed or caused by environmental factors. It is also argued in the United States by the National Institute for Occupational Safety in Health-NIOSH-that up to 40 per cent of all cancers are induced by

1392 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

exposure to carcinogenic substances in a work place environment. In the post-war period this country and the United States have been through a revolution in the production of chemicallybased pollution within the work situation and more generally within the environment. Despite that, we have taken no account of those costs in terms of nationallegislation.
We have no regulatory mechanisms. We have no equivalent of NIOSH. We have no equivalent of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration in the United States. We have not even begun the process of regulation in relation to environmental and occupational health in this country. That means that the costs associated with these diseases~1 refer particularly to the costs associated with the disease of cancer~both in terms of human suffering and in terms of the health bill are borne by the public sector even though those costs are very often generated in terms of private sector activity; indeed, this is so in the overwhelming majority of cases. So, when a Government supporter introduces a motion such as the one before us which says that we ought to be cutting public expenditure, he is really saying that we ought not to be taking account of t1J.e consequences of private sector activity and the results of that activity in terms of public sector expenditure and welfare services.
I believe that Western society is facing what might be termed a fiscal crisis of the state. More and more tasks are being transferred to the state simply because control within the private capitalist system would destroy the illusion of profitability~that is, the private capitalist system cannot operate, the monopoly capital cannot operate, at this point in its history without the state. Thus, one gets the situation where the public sector increasingly bears the costs while the private sector gets the profits. This situation is, of course, intolerable.
Furthermore, we are moving to multiply the complexity of society so that people have less and less control over their lives. The growth of massive corporations which are often subject to the control of a single individual or at best an incestuous board requires countervailing power, which is provided in the form of a strong state and state regulations. But, of course, there are contradiction involved in this. People on this side of the House are well aware of that. Those contradictions cannot be dealt with unless people admit that we are dealing with a situation in which corporate power is increasingly concentrated. It is simply not good enough to go back and talk about eighteenth century economics as if there has not

been a revolution, as if there has not been a concentration of economic power, as if multinationals do not exist, as if multinationals are not fundamentally dedicated to the maximisation of profits and are not dedicated at all to minimising the costs which they transfer to the community.
There is no doubt whatsoever in my mind that what this Government represents is a coalition between the Government itself, the state and the monopoly sector. That is fundamentally the problem. If the Government were really committed to free enterprise, we could perhaps understand the honourable member for Moore and perhaps even the honourable member for Braddon. But this Government is not committed to private enterprise; it is committed to maintaining corporate power and, indeed, forms the closest of possible alliances with corporate power. We can see that in relation to the policies of this Government whereby it seeks not to enforce trade practices legislation which might introduce more competition and introduce more sense of the marketplace but in fact moves, through the razor gang, to eliminate mechanisms such as the Trade Practices Commission which might introduce a degree of competition in society.
It is not true to say that honourable members on this side of the House are not concerned with maximising freedom, that they are not concerned with increasing the range of choices of the private individual. We are fundamentally committed to those things, but we believe that the only way that people can get freedom is if the society is prepared to take on in the strongest possible way entrenched corporate power and privilege. If the honourable member for Moore were interested in taking on corporate capital~1 do not believe the honourable member is too interested in that; he is interested in coming in and giving us lectures but he is not really interested in taking on the major corporations of this country~we might be able to take him seriously. If his party were concerned about that we might be able to take it seriously. But the reality of his party is that it is opposed to regulations because it knows that that is what the corporate sector wants. It knows that the corporate sector would rather be gone with regulations because what regulations mean in this country, as regulations mean in the United States, is that there is at least some countervailing power and there is someone working to see that some of the costs that are generated by major companiesmany of them are investing in this country in a very big way and we are not counting the costsare taken account of and, if possible, are put back into the private sector. I conclude by pointing out--

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1393 .

Mr DEPU)'Y SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time
has expired.
Mr SAINSBURY (Eden-Monaro) (9.18)
-First, I want to confess that I am an unashamed capitalist. That is in contradistinction to the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe), who is an unashamed socialist. We may as well get that straight. I think we had better get a few other things straight. The period when economic power was far more concentrated in Australia was in the 1800s when we inherited a system that was work ing its way through into a more democratic system. We have now at last reached a stage where, through our democratic system, we have the means of freeing up markets and allowing people greater freedom. Individuals in our society, given that governments will allow them to, can have economic freedom and therefore personal free dom because of the basic level of affluence that spreads right across the economy. When did Australia run into trouble in recent history? We ran into trouble during the Depression in the 1930s. We ran into trouble for one reason only. It was because the then government wanted to interfere and regulate and not to let a nasty coinci dence of events work itself through. If honourable members opposite do not believe that; why do they not read what Jack Lang had to say? After all, he was a member of the Australian Labor Party.
We ran into another nasty set of events in the 1970s when basically a similar thing happened with one additional impingement by government. Not only did governments interfere more and more and regulate more and more in the early 1970s but also governments grew more and more. Tonight we are talking basically about the size of government. Governments, through their size, tend to interfere and tend to regulate. If I get a chance I propose to talk briefly about those two aspects. We are here to talk about the size of government. Generally, by that we mean the amount of money that the Government takes from us and then in its great wisdom located here in Canberra, it decides who will get that money and how it will be spent. Of course, the Government knows better than we do about how we should allocate our resources. The honourable member for Batman talked about market failure. Market failure will always occur in this country when we have a market system. The public should not think for one minute that the onle area in which market failure occurs is in private enterprise. It occurs in the government. Have honourable members not heard about government corporations making massive losses? Is not

that market failure? Have not governments had programs with corporations that have had difficulties and have not been able to cope as well as other people who can make better free choices? The honourable member for Batman talked about all these wonderful concepts and the victims of market systems. In systems, such as the true social system in Russia, everybody is a victim of the system.
Mr Howe-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point
of order. It has been imputed by the present speaker that I suggested that the Soviet Union represented some kind of ideal socialist state. Let me make jt perfectly clear that I am a socialist. I do not regard the Soviet Union as the model to which I referred.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! There is no point of order. If the
honourable member wishes to claim that he .has been misrepresented, he can do so at the appropri ate time.
Mr SAINSBURY-I would just like to point
out that Russia calls itself a socialist system. I take its word for that The honourable member for Batman talked about the concept of big capital monopoly. I do not quite understand that. All I can say is that in those countries where the Government is biggest, the biggest capital mon opoly applies. This Government is the biggest capital monopoliser in this country or in any other country. The bigger the government the bigger that capital monopoly will be. In fact, of all these nasty companies which the honourable member for Batman would like to tear down-1 noticed earlier in the debate today that he was not too anxious to tear down companies which had to face some pretty severe facts on the Rundle shale oil deposit even though one of them was a multinational-it is always the companies that provide the jobs for people in this country. He ought to realise that in our sort of system the companies are controlled by myriad people who go along and invest in shares. Whether they do that through a stockbroker-! must say that not enough people do that in Australia-whether they do it through a savings bank account as a loan to a company, or whether they do it through a deposit with an insurance company which in turn will invest in another company, does not
matter. (Quorum formed). I hope that the few
additional Labor members who have come into the House will stay and.listen as they might learn something. I was talking about the size of government. I will leave aside for a moment what was said by the honourable member for Batman. At present the size of government, which I imagine is

1394 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

best measured by the size of government expenditures for reasons that are fairly obvious, is round about 28 per cent of Australia's gross domestic product.
The honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) suggested, firstly, that it has been increasing too quickly, although he referred to the revenue side more than the expenditure side; and, he also suggested that we ought to look for means of cutting it back. At a level of 28 per cent this means that we leave-by my arithmetic-only 72 per cent for other people to control. We have to ask ourselves, without looking at the efficiency with which that money will be spent by government, whether already we are crowding out the more productive sectors of the economy. Sh6uld we bring it down to 25 per cent, 20 per cent or 15 per cent? Perhaps in all fairness we should go the Swedish way and have it at a level of 53 per cent. I completely agree with what the honourable member for Braddon has had to say. The 28 per cent level is far enough.
In the past few years there has been an alarming coincidence between the increase in government expenditures and the increase in unemployment, the size of the deficit, interest rates, and a number of other economic factors. It may be that they are not all interconnected but it just seems to me that a level of 28 per cent is far enough. I put this proposition to the honourable member for Braddon: One of the options that we have if we are not going to have a discontinuous arrangement, a very severe cutting back which can throw a number of things out of kilter, is for us to say, that we will hold the real money level at the same level. By that process, over a period of increased productivity that that very decision will help, we will have a cutback in the percentage of expenditures going to government. On my assessment an amount of 28 per cent going to government spending, and also, on the other side, going to government through taxes or through government borrowings is going far enough. I hope that we can get that figure down.
The crowding out effect has been rather severe in recent years. We have notices that people, who want access to capital that has been traditionally available, have found that it is just not there at times such as the situation we are facing at present when the Opposition is saying that Australians ought. to invest more. If the Government were taking 28 per cent and leaving 72 per cent for other people we would be in a worse position in relation to finding the money with which to invest in our resources in Australia than we would be if the Government spent, say, 25 per cent and left other people to spend 75 per cent.

When one talks about the size of government, in what way could Government better employ our money, apart from doing basic things such as providing a defence force and a social security system that looks after the really needy people? What else can government do? Can government supply information required in a system such as ours more efficiently than that supplied by the private sector? Can government provide economies of scale that other sectors sometimes are looking for in order to be able to produce cheaper goods? Can government really provide a higher level of management or better managers than the fellow who grows up in a small business, who battles his way
through crises and who, at the end of the day, finds that he has something to offer; the practical man, the practical tradesman or the practical professional man? Can the Government really provide management services as well as that? Can the Government encourage better effort?
Does the government work as hard as the man in the work force? Can the government really guarantee that the men and women it employs will work as hard as people in the private sector who have different incentives and different bonus schemes? Let us consider an organisation such as Telecom Australia which, at a management level, is really trying to crack down on inefficiency. Do people in the constituencies of honourable members ever complain that the people working for Telecom do not seem to work as hard as they do? Maybe honourable members opposite live in a different part of the world. Do the people ever complain to honourable members opposite that people working on the councils do not work as hard as they should? They complain to me. I contend that the fellow who has a small business or the fellow with a big business who wants to make a profit so that he can feed his kids or pay a dividend so that other people can feed their kids will work a little harder and use more ingenuity. When the Government takes over our resources and says that it can manage them it reduces the basic efficiency of the country. If honourable members want to see that statement borne out-I say this without any reflection on the honourable member for Batman-they should look at the Soviet Union.
Let us say that the level of 28 per cent is far enough. In real terms we are talking about an expenditure of $36 billion this year. I admit that there are areas in which there could be a reallocation of priorities. This was raised earlier by the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde). It is essential that we as a government reallocate expenditure on social security to those in greatest need. There are a number of groups in our

Reduction~ Within Federal Bureaucracy

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1395

community-people come to talk to me about this-to which, frankly, not enough of the social welfare dollar is going. At the same time, people who do not require benefits are picking them up. We should look not only at the size of government but also at a reallocation of government expenditure. In that sense the razor gang is doing a very good job.
Let us also consider a reallocation of government priorities in considering how the $36 billion should be spent. We should not prop up industries that do not deserve to survive. We should allow other industries to burgeon. There are plenty of industries in this country that will survive far better if the Government reallocates its priorities, even within its present spending program. I point out that we are not suggesting, as the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) contended, a reallocation towards the wealthy. Whenever the Government cutstaxes members of the Opposition always say, 'How much will Malcolm Fraser get?', or something like that. It is absolutely ridiculous. The general direction of the tax cuts which this Government has broughr about has been towards people on lower incomes. The record is there. Of course, some people already pay a disproportionate amount of tax. (Extension of time granted). It is very gracious of the Opposition to allow me an extension of time. It shows that the spirit of tolerance which the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) mentioned during a condolence motion the other day really does exist. If I am speaking and the Opposition wants to listen there must be tolerance.
I have dealt very briefly with the financial aspects of the size of government. I could say a lot more. It would probably be appropriate, especially so soon after an election when the people of Australia clearly told the Government that they wanted less money dragged out of their pockets, to talk about specific programs, as the honourable member for Moore did, but I do not propose to do that. I prefer to mention briefly other areas where the very size of government helps to foul up the economy. The first is basic interference in the market. We have had a tendency in this country to allow governments to get involved in corporations that could be better run by private enterprise. Sometimes it appears that this has happened for legitimate reasons. When Trans-Australia Airlines was set up in the late 1940s it was seen as a short term measure-that is exactly what the then Prime Minister said-to try to provide for the Australian people a service that may not have been offered otherwise. But where does TAA fit into the market at the moment? Is it there merely because the Government wants to

perpetuate a governmemnt instrumentality or is it there genuinely so that the consumers of Australia can have cheaper air fares and more services? As the next few months go by I think the Australian people will be clearly convinced that the continuing existence of TAA militants against their best interests. Is Qantas Airways Ltd interfering in the market? Perhaps it is not. Perhaps if we did not have Qantas we would not ha'{e any other international carrier and our sacred international obligations would be seen to be abrogated. I doubt it. I suspect that if Qantas were not run by the Government other people in Australia would apply for licences to fly people overseas. Perhaps then people would fly on time as distinct from the situation in which a number of us were caught recently.
Other instances of interference in the market place are numerous. Australia Post should justify its action in keeping people from providing basic courier services. The argument involves economies of scale. If people in the community want to employ others to fill in gaps and provide services which are slightly more innovative than those which already exist, why do we not let them? Why do we let the Government monopolise any area? The honourable member for Batman talked about monopolies. Why let the Government monopolise areas when individuals are quite willing to do the jobs? As I said, they would probably do them with more effort, better management and a better flow of innovation. There are a number of areas in which the Government interferes in the market system and which it ought to get out of. A further point relating to the size of government concerns government regulation. This impinges on the basic phi1c-1phy of the Government parties.
Mr Howe-Let us hear about it.
Mr SAINSBURY-If the honourable member wants to hear about it I will send him a copy of a document which came out in 1975.
Mr N. A. Brown-Our policy speech.
Mr SAINSBURy-It was very much our policy speech and our philosophy. It is not governments or government monopolies that matter; it is individuals in our society. If we do not believe in that philosophy we will inexorably move in the direction of monopolies. Regulations interfere with individuals and, at the same time, they reduce freedom. I will be very pleased when the Prices Justification Tribunal is disbanded, I hope in the next couple of months. I will be very pleased when the Government interferes less than it does now in the interest rate and exchange rate structures. I will be very pleased when the Federal

1396 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

Government ceases overlapping in areas which the States, by the Constitution of this country, properly administer. I will be very pleased-this is a very topical issue-when the Government stops interfering in specific areas such as air fares and the pricing of commodity exports when the prices are being determined on the true world market.

A large number of Government members agree

with all the things I have said. Thankfully, that is

the way we are heading. The Government makes

regulations only to guarantee freedoms and not to

take them away. The basis of such Acts as the

Trade Practices Act fits in very closely with my

ideals. I will not run away from those ideals. The

motion moved by the honourable member for

Braddon, which I commend, referred to two

things. These are the concepts that matter. The

first is greater incentive. In our system that means

greater production and, therefore, greater

affluence and a better life for those in need. Sec-

ondly, the motion called for more discretion.

Those words, by their very definition, mean

greater freedom. Tonight we are talking about less

government in order-to bring about better pro-

duction and greater freedom.

.

Mrs CHILD (Henty) (9.40)-1 support the amendment that has been moved by my colleague, the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis), and reject the motion of the restriction of public expenditure contained in the motion moved by the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom). I find it extraordinary that such a motion should have been put to the House by an honourable member from Tasmania. The honourable member for Braddon will know as well as I do that if the Federal Government moves quickly to reduce substantially the size and cost of the federal bureaucracy, the first State that will suffer will be Tasmania. If this is what the honourable member for Braddon wants for Tasmania, so be it, but it is not what we on-this side seek for Tasmanians or for anyone else who livesin Australia.

It is actually interesting to see this motion brought on for debate today, following the promise yesterday by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to seek to cut taxes before the next election-not that many people have much faith any more in the Prime Minister's promises. Experience has taught us not to become too excited in that regard. This debate is linked also with the address given yesterday by the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mi Wilson), in which he urged families to do more for themselves and not to rely on government. The message coming through loud and clear is that this Government is about to opt out of many areas of responsibility,

most likely the welfare areas, in which it has always been a reluctant partner. The message from the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment about 'allowing ordinary Australians greater incentive and more direction over how their earnings are,to be spent' has a very hollow ring when one considers how many people are dependent on unemployment benefit, with little or no hope of gaining employment in the foreseeable future and very little earnings to have any control over at all.
The tens of thousands of Australians, including Tasmanians, who live well below the poverty line, will get no joy from the terms of this motion. I would imagine that the pensioners and the unemployed in Tasmania will wonder just who the honourable member for Braddon is representing if his Government intends to pull back on public spending. The Prime Minister's remarks were very enlightening. He said:
Small and limited governmenf bears no relationship to mean, ungenerous government. In social security, for example, the Government remains absolutely committed to making sure that support and assistance will be available to those who need it.
They are fine words but are not followed by fine deeds. We are all familiar with the distress that has been caused over past months by the application of extremely stdct guidelines by the Department of Social Security in assessing eligibility for invalid pensions. The number of invalid pensions granted in the last 12 months has dropped considerably and, as well, many people who have received the invalid pension have been knocked off it.
Mr Good luck-Not in my electorate.
Mrs CHILD-The honourable member must get special treatment over there, with his pork barrelling. Parliament has frequently been told that there has been no change in the pension guidelines. Nevertheless, mostmembers of Parliament-except the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck)-most welfare workers, the Australian Council of Social Service, the Combined Pensioners' Association of Australia and the Australian Quadriplegic Association, have provided concrete evidence that changes have been made and have directly disadvantaged people who are dependent on social security payments. A backlog of 1,000 invalid pension appeals is still in the pipeline and, with the lack of staff due to this Government's policy of small government and economy, Social Security Appeals Tribunals will take more than a year to catch up. The waiting compounds the anxiety of invalid pensioners and makes a mockery of the Prime Minister's words, 'My Government gives to the elderly, the sick and the disabled'.

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1397

If public expenditure is further reduced, as is

advocated by the honourable member for Brad-

don, the elderly, the sick and the disabled will be

the first to suffer, and those who are in Tasmania

will suffer along with the rest of us on the main-

land. If this is what the honourable meinber is

advocating, so be it. For some days this House has

been denuded of legislation to debate while the

Prime Minister and his advisers have been trying

to make up their minds on what they intend to do

about health, unemployment benefits and various

other areas of policy.

.

This motion is a kite flying exercise by the Government to try the carrot-before-the-donkey trick in the form of reduced taxes, coupled with a veiled insinuation that we would all have more money if those who lived on social security and unemployment benefit did more to help themselves. This is a great platform that the conservatives have and one of which we should beware. They divide the poor into the genuine and the loafers. They do not say it as openly as that, but the implication is quite clear. The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment stated that if health users, apart from the poor and needy, were to pay more, governments would pay .less. The Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) says that the user should pay. Who is to identify the genuine poor and needy? If this Government's strict guidelines are used, not many will qualify.

Again, what a message to give forth: 'Reduce the taxes' says the Prime Minister. The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment then says: 'But you'll pay more for health care'. It is just another Hobson's choice. The Government is saying, 'We will give you a tax rebate on one hand while we rip you off on the other.' Tasmanians beware; if this motion is passed, you will be paying more for health care and for education. The Government appears certain to pass back to the States all responsibility for health care, and that will spell disaster for State public hospitals and community health centres in particular. It will not just spell disaster for those in my electorate but also for those in the electorates of Braddon and Franklin. Tasmania does not have the capacity to promote its own public hospitals and health centres. Perhaps they will take the advice of some Government Ministers and tell the States to raise their own taxes. Perhaps then there will be a health tax in Tasmania too or double income taxation. After all, the States have been given the right to raise their own taxes.

The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment did his bit in his address in Canberra yeSterday by floating the idea of a common pension age

for men and women. No doubt he had read the report in the recommendation of the Australian Industries Development Association that women should not qualify for a pension until they reach the age of 65 years. This is supposed to save the Government $400m over four years. What it will do to the women; nobody says or cares. No doubt this idea will appeal to the razor gang. I doubt that it will appeal to the women of Tasmania who are approaching the age of 60 years. It would be fair and equal to have a common pensionable age but, bearing in mind the state of unemployment in this country, it would be better to make the common age 60 years and to give men a go-give them a chance to retire early and some of the young unemployed a chance to get 'a job.
I wish to refer now to the proposal of the Government to restrict the unemployment benefit paid to people under the age of 18 years. Apparently Government supporters believe that such people are best cared for by their families. We on this side of the chamber believe that the unemployed are already carrying an unjust share of the burden of this Government's policies. The Government has blamed everyone in sight for unemployment. First it blamed the trade unions and then the Labor Government, six years after it went out of office. The families of the unemployed have been attacked for not supporting their children. The education system has been attacked for not educating those who are unemployed but, in the main, the unemployed themselves have been criticised for not going out and finding a job. Nobody seems to notice that there are not enough jobs to go round.
Now we get the warning, which I imagine will be followed by legislation-if the Government ever brings any legislation into this House againthat the out-of-work 16 and 17 year-olds are not only to be blamed for their own plight but also are to be punished for being unable to find work by no longer being paid unemployment benefit. I remind the honourable member for Braddon that if he wants to save public money and reduce public spending, the unemployed in Tasmania-in his electorate and other electorates-will suffer along with the rest of us. This Government is not a job creator. It isa job eliminator. It is about to take a carving knife to its own Public Service. It is taking a carving knife to just about every area of welfare.
Mr Good luck-Three years away did not help you.
Mrs CHILD-It is some six years since this Government came to office and it has taken it a long time to get anywhere. The Government is lurching through its business. It is not really

1398 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

governing at all. Honourable members from Tasmania are quite dishonest when they promote this type of debate. They always vote with the Government, or absent themselves from the House when the vote is taken. They have humbugged their way through five years in this House. They support the inequitable policies of this Government. They are members of the Government; they support the Government; they take their seats with it and they vote with it.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (9.50)-I rise to support the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) who has been completely misunderstood tonight. The motion which was moved by the honourable member states in part:
. . . so as to allow a cut in personal income tax giving ordinary Australians greater incentive and more discretion over how their earnings are to be spent.
It was quite simple. As a result of trying to help the ordinary people of Australia, many red herrings have been brought forward, particularly by the Opposition, denigrating the Tasmanian members and seeking to create fear in the minds of the Tasmanian people.
If I had one criticism of my friend, it would be that I think he brought this debate on for discussion at an inopportune time. For some. unknown reason, there seems to be a resentment against Tasmanian members.l would like to go back in history. We, the five Tasmanian Liberal members, were all elected as members of this Parliament in 1975. We were elected as a result of certain promises. Tonight 1 heard my colleague, the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde), mention that we should abolish the freight equalisation subsidy scheme because it is affecting the potato growers of Victoria.
Mr Groom-It was a promise.
Mr GOODLUCK-It was a promise. All of the other matters on which we have endeavoured to fight together for Tasmania were as a result of promises. They were the reasons that we were elected. Do honourable members agree?
Mr Groom-That's right.
Mr GOODLUCK-They were the reasons. The honourable member for Braddon was even criticised for what happened at Mount Lyell. Not one cent went from this Government to Mount Lyell. The Opposition is trying to denigrate us. It is trying to create in the minds of people that we pork barrel, that we do this and we do that. All we have done has been to work together to enable the people of Tasmania to survive. What would have happened if the Mount Lyell company had closed? There would have been terrible dislocation in that area.

Mr Groom-Four thousand people.
Mr GOODLUCK-It would have affected 4,000 people. It is incredible that a lot of people in this House do not seem to realise that we have 400,000 people in Tasmania. In Australia there are 14 million plus. Tasmania represents 3 per cent of the total population of Australia. Those people do not seem to want us to have the opportunity to compete on their markets. The freight equalisation subsidy scheme is one. They love us as a State. They love to come to our State for holidays, et cetera, but they do not seem to want us. This Government, the Government of which I am a member, likes us to be five good members of the Government. It sends us a telegram every time we are re-elected stating that it is great to have us back but, when we come here, we seem to get spurned to a certain degree by the National Country Party. The honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher), who is a very good member and a nice fellow, had the audacity to say in this House that we should be sold to New Zealand. He took--
Mr West-I raise a point of order. Mr Deputy Speaker, I draw your attention to the terms of notice of motion No. 39 moved by the honourable member for Braddon. I have perused paragraphs (1) and (2) carefully and, for the life of me, I cannot find in the remarks of the honourable member for Franklin any reference to the motion. I think that, if the Government wishes to bring this matter on for discussion, Government speakers should at least remain relevant to the motion.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-I understand the wording of the motion. I am interpreting what the honourable member for Franklin is saying as being covered by paragraph (2) which states:
is of the opinion that the Government should move quickly to substantially reduce the size and costs of the Federal bureaucracy . . .
I interpret his remarks as being in opposition to that.
Mr Armitage-I raise a point of order. Mr Deputy Speaker, am I to assume that the honourable member is referring to the Public Service in Tasmania which has to be cut in size?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-No. In this case we are talking about the Federal bureaucracy. There is no substance in the point of order.
Mr GOODLUCK-The Opposition is again raising red herrings. It is trying to denigrate Tasmanian members because it is frightened of us. The Opposition put up all of its big guns in Tasmania to try, to get rid of us. It put up all the welleducated types, the trendies, the lefties and the

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1399

socialists, et cetera. The Opposition tried everything to get rid of us and failed. Tonight we have seen a concerted effort by certain members of the Opposition to denigrate us, by saying that we come up here to pork-barrel for Tasmania. Yet, on the other hand, the Opposition is trying to say that we do not understand the ordinary average people of Australia. All my friend from Braddon was saying was that there should be a reduction in taxation to help the ordinary people. All of the things which we have tried to do for Tasmania-we may have achieved certain things -have been brought up as red herrings. Of course, I agree that the main thing in this world and for Australia is to direct every available fund to the family, the needy. If we build on the family situation, we will have a better country in which to live. Is that not the honourable member's proposition?
Mr Groom-Yes. Mr GOODLUCK-Honourable members opposite are trying to say that because Tasmania might receive $Sm in the form of an air subsidy or another sum as a freight equalisation subsidy we are trying to go against the Tasmanian people. It is completely sheer hypocrisy. Mr Lusher-What about the Empress of Tasmania? Mr GOODLUCK-The honourable member has mentioned the Empress of Tasmania. Mr Lusher-About $2m or $3m there. Mr GOODLUCK-I a'sk the honourable member: What about all the farming areas, the subsidies and the fuel equalisation scheme? Mr Lusher-What about apple and pear stabilisation schemes? Mr GOODLUCK-Does he not have apples and pears, potatoes and other subsidised produce in his electorate? We were elected on promises in the same way as the honourable member for Hume who is trying to interject. We have stuck to those promises. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hume will restrain himself from interjecting. He will have an opportunity to speak later. Mr GOODLUCK-The Speaker of the House of Representatives, Sir Billy Snedden, was one of the architects for a proposal for Tasmania. The proposal was made in the form of a blueprint for the future. We were elected on that basis. We have endeavoured to stick rigidly to the promises that we gave the people in 1975. I did not win my seat by 15.2 per cent because I went around saying that I did not care for the qrdinary Tasmanians.

We won on the basis that we would work for those ideals such as freight equalisation, assistance regarding air fares for Tasmania--
Mr Duffy-Subsidies. Mr GOODLUCK-Subsidies for the apples in order to return the apple industry to a state of survival after it was ruined by the Whitlam Government. I do not like getting political and being nasty to the Opposition; but the Labor Government brought Tasmania to a standstill before we were elected. We became members of this Parliament in order to put Tasmania back on the map. That is what we have been trying to do; but we get criticised, not only by the Opposition, unfortunately, but also even from our own side. Mr Groom-We get sick of it. Mr GOODLUCK-We do get a bit sick of it. It is quite unfair and unnecessary that, in a debate tonight regarding the reduction of taxation in order to help the ordinary people of Australia, we are denigrated. Mr Armitage-How are you going-apples? Mr GOODLUCK-We get denigrated because of it. It is quite unfair and quite unnecessary. Somebody mentioned apples. At least the apple industry is surviving once again. At least the people in the Huon and other areas in Tasmania have been given an opportunity to employ and to survive. That is what we set out to do originally, together, all of us. Mr Lusher-Go and kiss him. Mr GOODLUCK-I will not kiss the honourable member; that is for sure. The honourable member for Hume mentioned the Empress of Australia. Mr West-What about speaking to the motion for a change? Mr GOODLUCK-I have been talking to the motion ever since I commenced my remarks. Mr West-Are you speaking for or against it? Mr GOODLUCK-I support the motion that was brought forward in all sincerity by my friend the honourable member for Braddon. I thought the honourable member's speech tonight was quite courageous. He put forward a point of view in lieu of some of the controversy and antagonism that has been directed against Tasmanians all this week. He st09d up to everybody because some of them were saying that a state of hypocrisy existed. We were alleged to have asked for SSm. We did not ask for the SSm; we received it because people realised what the situation was. Surely the people who have a little common sense realise that Tasmania is isolated. Air travel is the only way in

1400 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

which one can get from point A to point B. One cannot get to Tasmania by motor car, canoe or by swimming. We need the Empress of Tasmania and the Empress of Australia to get from point A to point B. The honourable member for Hume wanted Tasmania to support the Government. He wanted five members up here to assist the Government to fight for the things that we want, such as the free enterprise system, and not a socialist system. He wants us as much as we want him. That is the reason we should stay together and not criticise each other when we achieve something which will be beneficial to the people of Tasmania. That is all we wanted to do from the outset. We do not want all this criticism that we receive each time we win or gain something.
The Opposition will not get a vote in Tasmania. There was a school group from Tasmania in the public galleries tonight. Those students heard the remarks about Tasmanians. They heard all the other things that were said about Tasmania. Honourable members opposite say those things consistently. Somebody once said that there are more votes in the town of Newcastle than there are in the whole of Tasmania. Those things are never forgotten.
For those reasons, I support the honourable member for Braddon. I hope that the Government will move consistently towards the aim of reducing taxation to assist the families of Australia and, I hope, keep some of the women home to look after their children. Then we might not need to direct some of the money that is directed at child welfare clinics, other clinics and so forth. If we can do that, the fabric of the family will be stronger and Australia will be a better place to live in. I agree with the honourable member for Braddon. We will fight for that aim.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifley) (lO.1)-We have just heard one of the greatest exhibitions of male chauvinism that we have ever heard from a member of this Parliament. I never dreamed that we would get back to the situation of 20 or 30 years ago and have a member of this House-the honourable member for Franklin, Mr Good luck-advocating that a women's place is still in the kitchen.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member will refer to another honourable member by his electorate.
Mr ARMITAGE-The honourable member dealt with that very matter and I assume he was relevant to the motion, so I am dealing with his comments. I would also say that I never dreamed

that I would hear two Tasmanian members talking against the interests of Tasmania. I will explain that point. I refer to the segment on Tasmania on the Four Corners program which was shown over the weekend. I want to make it clear that I do not agree' with the assumptions reached in the Four Corners program that Tasmania is pampered. I believe that Tasmania has very special problems and they have to be looked into. Tasmania has to be assisted. But I agree completely with one fact which was brought out in that debate. I do so because I have had the matter verified. Charles Woolley-one might not like him but he is corrrect on this point-stated that 40 per cent of the Tasmanian work force is on the government payroll. Tonight two Tasmanian members-the honourable member for Braddon, Mr Groom, and the honourable member for Franklin, Mr Good luck-came into this Parliament, and what did they do? Mr Groom moved a motion, which was seconded by Mr 'Good luck.
Mr DEPUTY SPEA,KER-Order! The honourable member for Chifley surprises me as he is a most efficient Deputy Chairman of Committees.
Mr ARMITAGE-I should have said the honourable member for Braddon and the honourable member for Franklin. Paragraph (2) of the motion of the honourable member for Braddon reads:
is of the opinion that the Government should move quickly to substantially reduce the size and costs of the Federal bureaucracy, so as to allow a cut in personal income tax giving ordinary Australians greater incentive and more discretion over how their earnings are to be spent.
I do not agree with the second part, but I violently disagree with the first part, as would the 40 percent of the Tasmanian work force on the government payroll. Those people would disagree with the statement that the Government should move quickly to reduce substantially the size and costs of the Federal bureaucracy. They are the people whom the honourable members are trying to put out of work. They are the people who will create a further pool of unemployed. They are the people who, once they are put out of work, will no longer go to the shop and the shop will no longer go to the factory or the warehouse. This will create further unemployment, not only in the public sector but also in the private sector. The people of Tasmania should be ashamed of those two honourable members. The people of Tasmania have been hoodwinked by them since 1975. All the honourable member for Franklin did tonight was argue about the fight he is having with the National Country Party. The split between the

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1401

National Country Party-and the Liberal Party in I will not go into that matter in great detail. Any-

Tasmania is all he spoke about tonight.

body can read the article in today's Australian

Financial Review. It is there to be seen. The facts

Obviously neither Representative Groom nor Representative Good luck understands that the

are that what this Government has been doing to staff ceilings in the Public Service--

public sector of the economy is the greatest purMr Tuckey-Tell us about Friedman.

chaser of goods and services from the private sector and that when one reduces the size of the public sector one creates unemployment not only in the public sector but also in the private sector.

Mr ARMITAGE-The honourable member is only a baby in this place; he should wait until he learns a little. What this Government has been doing so far as staff ceilings are concerned has de-

stroyed the efficiency of the Public Service. I will

Mr Scott-Simple economics.

quote a senior public servant. Naturally, I will not

name the man. He retired at the first opportunity

Mr ARMITAGE-As the honourable member for Hindmarsh has just said, it is simple economics, but I would not expect those two honourable members to understand that. I must sympathise with the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in his dismissal of the honourable member for Braddon from the Ministry. Obviously this occurred because of the honourable member's lack of understanding of these simple economic principles. We should always remember that when the public sector no longer goes to the factory this

- he got-at the age of 60 about six months agobecause he was fed up with the game. He was a top man in the Public Service. The Christmas before last, he said: 'John, it will take many years to restore the efficiency of the Public Service because of the Government's policies on staff ceilings'. He
explained it very simply. First of all, there is a 2 per cent cut, so they all work a bit harder. Then there is another cut and they continue to work harder. Then there is another and another, and at that point they lose hope.

means less employment in the private sector as Mr Scott-And morale.

government is the biggest buyer fro.m the private sector. This is a principle which has not been learned.

Mr ARMITAGE-As the honourable member for Hindmarsh says, they also lose morale. They then decide that they will not kill themselves in

their jobs but will finally settle back and do what-

Added to that, the honourable members opever they possibly can. The result is that the

posite should remember that even the infamous efficiency of the Public Service, and its advice to

Milton Friedman, the arch monetarist of the past this Government, is impaired. In particular, ser-

who is in Canberra at the moment, the man who vice to the public is impaired. For example, Mr

sold his monetarist policies to the United States Deputy Speaker, you will know as well as I do

Government, the United Kingdom Government that the reason we have been through the most

and this Government, is now, as we will see from boring session of Parliament that we have seen for

his comments in the Press only this morning, trymany a day is that the Government, or Cabinet,

ing to get away from those monetarist policies and has been making decisions. It is not the parliamen-

into the middle ground so that he will not be tary draftsmen who cannot bring the Bills before

blamed for the economic wreckage that he has the House, but the Public Service which, because

caused, the massive unemployment, the worldof the staff ceilings, does not have the efficiency

wide recession, and the world-wide misery that he any longer to do the necessary work. I say

has created. Milton Friedman, the arch unequivocally that this motion-moved by a Tas-

monetarist-the proposition before us tonight is manian, of all people--

another monetarist proposition-is trying to get away from those policies and back into the middle ground. He realises in terms of history that he will be blamed for many of these policies. I shall quote from the Australian Financial Review-surely not a radical organisation-of today. The head-
line in that newspaper states 'P.S. Ceilings Blamed for Losses: Govt misses out'. The article states:

Mr West-Incredible.
Mr ARMITAGE-It is quite incredible. It will do a great deal of damage, if it is carried and implemented, to the efficiency of the Public Service, to its capacity to advise the Government and to its capacity to serve the public. In particular, it will do irreparable damage to Tasmania, which owes a great deal of its very good standard of life to the Public Service in that State. It is a very

Federal Public Service staff ceilings have been identified in the latest Auditor-General's report as the cause of millions of dollars of lost Government revenue.

beautiful island-one of the most beautiful places I have known-which has very special problems. It needs sympathy and assistance and yet here this

1402 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

member of the Government has moved a motion which will affect 40 per cent of the Tasmanian work force which earns its living directly as members of the bureaucracy, not to mention the private sector of the economy in ~a~mania which would be decimated by such a decISIon. As I have said, those two honourable members from Tasmania should be indicted by all the people of Tasmania. I believe that the people of that isle will realise that they have been hoodwinked by these two completely disreputable members of this Parliament.
Mr Good luck-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to raise a point of order. I ask for a withdrawal of that remark.
Mr ARMITAGE-I withdraw and say 'insincere members of this Parliament'.
Mr Good luck-I raise a point of order. Mr Deputy Speaker, that is reflecting on a man's character and I ask for a withdrawal of that, too.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Perhaps the honourable member for Chifley might make another attempt at withdrawing.
Mr ARMITAGE-If I have to make anotl1er attempt, because of my great respect for you, Mr Deputy Speaker, I will do so. I just make this point, that I believe they have been hoodwinked because of-can I say, 'insincerity'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member knows the answer to that question.
Mr ARMITAGE-I think everybody knows what I mean, and I withdraw.
Mr Good luck-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Chifley has withdrawn.
Mr LUSHER (Hume) (1O.13)-ln an address to the South Australian State Council of the Liberal Party of Australia on 5 December last year, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said:
As its name implies, ours is a liberal Government holding liberal principles. It believes, that is, that to the maximum extent compatible with a cohesive and stable society, people should be free to make their own decisions concerning their lives and the disposal of their own resources. It believes that society is healthier and the lives of people happier when responsibility, enterprise and power are spread widely through the community, rather than concentrated in one or a few places. That is the ideal to be aimed for and any deviation from it requires special justification.
He went on to say:
The Government is concerned to maximise the degree to which people have control over their own lives and their own resources, to ensure that it is their choices which are decisive, not those of politicians, of bureaucrats or union officials or corporations.

To this end the Government is concerned to limit the role and reduce the power of the State, and as part of that to restrain taxes and to contain public expenditure. The State must remain the servant, not the master, of the Australian people.
I am here tonight to support wholeheartedly that statement by the Prime Minister. I want to say a few words in support of exactly that proposition. One of the major problems that the federalism policy of this Government faces is that we increased the amount of money going to the States but maintained a share of the funding of the functions at a Commonwealth level. The only way that federalism can work effectively is if the total function and the total funding is transferred to the States. There is a large number of areas in which this should be done. Education, health, housing and transport are probably the most significant.

The Department of Education should be

abolished. Those functions which refer to the

Australian Capital Territory should be transfer-

red to the Australian Capital Territory. The

universities commission should be transferred to

the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabi-

net or some other department, and I can see no

reason why the rest of the functions of the De-

partment of Education could not betransferred to

the States. The Department of Health has a

number of important functions, including quaran-

tine, which obviously must be maintained at a

Commonwealth level. However, the Department

of Health certainly carries on a large range of

functions which are duplications of activities car-

ried on by the States. Perhaps the main area of

that involves the hospital cost sharing and benefits

scheme and a range of similar functions that are

duplications of State activities, They should be re-

moved from Commonwealth control and passed

back to the States as soon as possible. The com-

munity health program and the school dental

scheme should similarly be passed back to the

States. The pharmaceutical benefits scheme

should be thoroughly overhauled so that benefits

are not. paid on anything other than essential

drugs.

..

The Department of Housing and Construction, as such, should be abolished. The entire welfare housing program and the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement should be returned to the States. The Department of Construction, probably in the form that existed in years gone by, should be re-established as a separate department with responsibility for those technical and practical matters which now come under the responsibility of the existing Department of Housing and Construction. Theprincipal expenditure items are the welfare housing program, which involves $140m, the' rental housing program which costs

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1403

$llOm and the Home Savings Grants Scheme which has cost $100m. There is no necessity for any of these policies to be carried out by the Federal Government; all should be either abolished or returned to the States. This would represent a saving of almost $350m in one department. The Defence Service Homes Scheme also cost over $40m. This Department employs over 11,000 people of whom almost 5,000 are described as being industrial or day labour. It seems absurd that the Commonwealth needs to maintain a day labour force of this size. These people should be replaced by contractors when the need arises.
Obviously the civil aviation and sea transport functions of the Department of Transport must be maintained by the Commonwealth; however, there is no need for the level of duplication between the Commonwealth and the States in the area of road administration and funding. We should refer to the old Department of Civil Aviation concept and take account of our constitutional responsibilities in relation to shipping. In regard to roads, I would favour a system where national highways are funded totally by the Commonwealth, State roads are funded by State governments and local government roads are funded by local governments, with an amount equivalent to what is presently being spent on local roads added to their share of revenue, which would involve an addition to the 2 per cent of income tax revenue that they now get.
The Department of Veterans' Affairs employs approximately 13,000 people. By comparison, the Department of Social Security employs approximately the same number. The extent of the bureaucracy in the Department of Veterans' Affairs must be horrific. If we compare either the amount of money administered or the number of clients of each department, then the productivity of the Department of Social Security makes the productivity of the Department of VeteraIJs' Affairs seem horrible. The Department of Veterans' Affairs ought to be abolished and its functions taken over by the Department of Social Security. The claim of the Returned Services League that we should have a separate department with its own Minister must be considered but if the choice is between better administration and higher taxes, then the RSL should be made to believe that higher taxes are not an option.
The Department of Employment and Youth Affairs is a unique department in that it administers virtually no legislation. The only Act of any importance administered by that Department is the Commonwealth Employment Service Act. This Department would appear to be a classic example of bureaucracy gone mad. I am not

aware of any other function of the Department, apart from the Commonwealth Employment Service, that has made any impact on this government. The export expansion grants program should be phased out as soon as possible. It is the sort of program which should be introduced once every 10 or 15 years for a limited period simply to draw attention to the fact that export opportunities are available and to encourage people to take advantage of them. It should not be a long term ongoing program. It has achieved its impact over the last couple of years. It is also obvious that Australia is not in export difficulties. Although we should try to maximise our exports, the reality is that we have no necessity at this stage to encourage exports by this sort of expenditure.
Similar comments apply to the investment allowance. It should certainly not be extended beyond 1982 when it is to terminate. The Independent and Multicultural Broadcasting Corporation should be placed on a strict performance and results basis. If it does not obtain a certain percentage of the listening audience by a particular date, it should be scrapped. The whole social security system should be overhauled to ensure that payments are made on a basis of need. The principle of social security payments should be to assist those who, for reasons beyond their own control, are unable to care for themselves. All social security benefits should be subject to a means test and the family allowance should be included in this category. The children's services program which includes pre-schools and costs something over $36m per annum should be returned to the States.
Mr Deputy Speaker, if one removes a function or a program from a department, Parkinson's law will ensure that little real saving is made. If one abolishes a whole department, the saving is total. The impact on the Australian Public Service and on Australia as a whole would be remarkable if the Government were prepared to bite the bullet and abolish three or four or more of the existing departments of state. Obviously essential functions would be transferred to other remaining departments, but the bulk of the activities of the departments concerned would be transferred to the States. The Government needs to take a bold step such as this if it is ever to reverse the everencroaching spread of bureaucracy. If the public can be educated to the extent that it is made to understand that new taxes or higher taxes can be avoided if administrative changes aremade, I have no doubt that the sorts of propositions I am speaking about can be handled successfully. It is simply a matter of choice which must be put to the community.

1404 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Reductions Within Federal Bureaucracy

The Constitution makes interesting reading. Part V, which lists the powers of the Federal Parliament, shows that the main functions intended for the Federal Government include trade, taxation, post and telecommunications, defence, quarantine, currency, social security, immigration, foreign affairs, property and conciliation and arbitration. There are obviously a range of other smaller and less important matters but the principal powers given to the Federal Parliament are those which have been listed. It is interesting that some of. the major spending departments within the Commonwealth today-for instance, housing and education-do not even rate a mention in the Constitution. Apart from the quarantine power, health comes into the same category.
I do not want to take up any more time than is absolutely necessary. I want to be on record in this Parliament-particularly in a period which is close to the time when the Cabinet Review of Commonwealth Functions Committee will be making a report to the Government-as stating that I believe firm steps and firm actions need to be taken. For my part, I say that there should be more power given to the razor gang. May its efforts be successful and may we get some fundamental changes made to the bureaucracy of Australia as the result of the razor gang's activities. May we then look forward to a situation which the Prime Minister himself has outlined. In conclusion, I will repeat some of his words:
The Government is concerned to maximise the degree to which people have control over their own lives and their own reesources, to ensure that it is their choices which are decisive, not those of politicians, of bureaucrats or union officials or corporations.
To this end the Government is concerned to limit the role and reduce the power of the State, and as part of that to restrain taxes and to contain public expenditure. The State must remain the servant, not the master, of the Australian people.
I say: Hear, hear, Mr Prime Minister!
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (10.25)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I find it curious that tonight the Government has decided to waste the time of the national Parliament debating an absolutely pointless motion moved by a former Minister. The honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) expresses disappointment in his motion.
Dr Jenkins-You would think they would bring in some legislation, wouldn't you?
Mrs DARLING-One would think the Government would bring in some legislation. That it does not, is a matter of disappointment for me and my colleagues. It is extremely unfortunate that what looks like being the year of the big axe coincides with the International Year of Disabled Persons. Handicapped and disabled persons who

might have looked forward to international focus of attention on their predicament in the hope of attracting government support will be sadly disappointed, much more qisappointed than the honourable member for Braddon is about the level of public expenditure. Already there is a long waiting list of welfare organisations,such as ANSUA, A New Start for the Under Achiever, and SPELD, the Society for the Prevention and Elimination of Learning Difficulties. Both organisations are concerned with learning difficulties faced by children waiting for some sort of government recognition, support and funding; It looks as if it will be a long wait-at least three years. The omens on the health, education and welfare fronts are particularly appalling. The cuts are coming on both large and small scales. Social worker organisations have already suffered considerable staff reductions despite the fact, that the demand for social workers is even greater as a direct result of Government cutbacks already made in welfare expenditure. Invalid pensioners in Queensland have suffered delays of up to six months in the processing of their appeals because the Social Security Department does not have enough money in its coffers to pay for the services of a medical representative on the Social Security Appeals Tribunal in that State.
The Psycho-analytical Society has expressed serious concern over the statements of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) about possible curtailment of health benefits payable for psychoanalytical treatment. It sees the writing very clearly on the wall. Queenslanders are battening down the hatches against the .inevitable and inexorable opposition of the Federal Government to the free public hospital system which a previous Queensland Labor Government established. In the Courier-Mail yesterday a scathing attack was made by the Liberal Queensland Health Minister on the Liberal Federal Health Minister. The honourable member for Braddon's motion calls for a reduction in the size and cost of the Federal bureaucracy. No one could query the need to retain the bureaucracy within sensible limitations of cost efficiency, but the assumption that less bureaucracy means greater efficiency is patently absurd. If any proof is required, I suggest he read the report of the Auditor-General which was tabled in this House last week. The Auditor General states:
It is a matter for concern that, at the time of audit, claims examinations were significantly in arrears-
He goes on to say that it will take up to 10 manyears for these arrears to be brought up to date. The report casts similar reflections on other departments already mentioned by the honourable

Adjournment

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1405

member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis). I venture to add the Department of Social Security and the Australian Taxation-Office to the list of departments benefiting from an increase and not a cut in staff, if only on the grounds of increased cost efficiency. For example, naturally the incidence of fraud increases in the Department of Social Security every time the Government reduces social security because there are fewer staff to check benefit claims.
That is not the only basis on which I find the Government's course objectionable. I am completely opposed to the habit of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) of playing on the public's natural apprehension that the bureaucracy should grow like Topsy as a means of painlessly withdrawing essential services from already neglected sections of the Australian population, sections outlined capably by the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child) earlier this evening. To put it bluntly, the Prime Minister whispers to his razor gang to do the slashing on public expenditure, but hides his own role from the voting public with the most distressing display of double talk I have wItnessed in this House; for example, his declaration that his Government will give assistance to those who need it. We know who that means. It means Rupert Murdoch, Lang Hancock, Peter Clyne and a plethora of multinationals. That statement, and other references which the Prime Minister made yesterday in public statements about the true functions of the Commonwealth, are nothing less than the euphemisms for a wholesale sell out of Federal Government programs to the States and to free market forces.
The honourable member for Braddon refers in his motion to ordinary Australians. I am sure he means average Australians. There are no ordinary Australians; only extraordinary Ministers and former Ministers, extraordinary in the extent of their blindness to the needs of the average Australian. If the honourable member for Braddon and his colleagues had any real depth of compassion for the average Australian, they would have given notice of motions reflecting the disappointment which I share with my colleagues.
Debate interrupted.

ADJOURNMENT
Australian Tourist Industry-Unemployment-StaffCeilings:
Erindale Community Library-Lack of Facilities on Canberra-Sydney
Highway---:-Training Allowances-State Government Funding-Trade Unions: Queensland-Taxation: Interest Rates
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (1O.30)-The Australian tourist industry is becoming very important. Tourism in Australia contributes around 2.6 per cent to the gross domestic product. This compares very favourably with the motor vehicle industry and the minerals and energy industry which contribute about 3.4 per cent to the gross domestic product. The magnitude of the tourist industry can be seen by quickly referring to one country, the United States of America, where it is estimated to generate revenues and income of over $USI00,000 a year, as well as supporting more than 4 million jobs. Those figures surely point to the importance of tourism to any country, no less Australia.
I allude now to my own electorate of Isaacs which, as I have said before in the House, constitutes one of the longest, if not the longest, metropolitan electorates in Australia. The electorate, situated in the metropolitan area of Melbourne, runs for some 30 kilometres along the bayside region of Melbourne on the foreshores of Port Phillip Bay.
Mr Barry Jones-And you run along along it.
Mr CHARLES-That is right. I run an awful lot along it. It is a particularly nice part of the world. However, we have had our bayside problems with pollution and the washing away of quite a deal of our beaches. Hard work over the years by local municipalities has helped to rectify this situation. I refer to Mordialloc Council as an example. The Council has spent many thousands of dollars over the past few years on reclamation of the beaches and the foreshores at Mentone, Mordialloc and Parkdale, and it is a credit to the Council that these beaches are becoming more popular every summer. The Parkdale beach has only recently been reclaimed. In February the first life saving carnival was held at Parkdale for over 50 years. A feature of that kind alone brings tourism to the bayside area.
Mordialloc Council spends some $85,000 a year on beach cleaning and maintaining its beaches. It is estimated that nearly 90 per cent of people who

1406 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Adjournment

visit those beaches in the area are from outside the bayside region. With the increased popUlarity of the beaches-they have become superb beachesrecreation and tourism have increased. Thus the money that is generated to small business, local shops, et cetera, is very good and very important for the whole area. However, let us return to the $85,000 which the Mordialloc Council spends. It has to front up with $60,000 of that amount itself. The Victorian Government gives a subsidy of $25,000. No matter which way we look at the matter, the local ratepayers are once again forced to carry the burden. The Federal and State governments should take a stronger hand and make more worthwhile contributions to local municipalities that are trying to lead the way in tourism and are maintaining and enhancing our natural environment.
Approximately one-third of all the life saving clubs around Port Phillip Bay are in my electorate. Life saving carnivals, swimming competitions, yachting and various recreational activities on the playgrounds of the foreshore are vital to the local area. The Federal Government is not doing enough at present. Local councils know, when they have a big project in the recreation and tourism area in mind, that they will have to fund the major slice of it themselves. This is just not good enough. The Federal Government must decide whether domestic tourism should be given a real boost. If it decides it should be given a boost it should examine local tourist attractions and areas that can be helped. It must be a little more fair dinkum about tourism. I ask the Government to give consideration to increased funding and direct funding to local municipalities to help them continue their work-in many cases, such as the Mor~ dialloc Council, excellent work-that has been carried out in the areas of recreation and tourism.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (10.34)-Tonight considerable pleas have been made by honourable members from this side of the House for more free enterprise. I think these people were trying to say: 'Let us get the outstretched hand back on to the wheel'. My speech tonight will not be entirely in that direction. I am concerned about some of the , problems of a particular issue-unemployment. A considerable myth exists today-I may get some cheers from honourable members opposite by saying it is a myth-that trade unions are responsible for inflation. I further think it is a myth that governments create unemployment. In fact, I think the reverse applies. Governments by their policies should and can either create or control inflation. Trade unions, by their price fixing policies which they apply just as vigorously to their

members as they do to employers, create unemployment. Nobody will buy a product for more than the amount for which they can sell it.
The opportunity for our young people to gain employment is,nevertheless, all around us. Large numbers of people in the community have the privilege of work at today's high wages. These people would gladly spend some of this money on services that they are unable to obtain. As an example, I ask: How much would some young people earn if, instead of being handed a dole application form, they were given a ladder, a plastic bucket and a chamois, and it was suggested' that they offer their services to clean windows in the suburbs? Window cleaning is quite honourable employment. Others might see themselves as handymen or as being suitable for other duties in the household area. I see no difficulty in their earning a sum well in excess of the unemployment benefit that others must pay.
It has also been raised. that, today's economy and policy constantly favour the rich and disadvantage the poor. No doubt that can be proved in certain areas. However, we must first define the rich and the poor. The inference that we draw from the other side is that the rich are the establishment which is built on generations of wealth. Honourable members opposite overlook the regiment of newly rich such as the Holmes a'Courts, the Bonds,and the Agnews-I name Western Australians as they are known to me---:and the many other young men from other States who have risen to great wealth in their lifetime and, in some cases, in this decade. Similarly, many examples of the financial decline of the establishment are also obvious. Some have occurred recently. All this proves to me that the greatest factor that exists in the Australian economy today is equality of opportunity-equality of opportunity to anybody who is prepared to start, if necessary, with his own ladder and plastic bucket.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (10.38)-Tonight I rise to discuss a serious waste of public' funds caused by the Government's inflexible policy on staff ceilings. My words refer to the failure of the Government to provide sufficient staff to enable the Erindale library in Tuggeranong in the Australian Capital Territory to operate as a community library. Library facilities provide an essential public service. Through libraries our citizens enjoy access to information, recreational reading and self-education. Because of their substantial expenditure of public funds on school and community library buildings and on their book collections, so called joint use libraries are being developed in some communities as a means of containing expenditure. Joint use libraries are

Adjournment

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1407

shared by a school and ~he community in the locality of the school. Students and residents utilise the same building and parts of the same book collection.
Such a joint use library has been built in the Tuggeranong Valley in the Capital Territory. It is called the Erindale Community Library and is designed to service not only the students of Erindale College but also the residents of Tuggeranong who currently number 25,000 but will ultimately number three times as many. As I say, the library has been built and it is sited in a modern, well equipped building. The library is now being used by the students of the college. Books and other library materials have been purchased and , catalogued but the library is closed to the 25,000 re~id~nts of Tuggeranong because of the Governmenfsstaff ceiling policy. The Public Service Board has refused to increase the staff ceiling of the Canberra Public Library Service in order to allow the Erindale Community Library to provide day-to-day services to the public. The Board will review the situation in July but, even then, there is no guarantee that staff will be provided to open this library. It is surely a complete waste of public money to build and equip a community facility i and then fail to use that facility because of a lack of staff.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.41)-Tonight I draw the attention of the House to the lack of facilities on the main road linking Canberra to Sydney, particularly that section which passes through my electorate and which was totally funded by the Federal Government and for some curious reason was opened by the Premier of New South Wales, despite the fact that the New South Wales Government contributed not one penny to the very large amount of $80m or so spent on that section of road. I refer to this section of road in particular because I am concerned about the lack of signposting indicating the services needed and available to travellers in those towns which are by-passed by the main road. I particularly mention the Canberra to Sydney road but, of course, also the Sydney to Melbourne road and other major centres south of my electorate.
The concern that I have is that in the towns of Bargo, Tahmoor and Picton, for example, there are many small businesses which for many years have serviced travellers. In those towns there are caravan parks, motels, shops of various kinds and service stations. In fact there is a large industry which is ready and able to serve the needs of people travelling south and north on this main road through my electorate. Until the federally funded new section of Highway 31 was opened these people provided services to users of the

Hume Highway. The Hume Highway has now been by-passed. It is normal procedure that, when a town is by-passed, signs are erected on the bypass road to indicate the very good, high quality I services which are available to the traveller, such \ as are available from the small towns in my electorate.
Unfortunately the New South Wales Department of Main Roads, which built this new stretch of highway, has rejected a request, dated 16 October, from the Wollondilly Shire Clerk in which he said:
. . . Council continues to receive enquiries from local organizations in regard to the provision of suitable signposts advertising the facilities which are available in the towns and villages which will be by-passed by the Freeway but are located on the present Hume Highway.
The purpose of this letter is to ask your Department if it is the intention to provide service signs denoting establishments, caravan parks and the like available in towns being passed by the Freeway.
That is a normal, reasonable request. On 4 December, the Divisional Engineer of the Department of Main Roads in New South Wales said:
Town Service signs are erected on the basis that a driver seeking a service can return to the freeway easily and that it is available at all times. Due to the distance from the freeway to Picton and the limited services available at other towns such as Bargo, the Department is not considering the erection of these signs on the new section of Freeway-F5.
The Department of Main Roads of New South Wales may be pretty good at building roads but it is not too good at judging what the services available to people are and whether those services are needed. In particular I stress that there is a very large stretch of road with no signs indicating services off the road. The Avon Caravan Park is an example that springs to mind. It is readily accessible from the freeway. At peak holiday periods, the Mittagong Caravan Park turns people away and they do not have an opportunity to go to the Avon Caravan Park because of the lack of signs informing them how to get off the freeway at, for example, the Avon Caravan Park site, even though it is next door to a point of egress.
I hope that the FederalMinister for Transport (Mr Hunt), whose Government after all paid for this road, will act in this matter. Why can the New South Wales Government not be told to look after people in this area and to erect these signs on this federally funded highway instead of adopting its very high handed approach to the small business people trying to earn a living in the towns in my electorate. I condemn the New South Wales Department of Main Roads for its arrogant attitude to these people who are trying to provide a service to the traveller. I think it is quite improper that it should decide not to accept this recommendation

1408 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Adjournment

from the local council to put up the normal signs which are available on every major freeway in Europe. There are always signs indicating the services available just off the main freeways or autobahns.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (10.46)-1 raise two matters tonight. The first relates to a matter of serious concern to a large number of my constituents. I note that the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) is in the chamber. An amount of $26m plus in training allowances is owed currently to teachers who have been involved in teacher training programs in private schools arising from the Deakin School of Education. This amount is owed for services which have been provided to the university. I advocate to the Minister that applications for the reimbursement of these funds should be dealt with as a matter of urgency. They are wages properly earned. My understanding is that money does not exist to pay those wages and they are part of the tertiary process for which the Commonwealth currently accepts responsibility.
There is one other matter I wish to raise, but first I draw attention to the speech of the previous speaker, the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume). I do not think that the House should ignore the fact that Government members seem to find it convenient to blame Australian Labor Party governments for deficiencies in State Labor administrations; and, in answering questions where there are not Labor governments, Ministers indicate that the matters raised are responsibilities of the States and are ,always prepared to indicate that those governments have no obligations at all and make no mistakes. The States exercise no control over Commonwealth funds, nor do they ask for any accountability in respect of Commonwealth funds. Recently we have seen the situation where funds which have been raised through the Commonwealth taxation system and reimbursed to State governments have not only been squandered but also been criminally misused by State governments. Possibly the greatest example exists in Victoria, where the degree to which financial irresponsibility exists within the State system would be a national scandal in any country where that country had governments which were concerned, as this Government consistently expresses it is, about the expenditure of public funds.
There has not been a major public work undertaken in Victoria in the last 20 years which has not been the subject of mismanagement, failures, contract failures, bad design and a squandering of public funds. Not only that, but also funds which were provided by this Parliament to the Commonwealth for education purposes were used to

rent accommodation for a considerable period within the high rent areas of Melbourne without those buildings ever being occupied. Subsequently the State purchased other accommodation which it felt was more suitable. Funds allocated for education were totally squandered by a government which is totally irresponsible in matters of money. We all know what happened in Victoria in respect to the land scandals a couple of years ago. Few people in this Parliament are aware that the Victorian Government, in a shonky auction, sold the Liberal Party of Australia a building. When questioned in the Parliament, a Minister of the Crown stood up and said that he did not know that that organisation of which the Premier of the State was one of the directors was associated with the Liberal Party:
A nice lIttle secret deal was made whereby expenses which were not publicly advertised .as being covered in the sale were covered between the Liberal Party and a Minister of the Crown and a public building owned by the taxpayers of Victoria was sold at the lowest possible point of the market in a disgraceful deal which resulted in a major asset in the central business district being transferred to a political party. We are seeing the same types of activities taking place in this Parliament. Assets of the Commonwealth, assets of the taxpayers, are being transferred to support a political party, a political party which claims that it does not believe in the funding of other political parties.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (l0.51)-Many trade unions today have as their thrust the cry that they want more leisure hours for their workers. I refer to some unions in Queensland, particularly in Brisbane-the Federated Engine Drivers and Firemen's Association of Australasia, the Electrical Trades Union of Australia, the Miscellaneous Workers Union, the union covering plumbers, the Australian Tramway and Motor Omnibus Employees Association, the Building Workers Industrial Union of Australia, the Australian Workers Union and others. I refer specifically to the problems that the Brisbane City Council, which is a Labor council, has before it at the moment. I do not intend in this place to sheet the blame home to that Labor council or to the Labor Lord Mayor. However, I have gleaned that the only explanation behind the current industrial unrest in Brisbane is that the unions want more leisure time for their workers. No claim has been filed in the courts and no arbitration procedures have been

Adjournment

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1409

used at this time. But those unions are using the .frontal attack system.
I wish to make reference to probably the most disgraceful episode in this nation's history. It is something which probably epitomises the new low level of industrial lawlessness in this country. I refer to the funeral in Brisbane last Saturday of a 6-year-old boy whose coffin was left uncovered because of the industrial strife which presently exists in the city of Brisbane. The funeral was conducted in the afternoon and the parents and relatives went away believing that the final stages of the burial would be attended to. A premonition by the mother that night caused the relations to return. They found that the coffin had a little bit of soil across it and that the flowers which had been buried with the coffin were showing through the soil.
I do not intend to blame a council of another political persuasion to my own for that event. But I believe that that event in itself stands as a symbol of how low we can go as a nation. I have had cause on two occasions earlier this year to try to make contact with a cemetery in Brisbane. On both occasions I found that the staff was on strike. I simply ask whether union members have ever contemplated the distress and hardship which must be thrust upon the shoulders of near ones when they know that a burial that should take place has to be cancelled because some union has decided to go out on strike. I appeal to all members of this House to recognise that this lucky country of ours is in a very sad state. We have surely pressed the self-destruction button when we will not assist to put to rest those who cannot help themselves. I am sure that I have total agreement from all honourable members. I hope that this contribution will be reflected upon as the unions fight with no holds barred because they want more leisure time for their workers.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (10.56)-The honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) put forward a justifiable concern for a lack of responsibility in some sections of our community. I put to this chamber that the only answer to the ills of this nation is for each one of us to accept some responsibility for our own areas-for us, as members of this House, to accept that same responsibility to the people whom we represent, particularly the disadvantaged who, some say, are really pulling the nation down. One person who has accepted responsibility, a constituent of mine, has put very clearly in a letter to me the feelings, I believe, of most people in the electorate. I wish to

take this opportunity to read this letter to honourable members in the chamber. It states:
In the belief that you have sincere interest in what your constituents are thinking I am putting forward here some thoughts on two matters of importance. They cause me great concern and I am sure that there are many who share this concern.
1. Taxation.
Cannot the Government see that the high rate of Personal Income Tax tends to stifle productivity and quality of output?
Cannot they see that it must be a big factor in the problem of Tax avoidance?
Surely they must be aWare of the low morale existing throughout the nation's work force; and in being aware, they could not deny that high Personal Income Tax is a contributingcause.
All will agree that Income Tax rates sbould be reduced and in particular my sympathies lie with: (a) the aged pensioner with a small amount of cash 'on the side' who still has to worry about Income Tax returns; and (b) the superannuated person in receipt of income from a fund to which he has contributed; his rate of Tax should be at a substantially reduced level:
Achievement of a reduced level of Personal Income Tax is not easy but it seems to me that it could be made up through a reduction in Tax avoidance and an increase in indirect taxes. The latter would support the philosphy of 'let the user pay' which incidentally, I have noticed being reported in Government statements recently. If one were to be cynical, one could ask whether the Government's real philosophy is 'let the loser pay'.
II. Interest Rates.
This matter seems to me to be a more serious problem than Taxation. It is causing confusion and alarm among most people, but particularly the young marrieds and lower income folk with a housing finance arrangement. The increased repayments arising from higher interest impositions have already caused some to sell their homes and many others must be contemplating this action. To me that situation has all the indications of a disastrous depression in the making.
I know that no easy solution exists if urgently needed capital to fund development is to be obtained. But some relief for those in need must be found.
The Treasurer appears to be out of touch with what is happening to millions of Australians. His recent statement that an increase in Interest Rates was justified partly on the grounds of wage increases indicates this. I can think of three reasons why that excuse should be dismissed. These are
(a) Any wage increases serve only to catch up (in part) with the costs of day to day necessities.
(b) An incorrect impression is given about the extent of wage increases. In most cases they go to minority sections of the work force but publicity tends to suggest that all our wages are going up constantly.
(c) In recent times two increases in Interest Rates occurred nowhere near a general lift in wages.
One obvious solution to the problem for many is that loans for the purchase of homes retain the same rate of interest as that contracted for at the outset. Reams of argument could no doubt be mounted against this proposition but none would convince me that it is not morally just and in the best long term interests of Australia and its people.
Finally, do you have any words of advice or comfort for those in real fear of seeing their dreams crumble; of not being able to stretch their budgets to meet higher repayments brought about by higher interest rates?

1410 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Notices

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! It being 11 p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 2.15 p.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 11 p.m.

NOTICES

The following notices were given:

Mr Connolly to move-

That this House-

(1) views with grave concern the mounting evidence that the Soviet Union, with some of its Warsaw Pact allies, is moving inexorably towards the military invasion of Poland;

(2) reaffirms the recognition in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights that the inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world and supports the Polish Solidarity Movement's efforts to introduce free trade unions;

(3) affirms its support for the determined people of Poland,

and

'

(4) calls upon Western powers to consider all possible measures to deter the Soviet Union from this gravest of challenges to the sovereignty of Poland and, in consequence, to the stability of the world.

Mr Thomson to present a ,Bill for an Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.

Mr Thomson to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development

Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.

PAPERS

The following papers were deemed to have

been presented on 7 April 1981, pursuant to

statute:

'

Defence Act-Determinations-1981-

No.9-Flying Allowance, Diving Allowance and Extra Risk Allowance.

No. 10-Uniform Maintenance Allowances.

Defence Amendment Act-Interim DeterminationsStatutory Rules 1981, Nos. 53, 54, 55, 56, 57.

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980-Statement of particulars of direction given by Minister under subsection 13 (2).

REQUEST FOR DETAILED , INFORMATION

Department of the Parliamentary Reporting

Staff

'

Mrs Darling to ask Mr Speaker:

(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for Division !03-Parliamentary Reporting Staff.

(2) Has there been an underspending in this Division by the

estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information

Paper 'Statement of savings expected in annual appro-

priations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation

Acts (Nos. 1and 2) 1980-81 '; ifso, what is the reason.

'

Answers to Questions

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1411 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

White Collar Crime
(Question No. 30)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'Computer Criminals Fastest in the West', in the Australian Financial Review of 23 June 1980.
(2) Has he, his Department or any Federal agency under his control made any investigation or survey of white collar crime in Australia; if so, did it consider compu~er crime.
(3) Is he able to state whether a recent Interpol conference was told that white collar crime generally equalled 2.5 per cent of Gross National Product in industrialised, nations, and that computer crimes top the list of white collar crimes.
(4) What figures are available for the incidence of (a) white collar crime and (b) computer crime in Australia.
(5) What percentage of Gross National Product do each of the categories in part (4) represent.
(6) Is there any evidence in Australia that computer crimes are not always reported to police by companies because adverse publicity may result for the firms involved.
(7) Has the Australian Federal Police (AFP) force made any provision for specialist computer training for fraud squad detectives and permanent attachment of civilian experts to theAFP.
(8) If no provisions have been made, is he able to state whether any measures are being carried out by State police forces, and, if so, which States are involved.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) No to both sections.
(3) Yes.
(4), (5) and (6) I am advised that inquiries with the Australian Bureau of Statistics and the Australian Institute of Criminology indicate that there are no worthwhile statistics on the incidence of white collar crime and computer crime in Australia.
I would also refer the honourable member to the reply of the Attorney-General to question No. 6256 (Hansard, 17 and 18 September 1980, page 1455).
I am concerned there is no clear indication of the size of this problem. In an effort to improve this situation I have written to the Attorney-General, the Treasurer, and the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, proposing that the feasibility of collecting statistics in this area be looked into. I will also be taking up the matter with the Australian Police Ministers' Council.
(7) I am advised that some fraud squad detectives within the AFP have been given basic computer training with a view to specialist training, but that no consideration has been given at this stage to permanent attachment of civilian experts.
(8) I am unable to state what provisions are being made within State police forces.

Assistance to Inventors Scheme
(Question No. 48)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
Did his predecessor's answer to Part (2) of Question No. 6333 (Hansard, 17 September 1980, page 1459) include schemes which have been rejected; if so, what form-of nonfinancial assistance was given to the rejected applicants.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes. Non-financial assistance given to rejected applicants was in the form of advice provided by the State Inventions Advisory Panels on such matters as the viability of concepts, technical assessments, and patent protection. The Stale Advisory Panels act as the initial point of contact for individuals with ideas that require evaluation. The provision of informed advice helps reduce unnecessary expense which may otherwise be incurred by private individuals in pursuing the development of non-viable concepts.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives
- (Question No. 89)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) How many personnel were employed as staff assisting the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many were permanent full-time staff.
(3) What was the status of any staff who were not permanent full-time Board personnel.
(4) Were temporary secondments necessary in the latter part of the financial year to process a build-up of applications for commencement and project grants, as occurred in 1978-79.
(5) Has the situation referred to in the presentation by the Chairman of the Board's 1978-79 Annual Report of an expected continuation of a backlog in processing of project grant applications beyond a desirable level, occurred in 1979-80.
(6) What is his Department's definition of a desirable level.
(7) Was there a greater backlog of either project or commencement grant applications awaiting processing at the end of 1979-80 than at the end of 1978-79.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) 40.
(2) 35' permanent full-time officers of the Commonwealth Public Service occupied nominal positions as staff assisting the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board as at 30 June 1980.
(3) Temporary and seconded.

1412 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) Yes.
(5) No.
(6) No more than 60 project grant applications unprocessed at any particular time.
(7) No.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives
(Question No. 92)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
What were the resiJlts of the consideration by the former Department of Productivity, referred to in paragraph 122 of the 1978-79 Annual Report of the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board, of the ongoing staffing needs' of the Board.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The number of officers of the Commonwealth Public Service occupying nominal positions as staff assisting the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board was increased from 29 as at 30 June 1979 to 35 as at 30 June 1980.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives
(Question No. 93)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(l) Have sampling techniques referred to in paragraph 24 of the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board Annual Report 1978-79 been implemented; if not, will they be and, if so, when.
(2) If sampling techniques have been implemented, (a) how large are the samples for commencement grants and (b) how many extra staff would be required by the Board to enable all commencement grant applications to be investigated, bearing in mind that the discovery of one invalid $25,000 commencement grant would more than pay the salary of a single employee.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. The relevant considerations outlined in paragraph 24 of the 1978-79 Annual Report of the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board are still under examination. No decision has yet been made as to whether sampling techniques will be implemented.
(2) Sampling techniques have not been implemented.
Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly
(Question No. 173)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 2S November 1980:
Will he provide a detailed statement of the role, functions and powers of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The role of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly is, as elected representatives of the ACT community to advise the Minister in relation to ACT matters.
The functions of the Assembly are:

To meet and examine matters referred to it by the Minister or raised within the Assembly itself and to pass resolutions of advice to the Minister.
To propose of its own initiative draft ordinances and consider draft legislation submitted to it by the Minister.
To be represented on boards, authorities, committees, etc, as provided in legislation and/or at ministerial invitation.
Through its Standing and Select Committees to inquire into and report upon the administration of the Territory and issues affecting the Territory.
The powers of the Assembly as contained in the House of Assembly Ordinance 1936 are:
Section 10 'The Assembly may advise the Minister in relation to any matter affecting the Territory including the making of new Ordinances or the repeal or amendment of existing Ordinances'.
Section 11 (2) 'Any member of the Assembly may submit to it for consideration any proposal for the making. amendment or repeal of any Ordinance'.
Section 14 'The President may, if he thinks fit, upon the request in writing of any member of the Assembly, or of his own motion, and shall, upon the request of the Assembly expressed by resolution, request the attendance of any officer of the Public Service or an officer or employee of an authority established by a law in force in the Territory for the purpose of assisting the Assembly in the discussion of any question before the Assembly of which question the officer has expert knowledge'.
Section 15A 'The Assembly may make rules and orders in respect of the order and conduct of its business and proceedings'.
The Assembly is represented on the following bodies or for the following purposes:
ACT Agents Board ACT Children's Advisory Group ACT Consultative Committee on Social Welfare ACT Electricity Authority ACT Heritage Committee ACT Milk Authority ACT Nature Conservation Advisory Committee ACT Schools Authority ACT Third Party Insurance Premiums Advisory Committee Advisory Council for Inter-Government Relations Air Pollution Advisory Committee Building Industry Advisory Council Building Review Committee Canberra Commercial Development Authority Canberra Public Library Service Advisory Committee Canberra Retail Markets Trust Canberra Showground Trust Canberra Theatre Trust Canberra Week Committee Capital and Equipment Grants Committee Constitutional Convention Consumer Affairs Council Emergency Housing Committee Gorman House Interim Management Committee International Year of Disabled Persons Advisory Committee Joint Co-ordination Committee Legal Aid Commission Liquor Licensing Board Parole Board of the ACT Poker Machine Licensing Board Remand Centres Inspection Road Safety Council of the ACT

Answers to Questions

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1413

Standing Committee on Further Educatiori
Current as at 30.3.81.
Community Youth Support Schemes
(Question No. 233)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 2 December 1980:
(I) How many Community Youth Support Schemes (CYSS) are in operation throughout Australia.
(2) Where is each scheme operating and what has been the Commonwealth contribution to each scheme in 1980.
(3) What have been the average attendance numbers for each scheme in 1980.

(4) What percentage of participants from each CYSS centre found full-time employment in Australia during 1980.
Mr Viner~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As at 31 December 1980, 281 CYSS projects were in operation.
(2) A list of projects in operation as at 31 December 1980 by town or suburb is at Table A. The information on Commonwealth contributions to each CYSS project in 1980 is not readily available in the form requested.
(3) and (4) This information is not readily available within my Department and to obtain it would take considerable time and elfort beyond the normal requirements of administration. For this reason, I do not propose to have officers take time out from their normal duties to seek and collate the information sought.

Table A COMMUNITY YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEME PROJECTS IN OPERATION AS AT 31 DECEMBER 1980

Project

Town/suburb

New South Wales

Albury-Wodonga CYSS

AlexysCYSS

Transit CYSS

AuburnCYSS

Spring Toot CYSS

Bathurst Unemployed Meeting Place (BUMPS)

Bega UnerriployedGroup (BUG)

Projects by Unemployed (PUB) CYSS

Bellingen CYSS

Changes CYSS

BourkeCYSS

The Foundry

Brewarrina CYSS

Budgie Waves

Campbelltown CYSS

The Job Mob

Canterbury CYSS

Shop Front Theatre CYSS

Special Pre-Employment Centre

Charlestown Youth Support Through Employment Motiva tion (CYSTEM)

CobarCYSS . . . . .

Creative Living Workshop

Cooma-Monaro CYSS

Coonamble CYSS

CowraCYSS

Aquarius CYSS .

Deniliquin CYSS

Learning-to Live

WavesCYSS

Breakout

Hendo's Army

Fairfield CYSS

ForbesCYSS

Forster-Tuncurry CYSS

.

Gateshead Region's Young Peoples' Scheme (GRYPS)

Kountry Youth Activity Klub (KYAK)

Gosford Unemployed Support Scheme (GUSS)

Jobless Youth

Grafton CYSS

GriffithCYSS

Holbrook CYSS

Holroyd CYSS

The Cottage

Ingleburn CYSS

.

Inverell and Districts CYSS

Kempsey CYSS

Albury Alexandria Armidale
Auburn Bankstown Bathurst Bega Be\connen Bellingen
Bondi Bourke'
Braddon
Brewarrina Budgewoi
Campbelltown Camden Canterbury Carlton
Caringbah Charlestown Cobar Coifs Harbour
Cooma Coonamble Cowra Darlinghurst Deniliquin
Dubbo The Entrance Epping
Evans Head Fairfield Forbes
Forster Gateshead Gloucester Gosford Goulburn Grafton Griffith Holbrook Holroyd Hornsby Ingleburn Inverell Kempsey

1414 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Project

Kyogle CYSS . . . . . . . . . Lane Cove and Lower North Shore CYSS Leeton Young Employment Seekers Barwon-Namoi CYSS Lismore-Mullawarra CYSS Liverpool CYSS Nambucca River CYSS Unemployed Teenagers Home Away from Home (UTHAH) Alternatives Marrickville CYSS MudgeeCYSS Murwillumbah CYSS Horizons Not Everybody Works (NEW) Newcastle Out-of-Workers (NOW) NorthernBeaches CYSS NowraCYSS Orange Youth Centre Padstow CYSS ParkesCYSS The Exchange The Station House Richmond CYSS Opportunity . . Rise and Shine RydeCYSS Positive Action Centre The HUBB Youth Employment Advisory Service Tamworth (YEAST) The Cottage . . . . . . TumutCYSS . . . . . . . . Wagga Wagga CYSS . . . . . . Wallsend Community Group WarillaActive Youth Team (WAYT) WarrenCYSS Project Binjang Jobless Action CYSS Wollongong CYSS Peninsula Waves

Abbott 25 . . . . . .

Alamein CYSS . . . . .

Alexandra Manpower Project

Altona CYSS

.

Ararat and Districts CYSS

The Avenue Youth Project

Bairnsdale CYSS

BenallaCYSS

City of Bendigo CYSS .

Boronia CYSS

Shopback

Broadmeadows/Glenroy CYSS

.

Brunswick Unemployment Group (BUG)

Camberwell Unemployed SelfHelp (CUSH)

Camperdown CYSS . . . . . . . .

Castlemaine Employment Exchange

Cobram and District Determined Youth (CADDY)

Living Unemployed in Coburg (LUC)

Cohuna and District CYSS

ColacCYSS . . . . . . . .

Coolaroo CYSS . . . . . .

CorioCYSS . . . . . . .. .

Dandenong Resources Co-operative Limited

Dandenong Youth Employment Project (YEP)

Daylesford CYSS . . . . . . . . .

DonnyCYSS . . . . . . . . . .

Victoria

Youth Employment Project Doveton (YEP)

Answers to Questions
Town/suburb
Kyogle CrowsNest Leeton Lightning Ridge Lismore Liverpool Macksville Maitland Maroubra Marrickville Mudgee Murwillumbah Narromine Nelson Bay Newcastle Brookfield Nowra Orange Padstow Parkes Parramatta Penrith Richmond RootyHiIl Rozelle Ryde Seven Hills Sutherland Tamworth Taree Tumut WaggaWagga Wallsend Warilla Warren Wellington Woden Wollongong WoyWoy
Sandringham Alamein Alexandra Altona Ararat Dandenong Bairnsdale Benalla Bendigo Knoxville BoxHill . Glenroy Brunswick Camherwell Camperdown Castlemaine Cobram Coburg Cohuna Colac Coolaroo Corio Dandenong Dandenong Daylesford Doncaster/
Templestowe Doveton

Answers to Questions

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1415

Project

EaglehawkCYSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Echuca and District YMCA Youth Club CYSS . . . . .

Eltham CYSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Special Projects for Activities, Crafts and Employment (SPACE)

Joint Unemployment Group (JUG)

Geelong Unemployment Centre

Kyneton CYSS

Hamilton CYSS

Inglewood CYSS

Kensington CYSS

Kyabram CYSS

Kerang and District CYSS . . . . . . . . . . .

Lalor/Epping/Thomastown Unemployment Support (LETUS) Group

Lilydale Unemployed Self Help (LUSH)

Malvern Self Help Employment Exchange

City of Maryborough CYSS . . . . .

Melbourne Aboriginals CYSS

Melbourne Alternative Self Help (MASH)

Bayside Unemployed Self Help (BUSH)

MoeCYSS . . . . . . . . .

Bayside Unemployed Self Help (BUSH)

Morwell CYSS

... .

Oakleigh CYSS . . . . . . . .

Port Fairy CYSS . . . . . . .

Portland CYSS . . . . . . . .

Preston Employment Action Group (PEAG)

Peninsula Unemployed Assistance Board (PUAB)

Project for Unemployed Self Help (PUSH)

Quest Centre for Unemployed . . . . . . .

Richmond CYSS . . . . . . . . . . .

St Albans CYSS . . . . . . . . . . . .

School Leavers' Employment Opportunity Service (SLEOS)

Shepparton/Mooroopna CYSS . . . . . . . . .

Sherbrooke CYSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Southern Peninsula Learning and Self Help (SPLASH)

South and Port Melbourne Unemployment Group (SPUG)

St Leonards Avenue CYSS . . . . . .

Springvale Pre-Employment Centre (SPEC)

Stawell CYSS

,Sunbury/Craigieburn CYSS

Sunshine CYSS . . . . . . . . .

Swan Hill CYSS . . . . . . . .

Task Force Youth Unemployment Group

TaturaCYSS

Traralgon CYSS . . . . . .

Wangaratta CYSS . . . . . .

Warrnambool CYSS . . . . .

Warragul Community Youth Project

Waverley CYSS

Western Regions CYSS

Horsham CYSS

Yarrawonga CYSS

.

.

Youth and Others Unemployment Resource Centre (YOUR)

..

Young Unemployed of Collingwood Resource and Action Group (YUCRAG)

Ballarat Schools/YMCA CYSS . . . . . . . . . . .

Northcote Unemployed Resources Group (NURG) . . . . .

Queensland
Bowman CYSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . Bundaberg CYSS - . . . . . . . . . . . Burleigh Youth Support . . . . . . . . . . Backing Unemployed Surfers Paradise/Southport Youth (BUSY) Caboolture CYSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Cairns CYSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Caloundra CYSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . Unemployed Support Group Tweed Heads/Coolangatta Chermside/Kedron CYSS . . '. . . . . . . GriffithCYSS Gympie/Widgee CYSS

Town/suburb
Eaglehawk Echuca Eltham Essendon Fitzroy Geelong Kyneton Hamilton Inglewood Kensington Kyabram Kerang Lalor Lilydale Malvern Maryborough Collingwood North Carlton Mentone Moe Mordialloc Morwell Oakleigh Port Fairy Portland Preston Frankston Heidelberg Prahran Richmond StAlbans Ringwood Shepparton Sherbrooke Rosebud South Melbourne StKiida Springvale Stawell Sunbury Sunshine Swan Hill Prahran Tatura Traralgon Wangaratta Warrnambool Warragul Waverley Footscray Horsham Yarrawonga Rosanna Collingwood Ballarat Northcote
Wynnum Bundaberg Burleigh Reads Southport Caboolture Cairns Caloundra Tweed Heads Kedron Norman Park Gympie

1416 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Project

Gladstone CYSS Herbert CYSS Holland Park/Mt Gravatt CYSS Inala and Districts CYSS Inner City CYSS . . . . . Mackay/Sarina CYSS Maroochydore Pre-Employment Centre Maryborough CYSS MtIsaCYSS . . . . . . Moreton CYSS . . . . . . Nambour Pre-Employment Centre NoosaCYSS NundahCYSS PetrieCYSS Redcliffe CYSS Rockhampton CYSS Toowoomba CYSS Warwick and Districts CYSS Western Suburbs CYSS Windsor CYSS . . . . Woodridge Area Youth Support (WAYS) Young Unemployed People ofIpswich (YUPI) Young Unemployed People of Ipswich (YUPI Country)

South Australia
Skills Maintenance Program Unemployed Youth Group YWCA Port Unemployment Project (PUP) Action Volunteer Youth Bureau Department of Youth Pre-Employment Centre Whyalla CYSS . . . . . . . . . . . Brompton Unemployed Youth Scheme Port Pirie CYSS . . . . . . . . . . Motivation Through Opportunities and Voluntary Employment (MOVE) Tailem Bend CYSS OASIS . . . . . . Elizabeth/Smithfield CYSS AvagoCYSS Paddocks CYSS MannumCYSS Barossa Valley Youth Activities Centre CedunaCYSS Comskil Garage EnfieldCYSS Montrose Avenue Noarlunga CYSS Plympton CYSS Port Lincoln CYSS Gawler and Districts CYSS Campbelltown CYSS

AlbanyCYSS Armadale/Kelmscott CYSS BalgaCYSS Bayswater CYSS Belmont CYSS Bunbury CYSS Busselton CYSS Carnarvon CYSS Centrecare CYSS The Station House CYSS Collie Welfare Council CYSS Esperance CYSS Fremantle CYSS Geraldton CYSS Gosnells CYSS HarveyCYSS

Western Australia

Answers to Questions
Town/suburb
Gladstone Townsville Holland Park Oxley SpringHill Mackay Maroochydore Maryborough MtIsa Yeronga Nambour Noosaville Nundah Petrie Redcliffe Rockhampton Toowoomba Warwick Indooroopilly Lutwyche Woodridge IpswichRaceview
Parkside North Adelaide Port Adelaide Eastwood Salisbury Whyalla Brompton Port Pirie Henley and Grange TailemBend Unley Smithfield Ridgehaven Ingle Farm Mannum Nuriootpa Ceduna Woodville Birkenhead Enfield Norwood Noarlunga Plympton Port Lincoln Gawler Campbelltown
Albany Armadale Balga Morley Belmont Bunbury Busselton Carnarvon Perth Claremont Collie Esperance O'Connor Geraldton Gosnells Harvey

Answers to Questions

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1417

Project
Kalamunda CYSS Kalgoorlie/Boulder CYSS KwinanaCYSS . Mandurah CYSS Maylands CYSS Manijump CYSS Rockingham CYSS Scarborough CYSS SwanCYSS Victoria Park CYSS Wanneroo CYSS YokineCYSS Melville CYSS YMCAofPerthCYSS
Beaconsfield CYSS Bridgewater/Brighton CYSS Burnie CYSS . . . . . Chigwell United Unemployed Circular Head CYSS Clarence CYSS Colony 47 Incorporated Devonport CYSS FingalCYSS Georgetown CYSS Glenorchy CYSS Latrobe CYSS Launceston City CYSS Lilydale/Mayfield CYSS New Norfolk CYSS Risdon Vale CYSS St Leonards CYSS Scottsdale CYSS Sheffield CYSS Ulverstone CYSS WestburyCYSS
DarwinCYSS Alice Springs CYSS

Tasmania Northern Territory

Town/suburb
Kalamunda Kalgoorlie Medina Mandurah East Victoria Park Manijump Rockingham Scarborough Midland Victoria Park Wanneroo Yokine Melville Perth
Exeter Bridgewater Burnie Chigwell Smithton Bellerive Hobart Devonport StMarys Georgetown Glenorchy Latrobe Inveresk Mayfield New Norfolk Risdon Vale Ravenswood Scottsdale Sheffield Ulverstone Westbury
Darwin Alice Springs

International Year of Disabled Persons
(Question No. 243)

entitled 'The education of mildly and severely hearingimpaired children'. (Educational Research and Development Committee)

Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice,

The Theatre Board of the Australia Council has approved a grant of $38,000 towards the activities of the New

on 3 December 1980:
Is the Federal GovernmeIit examining specific programs for deaf people during the International Year of Disabled Persons; if so, what programs.

South Wales Theatre of the Deaf. This grant continues assistance by the Board to this organisation in recent years. (Australia Council)
It should be noted that the Commonwealth Government, in supporting the United Nations declaration of 1981 as IYDP,

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

will be drawing attention to all fOflps of disability, rather than singling out particular groups for special attention. Many programs planned, while not aimed specifically at deaf people, will be of benefit to them. The following selection of

Yes, the following are currently being considered, and it is expected other programs will arise as the year progresses:

Commonwealth Government initiatives is indicative of the work being done. There are at present 140 projects under consideration:

A lending library of films, suitable for deaf people. (National Library of Australia)

Provision of a range of aids to daily living under the Program of Aids for Disabled People. Assistance will be

The Educational Research and Development Committee provided with home modifications and a range of aids in-

is. currently funding a project by Dr B. Dalgleish, from the . cluding wheelchairs, orthoses, ollygen, medical wigs, mam-

Uriiversity of Queensland into 'The semantics of early deaf

mary prostheses, electrolarynxes, walking aids, aids for

communication'. In addition, the Educational Research

incontinence, and personal aids (cutlery, crockery, toilet

and Development Committee expects to receive in 1981 the

articles etc.) will be provided on prescription under this

report of a project by Dr D. Power, from Mt Gravatt CAE,

new program. (Department of Health)

1418 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Answers to Questions

TAFE work preparation courses including the provision of adult literacy, remedial and special programs for intellectually, educationally and physically handicapped people. (Tertiary Education Commission)
$1 million has been provided for 1981 for special support teaching services to allow the integration of handicapped children in regular schools. The Government has also announced that it will make available $2 million in 1981 for the development of education programs for severely handicapped children. (Schools Commission)
National Employment Strategy for the Handicapped (NESH). A concerted effort is to be made to assist and train disabled people. In addition, a strong promotional effort will be made in employment, assisted by on-the-job training subsidies. Employment promotion committees will be established in each State and Territory to promote the employment of disabled persons to employers. (Department of Employment and Youth Affairs and other relevant Department)
IYDP grants to States and Territories for small innovative projects on a one-off basis. Projects should benefit disabled children or their families and priority will be given to projects for migrants, Aboriginals and the children of socially and economically disadvantaged parents. (Department of Social Security)
Consultation with relevant women's groups, Primarily to co-operate with other departments and organisations in the development of appropriate policies and programs which have implications for handicapped women or those .women who are primarily carers for the handicapped. (Department of Home Affairs and Environment)
Industrial Accidents
(Question No. 367)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) It is a fact that the former Department of Productivity publication 'Work and People' estimated that approximately 3 times more industrial time was lost due to accidents and illness than to industrial disputes.
(2) If so, can he say why the Government has not used its external affairs power under (a) section 51 (xxix) of the Constitution to ratify International Labour Organisation conventions on safety and health in respect of the private sector and (b) section 52 (ii) of the Constitution in respect of the Government's employees.
Mr Peacock-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am informed that in 'Work and People' (Vol. 6, No.1, 1980) published by the former Department of Productivity there is an article about a survey conducted in October 1976 by the Human Relations Branch of that Department as to absence attributed to sickness and both industrial and other accidents in 1,184 manufacturing and non-manufacturing establishments. According to the article, the survey found that 4.0 per cent of employees were absent at anyone time and that this figure did not include time lost through industrial disputation. However, the article goes on to say 'D Crawford (Hyquip Pty Ltd) and S V Volard (University of Queensland) estimate that when strikes are included time lost runs at 4.23 per cent'. The article then goes on to comment on certain other aspects of the survey.
(2) (a) and (b). It is the External Affairs power that is exercised by the Australian Parliament whenever it ratifies international instruments, including Conventions of the ILO.
The process of examining whether Australia is able to ratify an ILO Convention almost always involves consideration of

the law and practice of both the Commonwealth and the States. In accordance with the ILO Constitution, Australian Governments have only ratified ILO Conventions that require Federal and State implementation after full consultation with the States as to their law and practice. This process has led to the ratification of several Conventions that deal with safety, health and welfare at work. Others are under Commonwealth and State consideration.

Social Security Regional Offices
(Question No. 379)

Mr Kent asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:

(1) Further to my question without notice on 2 December 1980 (Hansard, page 223) what (a) actions, (b) plans and (c) initiatives has he taken to give effect to his repeated pledges to achieve the Government's stated intention to reduce unemployment.

(2) What (a) are his objectives in this area and (b) time scale does he expect will be needed to give effect to his objectives.

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) (a)-(c) The Government has consistently followed a policy ,designed to maintain strong and sustained economic growth in order to create the necessary pre-conditions for a steady reduction in unemployment. Growth in the private sector is central to the strategy.

The Government's success is apparent-ABS figures show

that employment in the twelve months to January 1981 grew

by 140,000 (or 2.3 per cent), while the number,p1,p,ersons

looking for full-time work declined by 17,900 in 'the year to

February 1981.

' ',,'

At the same time as it is pursuing effective economic policies the Government has introduced a number of manpower programs designed to assist the most disadvantaged in the labour market. In particular the Government's commitment to youth has been clearly stated.

(2) (a) and (b) The Government's objectives are a sound economy, improving the ability of industry to meet its demand for skilled labour and assistance to those who are most disadvantaged in the labour market. I expect that employment will continue to grow. I do not speculate on variations in the participation rate and accordingly on the movements in unemployment.

Voluntary Advertising Codes
(Question No. 399)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn toa claim by Richard L'Estrange (Financial Australian, 19 January 1981, page 10) that the Big M campaign featuring herds of scantily-clad nubile young women (a) restored value to unsaleable farms, (b) brought dairy farmers back to the middle income bracket, (c) made flavoured milk the in drink of the young crowd and (d) helped sales of more milk than ever before including 15 per cent of the non-alcoholic drinks market for Big Malone.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to (a) advertisements with a similar theme combined with youthful athletic activity used to promote alcoholic drinks, for example Brisbane Bitter, (b) increasing consumption of alcohol by the young and (c) the fast-increasing cost of youthful drinking to health,

Answers to Questions

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1419

transport and law enforcement agencies, private industry and families.
(3) If so, will he and other Ministers review the policyofrelying on voluntary guidelines which fail to prevent use of advertising for this addictive substance by associating it with youth, fitness, athletic activity, recreation, glamour and success.
(4) Has his Department prepared proposals to implement legislative alternatives to voluntary advertising codes as requested by me during my service as Minister for Health.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I am aware of the successful advertising campaigns for milk and that these have resulted in a significant increase in sales of milk beverages.
(2) Yes.
(3) and (4) In responding la~t year to the Recommendations contained in the Report from the Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare entitled 'Drug -Problems in Australia-an Intoxicated Society?', the Government announced (Senate Hansard, 19 March 1980, pages 795-802) that it will continue to rely on the Voluntary 'Code of Advertising for Alcoholic Beverages oversighted by the Alcoholic Beverages Advertising Council. (The Council was formed in 1979 by media and alcoholic beverages industry groups to apply a code to govern standards of advertising of all alcoholic beverages.) .
My Department will continue to monitor the operation of the Code, particularly in relation to the avoidance of advertising that encourages irresponsible drinking.
In accordance with agreed procedures, my Department can-and does-lodge formal complaints with the Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations (FACTS) and the Alcoholic Beverages Advertising Council (ABAC), and may request that a particular advertisement be withdrawn;
My Department routinely reviewed the 'Brisbane Bitter' television commercial specifically mentioned by the honourable member and, on 24 February 1981, lodged a formal objection with FACTS and ABAC, subsequently maintaining contact with these bodies concerning withdrawal of the advertisement. Following my Department's complaint, the commercial was revised and has been reviewed by my Department. It is considered that the commercial is now in compliance with the rules of the ABAC Voluntary Code of Advertising.
Under circumstances such as this, in which my Department continues to effectively monitor the operation of the Voluntary Code, there are no plans at present to implement alternative proposals as regards further controls oil advertising of alcoholic beverages.
Kampuchea
(Question No. 490)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'Kampucheans return in thousands' (Age, 21 January 1981, page 9).
(2) If so, is he able to state what international reliyf agencies are currently operating in Kampuchea and whether the numbers of Kampuchean refugees who have been voluntarily repatriated to Kampuchea are as estimated in that article:
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.

(2) The following international agencies are currently operating in Kampuchea:

The United Nations Children's Fund, .the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Food and Agricultural Organisation, and the World Food Program.

Of the Khmers located in UNHCR holding centres in Thailand, it seems that some 5,000 have returned to Kampuchea voluntarily in recent months.

In July 1980 the Heng Samrin regime requested UNHCR assistance for 300,000 Kampuchean returnees. Of this number 175,000 were said to be from the Thai border area, 20,000 from Laos, and 115,000 from Vietnam.

It seems that the numbers given in the article to which the

honourable member refers also had as their source figures

given by local officials (of the Heng Samrin regime) to the

UNHCR. I am unable to given an estimate of the reliability of

the figures supplied by the Vietnamese-backed Heng Samrin

regime. They are almost the same as those quoted in the pre-

ceding paragraph.

.

World War II Records
(Question No. 509)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Were the World War II (a) daily aircraft servicing and maintenance records known as EE 77s and (b) flight authorisation books in which were recorded the purpose of and crew for each flight, retained in archives or destroyed.
(2) If the EE 77s and flight authorisation books were retained in part are those related to the operations of Catalina flying boats out of Cairns, Queensland, still in existence.
(3) If the EE 77s and flight authorisation books were wholly destroyed how were the crews of shot down aircraft discovered since the war identified.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) All World War II Forms EE 77 were destroyed.
(b) The possibility that World War II Flight Authorisation books were retained is remote as there is no documentation showing that they were retained and transferred to the Australian Archives.
The main reason for these records not being retained is that the information in them is held in other records with permanent retention value such as-Unit History Sheet (Form A50), Detail of Operations (Form A51) and various other reports including Narrative Attack and Reconnaissance.
(2) A check of the Australian Archives' accessions rel!\ting the the Catalina Squadrons operating out of Cairns has shown that no Forms EE 77 or Flight Authorisation books are held there. However, details of the operations of the Catalinas from Cairns, including the aircraft and their crews, are well documented in the records listed in (1) above.
(3) There are numerous records from which crews of aircraft shot down or otherwise crashed can be identified. Air Force Office holds a comprehensive card record of all World War II aircraft wrecks, including United States aircraft in Australia and the Islands, compiled from contemporary records and information provided by the RAAF Search Party. This record has a separate section for unlocated wrecks and includes the aircraft type, location and the identity of crew and any passengers. In the event of. an aircraft wreck being discovered, it can be identified by the aircraft type and location and thus its crew determined.

1420 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Answers to Questions

War Service Pensions: Merchant Navy
(Question No. 518)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to correspondence in the columns of the West Australian on Tuesday, 2 December 1980, and Monday, 8 December 1980, from a Mrs J. Antcliffe, honorary secretary, Merchant Navy War Service Association, and Mr Robert McKenzie, respectively.
(2) If so, and in the light of the Government's recent decision on eligibility for war service pensions for members of the,Polish Home Army and Tito's Yugoslav partisans, will the Minister now reconsider the matter of war service pensions for members of the Merchant Navy who served in World War II war zones.
Mr McVeigh-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) The Government will review this matter in its prebudget consideration of all pensions and benefits payable under the Repatriation system.
Handicapped Child's Allowance
(Question No. 524)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:'
(1) What are the criteria for distinguishing between a severely handicapped and a substantially handicapped child for the purposes of determining payment of handicapped child's allowance.
(2) What are the criteria used to determine whether the parents of a substantially handicapped child suffer financial hardship as a result of their child's handicap.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The Social Services Act defines a severely handicapped child as a child who, by reason of a physical or mental disability, needs constant care and attention permanently or for an extended period. A substantially handicapped child is one who requires only marginally less care and attention than a severely handicapped child.
When deciding if a child is a substantially handicapped or a severely handicapped child for the purposes of payment of handicapped child's allowance, my Department is guided by the Commonwealth Department of Health. That Department assesses the information provided by the child's parents and the medical practitioner who has been treating the child. If there is doubt, an independent medical opinion may be sought.
(2) The family of a substantially handicapped child is eligible for assistance if its income-after the deduction of special costs incurred in caring for the child-does not exceed the Average Minimum Award Wage for an Adult Male increased according to the number of children in the family of the claimant.

Mosquito Aedes VigiIax
(Question No. 527)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February, 1981:
(1) Will he ascertain whether an infestation of the mosquito type known as aedes vigilax currently being suffered by residents in the Brisbane suburb of Banyo originates from lands reserved for the New Brisbane Airport development.
(2) If the mosquito does originate from these lands does the Commonwealth assume any authority for the eradication of this pest when the breeding grounds are located on Commonwealth land.
(3) What is the procedure and the larvicide used in the eradication of aedes vigilax.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the,honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2)1 am informed by the entomologist at the Queensland Institute of Medical Research (who oversees vector surveillance activities at and near the Brisbane Airport) that breeding of Aedes vigilax does occur throughout the salt marsh swamps, part of which is Commonwealth land where the Brisbane Airport development is planned.
However the possibility of other species biting the residents of Banyo cannot be excluded. It is anticipated that breeding on Commonwealth land will be considerably reduced by the draining, filling and levelling operations connected with the new airport development. In addition appropriate vector control and surveillance measures will be undertaken to control breeding, as part of the overall plan to keep Australia's international airports vector free.
(3) These measures include one or more of the following:
reduction of breeding grounds through drainage, filling, ditching or other similar methods
use of the larvicide 'Abate' use of 'Malathion' as an insecticide for adult mosquitoes.
Grants for Intellectually Handicapped
(Question No. 593)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Minister for Sociill Security, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
What capital and recurrent grants have been made by the Commonwealth Government to the Ferntree Gully and Districts Welfare Association for the Intellectually Handicapped for each year from 1967 to 1980, and for what purposes was each grant made.
Mr Ilunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The Ferntree Gully and Districts Welfare Association for the Intellectually Handicapped was first approved for Commonwealth assistance under the Handicapped Children (Assistance) Act in 1970-71. No payments have been made under the Children's Services Program. The following financial assistance has been provided by the Department of Social Security in respect of the operation of the children's training centre at 77 Burwood Highway, Ferntree Gully and an activity therapy centre at 977 Burwood Highway, Ferntree Gully:

Answers to Questions

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1421

Build-

ing

Equipmain-

ment tenance Salary Annual

Year

subsidy subsidy subsidy total

1970-11 1911-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

2,337 1,850
492 527 1,422 14,616 5,819 2,286 2,930 3,700

580 1,040

5,823 12,198 18,749 17,585 19,724

$ < 2,337 1,850
492 527 1,422 20,439 18,597 21,035 21,555 23,424

Totals

35,979 1,620 74,979 111,678

These figures specify only those payments made by the Department of Social Security.

Regularisation of Status Program

(Question No. 614)

Mr Jull asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:

(I) How many applications for permanent residence were received in each State and Territory under the Regularisation of Status Program in 1980.

(2) How many applications under ROSP (a) have been approved, (b) have been rejected and (c) are awaiting determination, in each State and Territory.

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Applications received (these figures include some by people ineligible to apply). Note: The figures are for applications lodged, not the number of persons covered by applications.

New South Wales Victoria
Queensland South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania
Northern Territory Australian -Capital Territory
Office)

(including Central

5,805 2,114 1,028
297 811 91 190
314

Total

- . . . . . . . . . . 11,250

(2) (a) Applications approved (persons) as at 9 March 1981

New South Wales Victoria
Queensland South Australia Western Australia
Tasrnania Northern Territory
Australian Capital Territory Office)

(including Central

679 1,056
256 266 815
57 135
208

Total

. 3,472

(2) (b) Applications rejected (persons) as at 9 March 1981

New South Wales

nil

Victoria

nil

Queensland

nil

South Australia

nil

Western Australia

nil

Tasmania

I

Northern Territory

nil

Australian Capital Territory (including Central

Office)

nil

Total

(2) (c) Cases in process-applications (est) as at 9 March 1981

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory
Office)

(including Central

5,341 1,956
845 104 204 47 76
174

Total

. 8,756

The main delaying factor is the time taken to make character and related checks overseas.
Sale of Drugs
(Question No. 633)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(I) Can drugs thought to be dangerous by the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee and subsequently removed from the pharmaceutical benefits list still be Procured either across the counter on private prescription or through the hospital dispensaries.
(2) Will he request the National Health and Medical Research Council to follow up recommendations of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee in order to ensure uniformity in the availability of these drugs.
Mr MacKellar-The ansWer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Some such drugs can still be obtained on prescription or through hospital dispensaries. Drugs are not removed from the pharmaceutical benefits list solely because they are considered to be dangerous.
The Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) recommends the deletion of a drug from the pharmaceutical benefits list for various reasons, including-
the availability of a more effective alternative drug; the availability of a less toxic alternative drug; when in the light of further knowledge the therapeutic efficacy of a drug is found to be unsatisfactory; when the toxicity or suspected toxicity outweighs the therapeutic value; the drug has fallen into disuse; or the drug is no longer available.
In reviewing drugs available as pharmaceutical benefits the PBAC takes particular'notice of the comparative efficacy and toxicity of drugs in a therapeutic group.
Where a drug is shown to be toxic or dangerous, in the normal course of events its toxicity would be considered by the PBAC regarding availability as a pharmaceutical benefit and

1422 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Answers to Questions

concurrently or subsequently by other appropriate Commonwealth or State bodies regarding other aspects of its availability in the community. Thus, it is possible these drugs could still be procured in some, or all, parts of Australia, depending on the action taken by the relevant regulatory authorities.
(2) The National Health and Medical Research Council (NH & MRC) is alerted by the PBAC to all deletions which have been based on toxicity considerations. Suitable amendments are then made to the Council's Uniform Poisons Standard where appropriate. These amendments are notified to the States for incorporation into poisons legislation. The NH & MRC cannot, however, ensure that such recommendations are uniformly adopted.
Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme
(Question No. 670)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the practice of some parents of university students of using trust accounts in such a way as to employ their children and, in so doing, to become eligible for the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS) allowance.
(2) Will his Department make the allowance available to students in these cases; if not, will he (a) consider raising the means test for TEAS allowance and (b) consult with the Treasurer to determine ways by which this deceptive practice might be terminated.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follo",~:
(I) One of the grounds on which tertiary students may be awarded independent status under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS) is employment for two years full time in the workforce. There is no prohibition against employment in a family business or farm which may be operated as a sole trader, trust, or company; however applications for independent status must be supported by documentation which clearly indicates the bona fide nature of the employment. Independent status cannot be awarded on the basis of income from a trust where the student is not a bona fide employee of the concern.
(2) The allowance will be made available, provided the rules of the Scheme, as outlined in the Student Assistance Act and Regulations, are satisfied. The legislation provides for independent status on the basis of employment as indicated in (1) above.
(a) The means test on a student's income requires that,income from any source including employment, investments and trusts, be taken into account. Students may have an income of $2,000 a year before their allowance is affected. Where income is received in excess of $2,000, the allowance is reduced by $1 for every $2 of income in excess of $2,000. It is not proposed to vary this means test during 1981.
(b) I have no evidence of abuses occurring in the Scheme in the assessment of independent status on the basis of employment in family businesses or trusts, or in the means testing of student income derived from these sources.
Satellites
(Question No. 713)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(I) What satellites are being tracked currently by Smithfield TRANET Station 112 in South Australia.
(2) What are the orbital parameters of these satellites.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable' member's question is as follows:

(1) The only satellites currently being tracked by the TRANET station at Smithfield (now designated TRANET Station 412) are the five US Navy Navigation Satellites (NAVSATS) and the Geophysical Experimental.Ocean Satellite (GEOS-C).

(2) The NAVSATS are in polar orbits with a period of 107

minutes at altitudes of between about 550 and 600 nautical

miles. GEOS-C is in an orbit inclined at about 115 degrees to

the equator with a period of 101 minutes at an altitude of

about 450 nautical miles.

.

Asia Dairy Industries
(Question No. 720)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 5 March 1981:
(I) Have the Australian Federal Police commenced investigations into alleged irregularities in the affairs of Asia Dairy Industries and the Australian Dairy Corporation; if so, when.
(2) How' many police have been involved in the investigations and what period of time has been spent by t,he officers in making the investigations.
(3) On what dates have progress reports been given to the (a) Minister and (b) Government.
(4) Is. he able to say whether any report has been given to the Minister for Primary Industry; if so, on what date.
(5) On what dates has (a) he, (b) the Minister for' Primary Industry or (c) any other Minister asked for further inquiries to be carried out.
(6) Have the investigations shown that the Australian Federal Police lacks the skills, capacity or manpower to carry out the investigations; if not, what particular problem has caused a delay in reaching a conclusion in the matter.
(7) Has the Victorian State Police Fraud Squad been involved in the investigations,
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, on 18 August 1980.
(2), (3) and (4) Three police. A report was forwarded through the Secretary, Department of Primary Industry on 24 October 1980. A further report was similarly furnished on II March 1981.
(5) The further report was furnished following a request from the Secretary, Department of Primary Industry on 21 November 1980 under the direction of the Minister for Primary Industry.
(6) No, In all the circumstances, the investigation proceeded as quickly as possible.
(7) No.

Army Reserve
(Question No. 729)
Mr Mildren asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(I) Was the Army Reserve re-organised as a result of the implementation of the Millar Report; if so, did the reorganisation bring units to a minimum of 70 per cent of establishment.
(2) Did this result in 3 infantry battalions being disbanded in Victoria and the 2 remaining battalions being approved at the lowest personnel level authorised.

Answers to Questions

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1423

(3) Were undertakings given at the time of the reorganisation that when units reached specified levels of involvement the units would be split, thus increasing the number of units in Victoria.
(4) Have ,l.Uthorised unit levels been increased in order to avoid meeting this commitment.
(5) Will he examine the original undertakings on authorised strength and honour the commitment given at that time.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I ) Yes. Units were re-organised as a result of the Millar Committee recommendations. The 70 per cent manning level was regarded as a desirable goal as it was not considered practicable to rigidly enforce this level ofmanning.
(2) Yes.
(3) No specific undertakings were given that a unit could. split to form two smaller units. However it is possible for units that achieve a posted strength in excess of their approved establishment to be split if there is an organisation for battle requirement for an additional unit. This only applies to units classified as Type A which for a battalion is almost the same as for an ARA battalion with the addition of specific increments to cater for integral recruiting cells; training cells, bands and additional key appointments.
(4) No. Establishment changes have been made for the sole purpose of aligning ARES establishments as closely as possible to equivalent Regular Army establishments as part of the further development of the "Total Force" concept.
(5) The matter of re-raising of units is being examined in Army Office, however reversion to previous criteria is not favoured as this could lead to the creation of non-viable units.
Defence Force Reserves
(Question No. 740)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(1) Is it a fact -that single mothers are required to pay for rations and quarters during periods of live-in camps with Defence Force Reserves, but married mothers are exempt from these payments.
(2) If so, as an unmarried mother has to provide for the care of her child while absent, will he state why this discrimination exists.
(3) Has he taken any action to rem\lve this apparent discrimination; if so, what.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) It is not a fact that marital status determines a member's entitlement to exemption from Rations and Quarters charges when on continuous Reserve Force service. Any member who maintains a home for his/her dependants, but who is required to live away from that home for the Reserve service is entitled to waiver of Rations and Quarters charges.
(2) No discrimination exists between married and single parents in the Reserve Forces when determining entitlements to exemption from payment of Rations and Quarters charges. The entitlement to exemption is based on the member's maintenance of a home for dependants.
(3) See (1) and (2) above.

Low Rent Accommodation
(Question No. 787)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that there are a number of houses in the Northcote Hales Court Estate, Victoria, being rented by the Housing Commission of Victoria to the Department of Defence.
(2) Is it also a fact that most of these houses are vacant and have been vacant for several months.
(3) Will he return these houses to the Housing Commission of Victoria so that they can be rented to low income persons in view of the shortage of low rent accommodation in Northcote and in the inner suburbs of Melbourne.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. The Department of Defence did occupy twelve flats at Number 2 Hales Court (Flats 1-6) and Number 4 Hales Court (Flats 1-6) at Hales Court Estate, Northcote, under the terms of the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement (Servicemen) but these were returned to the Victorian Housing Commission in May 1979.
(2) The question of vacancies is now a matter for the Victorian Housing Commission.
(3) See (1) above.
Copies of Decorations
(Question No. 793)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(I) Will he take action to prevent the manufacture and sale of copies of decorations belonging to individual ex'servicemen without the permission of the person concerned or the next of kin.
(2) Will he examine the possibility of making decorations awarded to individuals their exclusive property, including the rights over all reproduction other than for official purposes.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Prior to the enactment of the Defence Amendment Act (No.2)- 1977, provisions existed to proscribe the unauthorised manufacture, sale or supply of service decorations. The enforcement of these provisions proved to be.a major and expensive task and they did not prevent awards leaving Australia for sale with consequent loss to the country of significant military awards. Moreover, the provisions were found to restrict genuine collectors and dealers who have done much to encourage interest in and the preservation of military relics. Consequently, these provisions were amended. The new provisions had the support of the Military Historical Society and the Returned Services League of Australia. The present legislation, I might add, was endorsed by the honourable member for Oxley speaking for the Opposition.
(2) The duplication of decorations for commercial exploitation is to be deplored. However, because of the difficulties outlined above, as well as the difficulty of detecting duplicates and our inability to prevent reproduction overseas, the -reintroduction of proscripti"e legislation is not contemplated.
Global NettiatiOnS .
"(Question 0.801)
Mr Willis asked th Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:

1424 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) What is the Government's view in relation to the Global Negotiations.

(2) Have Australia's representatives in the United Nations Organisation taken any part in the discussions preparing for the Global Negotiations.

(3) Has the Australian Government taken any action to encourage the Government of the United States of America to participate in the Global Negotiations.

Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) The Government is committed to full participation in the proposed Global Negotiations on international economic issues. This is in line with Australia's intention to playa constructive role in international consideration of North-South issues.

The Government believes that Global Negotiations, which will comprehend the range of matters arising between developed and developing countries, could lead to progress towards mutually beneficial solutions to international problems. The Government's approach to preparations for the Global Negotiations has been to urge states to focus serious attention on a few recognised priority concerns where there is a realistic possibility of achieving tangible results. The Australian delegation in New York is giving full support to efforts to achieve agreement over the basis upon which the Global Negotiations might proceed.

(2) Yes-Australia participated actively in meetings of the UN General Assembly Committee of the Whole and the Special Session of the UN General Assembly on Economic Development at which preparatory arrangements for the Global Negotiations were considered in 1979. Australia has also participated in extensive deliberations on these issues as a member of an informal caucus comprising representatives from various geographical groupings which is known as the 'Friends of the President' of the General Assembly.

(3) Yes-in contacts over an extended period with officials

of the United States Government Australian officials have

stressed the importance which Australia attaches to partici-

pation by the United States in the negotiations.

.

Export Controls on Minerals
(Question No. 802)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(I) What decision has been made by Government, pursuant to discussions foreshadowed in an announcement by him on 15 December 1978, regarding removal of export controls on (a) salt, (b) nickel, (c) copper ore, concentrates and matte, (d) refined copper, (e) lead ore and concentrates, (f) zinc ore and concentrates, (g) manganese ore and concentrates, (h) tungsten ore and concentrates and (i) bismuth.
(2) Have export controls been removed from other minerals appearing in List A referred to in the same announcement.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I refer the honourable member to the media release on reduction of export controls on minerals issued by the Minister for Trade and Resources on 12 June 1979 (79/75) and a further statement by the Ministers for Trade and Resources, Industry and Commerce, and Business and Consumer Affairs on copper and certain copper products on 22 July 1980 (80/80).

(2) Yes, as stated in the aforementioned media release on 12 June 1979 (79/75). Also, a decision has been made to remove export controls from bismuth.
Bushfires: Water-bombing
(Question No. 813)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(I) Are scientifically controlled trials of water-bombing techniques to take place in Western Australia; ifso, why.
(2) Can he give an assurance that aircraft engaged in trials in Western Australia will be diverted to the eastern States should serious bushfires break out in these States at the time of the trials.
(3) If he can give this assurance, who will decide if this action is to be taken.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The location(s) of CSIRO's experiments-known as Project Aquarius-to evaluate the effectiveness of aerial fire fighting techniques are yet to be determined by consultation between CSIRO and State bushfire control authorities.
(2) No. The use of the aircraft will be dependent on the availability of firefighters trained to work in conjunction with it and on the establishment of an associated facility for the mixing and loading of fire retardant and other chemicals as well as water. The possibilities for deploying the aircraft to other States would be severely limited by the unavailability of a specially trained field force and the necessity to return to the loading facility to refill.
(3) See (2).
Bushfires: Water-bombing
(Question No. 815)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(I) What are the details of the plans for scientifically controlled trials of water-bombing techniques to be supervised by the CSIRO as announced by the Prime Minister on 22 September 1980.
(2) Will he announce the timing of the trials, the types of aircraft to be used and the likely financial arrangements for the trials; if so, when.
(3) When will the results of these trials be made available.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I refer the honourable member to the Prime Minister's reply to his earlier Question on Notice No. 45 (House of Representatives Hansard 25 February 1981 p. 197) in which he outlined the nature of the CSIRO study.
(2) Yes. The CSIRO experiments are expected to be carried out over the next two summers. During 1981-82 sites will be selected and prepared. This will involve fire fuel load assessment and characterisation in the test areas as well as fire behaviour studies. These studies are necessary to ensure that the full scale experiments can be conducted without endangering life or property. During 1982-83 actual air dropping using different fire retardants and mixtures will be carried out. At this stage the only air dropping operations planned for the 1981-82 fire season are those to be conducted with the Modular Airborne Firefighting System in Victoria using a RAAF Hercules aircraft. CSIRO will, at the appropriate time, call tenders for a suitable aircraft for use in its experiments the following summer. The Commonwealth is to finance the CSIRO

Answers to Questions

7 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1425

experiments and, as announced by the Prime Minister and the Premier of Victoria, will share the cost of the operations in Victoria during 1981-82 with the Victorian Government.
(3) Measurements taken during these experiments will be subsequently used for evaluation of fire control techniques and the extension of results to other areas. The results of the CSIRO experiments will be made available as soon as possible following completion of the actual field work.
Forest Fires: CSIRO Laboratory Experiments
(Question No. 816)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
Is a vast amount of information on combatting forest fires now available to the Government from various sources in North America and Europe; if so, why is it necessary for the CSIRO to carry out planned laboratory type experiments when the Government could have this information made available on request.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Information from North America and Europe on aerial forest fire control has been available to and collected by Commoriwealth and State bushfire control authorities for many years. The data relates to particular vegetation, climate and terrain types which are not experienced in this country. Drop patterns for various tankers have been established but as yet there is no data on the suppression effectiveness of various concentrations of fire retardants on forest fires of differing intensities. CSIRO's evaluation is intended to demonstrate the likely value and cost effectiveness of the use of aircraft to fight forest and bush fires in Australia.
Philatelic Sales
(Question No. 855)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
What has been the (a) gross income and (b) net profit to Australia Post from philatelic sales for each of the last 5 years.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Estimated gross revenue figures from Australia Post sales categorised as philatelic, for each of the past five years, are shown below.
Operating costs for the philatelic service would generally equate with about half of that revenue.
The level of 'net profit', however, must be a matter of speculation since it cannot be determined to what extent stamps attributed to philatelic purchases are used ultimately for payment of postage.

Year
1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Estimated Revenue
$ 5.2 7.1 8.5 16.0 27.7

Defence Services: Attitude towards Homosexuality
(Question No. 856)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
Will he publish the Services attitude towards homosexuality amongst members of the Forces, as outlined to me in correspondence some months ago.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The substance of the correspondence referred to by Dr Klugman is as follows:
There is a Defence Force policy on homosexuality in the Services which is applied in common in the three arms of the Defence Force. This policy is based on the fact that the disciplined and structured environment of the Defence Force requires an approach to homosexual relationships which is in keeping with its primary functions and which may be different from the approaches which may be appropriate in the civilian community at large.
There is a need in the Defence Force to maintain command relationships, high morale, and discipline. The Services cannot function effectively in peace time, let alone in an operations situation, without these.
Acceptance and condonation of homosexual behaviour does not fit either the public or the Services' view of the Defence Force and would adversely affect both recruiting and re-engagement. For example, a large proportion of those recruited into the Services are very young persons for whom the Services have an obligation to act, in respect of social behaviour, in loco parentis. If it were to be known that the Services declined to fulfil this obligation many parents would be reluctant to authorise or encourage their children to enlist.
An allegation that a serviceman or servicewoman has been involved in homosexual conduct is necessary before any incident is investigated. The investigators are carefully briefed on the conduct of the investigation, which is carried out as discreetly and with as little publicity as possible in order to minimise embarrassment to those involved.
Should an investigation show that an allegation is illfounded, that is the end of the matter. But if an investigation substantiates an allegation, further action may be either disciplinary (i.e. the laying of charges) or administrative.
In all three Services there is a reluctance to take disciplinary action. A trial inevitably causes embarrassment not only to the accused but also to others who may be wholly innocent victims.
If it is reasonable to assume that the serviceman or servicewoman is not a confirmed homosexual and is unlikely to become involved in further incidents, he or she may be retained in the Service and warned of the consequences of further involvement in homosexual behaviour.
If, however, it is apparent that the serviceman or servicewoman is a confirmed homosexual who cannot or will not refrain from further involvement, administrative action is taken to arrange release from the Service.
Although confirmed homosexuals are not retained in the Armed Services, their cases are treated with sympathy and discretion, and it is possible for them to leave the Services with an honourable discharge.

1426 REPRESENTATIVES 7 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Canadian Seal Hunt
(Question No. 907)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) Has he or his Department had any correspondence or discussions with the Canadian Government concerning the current seal hunt in Canada.
(2) Has he, his Department or any other Australian Government Department or Agency expressed a view on the Canadian seal hunt at an international forum or to the Canadian Government; if so, what view is expressed.
(3) If a view has not been expressed does the Government intend to raise the matter with either the Canadian Government or at any international environmental conference at which it is represented.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) The Government has had no contact with the Canadian Government concerning this year's seal hunt in Canada.
(2) and (3) Australia has discussed the matter informally with Canada in the past. Canada is generally recognised as I having an active and enlightened approach towards conservation issues and Australia has previously expressed the view that the Canadian authorities are fully competent to deal with this matter.
Neither hooded seals nor harp seals (the main species hunted) are currently endangered, and no country saw fit to raise the issue at the recent meeting of the Convention on In- , ternational Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora in New Delhi.
Both Canada and Australia are parties to the Convention. The Australian Government will continue to keep itself informed about the seal hunt and, should it be convinced that any hunted species are becoming endangered, Australia would be prepared to seek to have those species scheduled under the Convention.


