House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 123, 1981 Thursday, 4 June 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3099

Thursday, 4 June 1981
Mr SPEAKER CRt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10.30 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of unqersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party PQlicy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
by Dr Cass, Dr Everingham, Dr Jenkins, Mr Les Johnson,. Mr Charles Jones, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) The financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary Institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) The imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1974 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) Those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the n,introduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) Post-secondary tuition fees not be reintroduced for any courses or for any category of students.
(ii) The imposition of visa charges upon private overseas students be ceased and desisted from immediately.
And your,petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Duffy, Mr Jacobi, Mr Kent, MI' Milton and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the 1I0use of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) The financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) The imposition of post-secondary tuiti~n t'eesof compaTable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) Those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the re-introduction of. fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
1. Post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students.
2. The visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately.
3. The Minister of Education immediately clarify the government's attitude to the re-introduction of postsecondary tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Jenkins and Mr Young.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersignd citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
1. the proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. the proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a 'poor risk' (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. in regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. the proposed restriction of adult secondary assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full bigh school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school eady.

3100 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Petitions

5. the proposal not to fund 30 colleges of advanced education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid 1980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or for any category of students;
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students.
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced. (iv) that there be no restriction of adult secondary
assistance. (v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are
rationalised be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bourtd will ever humbly pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places were the people may partake of the three basic needs of life: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
S. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5811 hotels in Australia.
7. J'he very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
11. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
1. Recognise the importance and place of the Australian Hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
2. Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite and Mr Lusher.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That public investment in tertiary education in the form of Federal Government funding is an investment in Australia's future and enables Australia to meet the demands of technological innovation;
That grave concern has been generated as a result of the Government's decisions to:
(a) Abolish the education research and development committee.
(b) Terminate special support for educational research. (c) Scale down in-house and contracted research activities
of the Department of Education. (d) Scale down participation in international education
activities, particularly UNESCO and OECD. (e) Further tighten already restrictive eligibility guidelines
for TEAS. (f) Supplement TEAS assistance by means of a loan
scheme. (g) Phase in tuition fees for students undertaking degrees
and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification. (h) Reduce grants to universities and colleges to take accourtt of fee income, (i) compeletely abolish 30 colleges of advanced education, and (j) Scale down various engineering schools in colleges of advanced education around Australia:
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these regressive decisions and. desist from obvious attempts to pave the way for a complete reintroduction of tertiary fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cross and Mrs Darling.
Petitions received.
Anti-discrimination Legislation
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives' of the Australian P\lrliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth: That currently discrimination in the provision of work, in appointment to jobs and in promotion exists in Australia on particular grounds including, inter alia, grounds of race, ethnic origin, marital status, pregnancy, sex and/or sexual preference; and

Petitions

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3101

That currently discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits is exercised against particular groups of individuals-in particular, against married women.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employment, in employment of individuals under federal awards, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasi-governmental organisations, and in employment of all persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal opportunity legislation should have jurisdiction; and
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons without regard to sex and/or marital status:
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrCross.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This 'petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian postsecondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties;
(ii) the imposition of tuition fees for second degrees and post graduate degrees will deter many able persons from enrolling-such courses and further preserve higher education for the rich;
(iii) the introduction of a loans scheme, subsequent review of the level of TEAS and the tightening of the eligibility criteria for TEAS will cause great financial hardship and wiII deter students from enrolling in tertiary institutions.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
1. 'Post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students.
2. The visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately.
3. The Government reverse its decision to introduce a loans scheme and instead increase and extend TEAS scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cross.
Petition received.
Aborigines
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the humble petitioners respectfully believe that the Federal Government has the power conferred on it by the 1967 Referendum to intervene on behalf of Aboriginal people in any conflict with any State or Territory Government.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Federal Government assumes its full responsibility for Aboriginal Affairs and use the powers conferred on it by the people of Australia in the J967 Referendum to intervene on behalf of Aborigines in any conflict with any State or Territory Government;

That the Federal Government use those constitutional powers to intervene on behalf of the Aboriginal people in their dispute with the Goverm1'\ent of Western Australia enacting special overlay legislation to make unlawful the entry of mining company agents onto Noonkanbah land without the express permission of the Aboriginal people and that it be done immediately for the benefit of the Noonkanbah people.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cross.
Petition received.
Health Care Services: Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Austral,ia respeclfulIy"showeth:
That we strongly condemn any action taken by the Federal Government which will lead to the destruction of the Free Hospital and Medical Services of the State of Queensland.
And your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Parliament reject the proposed health cost sharing arrangements between the Commonwealth and the State governments and guarantee the maintenance of the present scheme whereby all Queenslanders who wish to avail themselves of these services may do so.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned Australian citizens showeth:
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital has been of inestimable value to eligible repatriation beneficiaries for many years, and the closure or dispersal of the facilities available at the hospital would be a retrograde step.
The proposed decision to close Rosemount Repatriation Hospital through active discouragement by departmental administrative officers of any further referrals by medical officers of patients for medically prescribed occupational therapy is objectionable.
Closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital would severely disadvantage veterans in Brisbane's northern suburbs, as well as their relatives and friends who would be required to travel a great distance in order to visit hospitalised veterans at either of the lwo alternative repatriation hospitals.
Closure of Rosemount repatriation hospital and transfer of patients to Greenslopes would greatly add to the administrative burden of that repatriation and general hospital.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will reverse its announced decision to close the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Overseas Aid
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

3102 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Petitions

That Australia, as an affluent and developed nation, should be able to expend more of its resources on the alleviation of human suffering and deprivation in other less developed countries.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth government will:
Increase overseas aid to 0.7 per cent of Australia's G.N.P.
Increase to 4 per cent the proportion of overseas aid channeled through recognised non-government organisations such as World Vision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Migrant Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That serious concern has been generated in the migrant community following the Government's endorsement of decisions of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government Functions to:
Restrict the role of the Commonwealth in adult migrant and refugee education program to the arrangement and coordination only of such programs and relinquish responsibility for the conduct ofindividual programs.
Terminate some and rationalise other information services provided by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.
Terminate forthwith the migrant assisted passaged scheme.
Transfer the translation interpreting services to private agencies or withdraw altogether.
Reduce hours of operation of the telephone interpreting service.
Discontinue production of the National Groups Directory.
Reduce overseas based staff associated with the recruitment and selection of persons for permanent settlement in Australia, which will result in greater delays in the processing of immigration applications.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government respect the needs of Australia's migrants and accordingly rescind these decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Great Barrier Reef: Oil Exploration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens:
That the undersigned are of the opinion that the Great Barrier Reef and region must be protec~ed in entir~ty from the potentially destructive effects of mining and respectfully demand that you ensure this by declaring a continuous marine park of the reef zone from Fraser Island to the Tortes Straitin 1981, for which management plans of the type devised for the Capricornia Section can be prepared and discussed in due course.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that 'between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent'.
It is your petitioners sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive .abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrDobie.
Petition received.
Health Insurance
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the Hous" of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of. Australia respectfully showeth:

Petitions

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3103

1. That Federal Government proposals to shift the cost of health insurance onto the individual has placed a disproportionate and unfair financial burden on lower income groups, but particularly on large families: single income families; the chronicall~ ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes
2. That an estimated 15-20 per cent of Australians will not be able to afford insurance and will be forced to undertake extensive travel to avail themselves of outpatient services, the quality of which will be drastically reduced because of staff cuts
3. That doctors, who at this moment are awaiting a fee increase, will inevitably become more and more expensive
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government (i) will re-examine the effects of health proposals and of the necessity for compulsory health insurance on lower income groups who do not presently meet the description of disadvantaged, and (ii) redefine the criteria determining the genuinely needy and disadvantaged to encompass the categories of persons mentioned in (I.) above.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr HllImpilrey.
Petition received.
Hospital Funding Arrangements
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members ohhe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That the Federal Government's shifting of responsibility for funding of public hospitals onto the State Governments has placed a disproportionate and onerous burden onto lower income groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes.
2. That included in the undesirable effects on the public hospital system in Queensland will be-
(i) long waiting times for non-urgent surgery (ii) long waiting periods in out-patients (iii) services, e.g. X-ray and Pathology will be reduced (iv) staff will be reduced (v) possible abolition of teaching hospitals and centralis"
ation of training facilities for doctors and nurses (vi) closing down of small country hospitals
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will request the Government to re-examine its public hospital funding arrangments, the impact of these arrangements on lower income groups mentioned in (I.) above and increase funding to the States to ensure that the undesirable effects mentioned in (2.) above do not occur.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Child Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(i) that according to the latest ADS bulletin on child care, based on a June 1980 survey, it is estimated that nearly 50,000 Australian children do not have access to child care centres and may be receiving less than adequate attention in the homes of people other than their parents;

(ii) that the Federal Government has neglected to regularly review and update funding arrangements since the family day care schemes were introduced in 1973;
(iii) that due to rising annual costs and the shortfall in Government funding since 1973, family day care centres are stretched to the limit in even maintaining their usual amount of child care.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will review and increase in real terms, its funding of family day care schemes in the 1981-82 Budget to permit improved child care and to extend this facility to those 50,000 Australian children who do not now have access to child care centres.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Taxation: Animal Welfare Organisations
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That the way in which we treat the animals entrusted to our protection is a reflection of our concern for people.
(2) That charitable organisations which work in the area of animal welfare must have the funds to help them to pursue and promote a policy of more enlightened and humane treatment toward animals.
(3) That tax conce~sions for donors to animal welfare charities:
(i) would achieve much toward alleviating unnecessary ~uffering and cruelty toward animals;
(ii) would bring animal welfare charities onto a more equal footing with other charities.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will legislate to amend present taxation laws to enable the extension of tax concessions to people and organisations who donate funds to accredited animal welfare charities.
And your petitioner~ as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the petiton of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Owing to an overwhelming and continuous demand by the Australian people for a cruise service within the economic scope of the working man and his family, we request the Government to lift the ban placed on Soviet passenger cruise vessels entering Australian ports.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should take action as it deems appropriate

3104 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Petitions

to ensure the continuing functioning of the Betsy Women's Refuge and the network of shelters in Australia.
We ask that the Federal Government acknowledge that 'Betsy' and its counterparts provide housing and care for women and children in violent situations, and the Governmen t agree to meet the financial responsibilities for continued and eITective refuge functioning.
The Federal Government should be informed that one in every five applicants are not accommodated at the Betsy Refuge due to overcrowding or full occupancy.
We therefore petition for full and adequate funding. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford. Petition received.
Interest Rates
The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that:
(1) Interest rates, rather than falling by 2 per cent as promised by the Prime Minister in November, 1977, are now between 2 per cent and 5 per cent higher than when that promise was made, and are at historically higher levels.
(2) This prevents many potential home buyers from borrowing to purchase a house; causes severe hardship to many people who are paying off a housing loan, causing some to default and lose their home; prevents or restrains the establishment or expansion of many businesses; and is directly responsible for increasing numbers of bankruptcies.
Your petitioners, therefore, pray that: Minimisation of interest rates be adopted as one of the aims of economic policy; the money supply target be relaxed to accommodate income growth without forcing credit restrictions and exorbitant interest rates; regulation of borrowing rates be reintroduced to prevent the financial institutions raising lending rates to compensate for higher borrowing rates; and foreign investment be more rigorously controlled in order to prevent destabilising inflows of foreign funds. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scott. Petition received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of Parliament assembled in the House of Representatives and the Senate. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Tambling Petition received.
Women's Centres
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned residents of Tasmania showeth:

That your petitioners are concerned about the uncertain future funding for Women's Refuges in Australia.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Commonwealth Government maintain responsibility for the National Womens Programme by continuing to fund them on a 75-25 per cent Federal State basis.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of Australia and their supporters respectfully showeth:
That funds for medical research into epidermolysis bullosa are no longer being made available from the Federal Government to the medical research team at the University of New South Wales, enabling them to continue medical research into epidermolysis bullosa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that these signatures contained on these forms will serve to make it known that we expect these funds to be forthcoming in the very near future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Export of Dog and Cat Fur
To the Honourable the Speaker and Memhers of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned children of Lindisfarne Primary School, Tasmania respectfully showeth that:
Domestic pets are being stolen and killed for their fur by people intent on making money. Dog and cat fur are exported to Europe by the thousands. The Australian Government has not made this illegal and we think this is not fair to the animals or pet owners.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the export of dog and cat fur to Europe be banned.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Good luck.
Petition received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B52 bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52s: (a) Carried nuclear weapons (b) Were engaged in bom hing missions against another
State.

Questions Without Notice

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3105

Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy.
Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region.
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents.
Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your Petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.

I hope that the honourable gentleman would not be advocating that we should be talking of boycotting a meeting with our close friend and neighbour because whilst we disagree strongly in relation to the proposed Springbok tour, that is only one facet of a relationship which is important to New Zealand and very important to Australia. It is an important facet, but it also does need to be understood that New Zealand's Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Brian Talboys, have in strong terms condemned the fact that that tour is taking place. So to that extent, that in itself is not a disagreement between governments. The
difference is, of course, that in Australia we would not allow visas to be given for that sort of tour to take place whereas in New Zealand the onus has been placed on the sporting body to make its own particular decisions. It has made that decision against the advice of the New Zealand Government. So we do need to keep these matters in perspective. I have noticed the reports about this finance meeting. I hope that the honourable gentleman will take note of what I have said in the spirit in which it is offered.

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
SOUTH AFRICAN RUGBY TOUR OF NEW ZEALAND
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I direct my question to the Prime Minister. I refer to reports that many Commonwealth countries are considering boycotting a meeting of Commonwealth finance Ministers to be held in New Zealand in September in view of the planned South African Springbok rugby tour of New Zealand, which I might add is a tour that the Opposition also opposes. Does the Australian Government intend to send a representative to the meeting of Commonwealth finance Ministers? If so, could it be interpreted as agreeing with New Zealand's acquiescence in the Springbok tour?

DISTINGUISHED VISITORS Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that we have present in the Gallery this morning a delegation from the House of Representatives of Morocco led by His Excellency Mr Ahmed Osman. On behalf of the House I extend a very warm welcome to the members of the delegation. Honourable members-Hear, hear!
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
AVIATION POLICY Mr CARLTON-My question is addressed to the Prime Minister. What steps will the Government be taking to increase competition and improve consumer choice within domestic aviation?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I thank the honourable gentleman for his reaffirmation of the bipartisan policy in relation to apartheid in sport. I think it is terribly important that this Parliament maintain that approach for reasons that all honourable members will understand. I would also hope that everyone in this House, because of a long and an historic association of many different kinds, would not want Australia to get into the business of boycotting meetings with New Zealand, no matter what other countries might do. If we had a situation in which most countries were not going to that meeting I suppose that
might throw into question the basis of the meeting itself and whether that meeting ought to be held.

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-On the assumption that the legislation is finally passed-there are certain important aspects of that legislation
which the honourable gentleman will be aware of and which the Government believes must stand as they have been introduced into the Parliamentthe first additional step to which we are com-
mitted is an examination of the practicality and, if practical, the means whereby some or all of the shares of Trans-Australia Airlines could be passed into public hands. The move towards making TAA a public company will, of course, proceed. In the initial instance it has been said that the Government will own all the shares, but that does not constitute a decision to sell or not to sell. We

3106 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

will immediately establish an independent examination of the practicality in the Australian environment of selling some or all of the shares and, at the same time, if practical, the best means of moving into private ownership.
A deregulation inquiry will be established. We expect that inquiry to report to government in the fifth year. There is a deliberate reason for that time scale. It will take two and a half to three years before all the new aircraft are operating in Australia. If the advice we have had is correct, those aircraft, because of the differences between the airlines, will break parallel sheduling and establish a much greater degree of competition on Australia's air routes. A deregulation inquiry to make a proper judgment of circumstances in Australia will need to be able to make judgments based on the experience of those new equipments operating. In any case, the present agreement will run for five years with the possibility thereafter of a three-year period of notice being given, whether in the fifth, sixth or any other year. The report of the deregulation inquiry will plainly need to be published and debated. The Government will plainly need to state its views in relation to it. It will do so.
I cannot prejudge whether what will come out of that examination will be for or against deregulation. All I can say is that the Government will be publishing that report. We will be making a statement about it and will have to justify to our own parties and to Parliament whatever stance we take at that time. Clearly, if events were moving in that direction and if the substance of examinations were moving in that direction, it would enable us to give notice in the fifth year if we wanted to and, at the same time, to indicate what would be taking place once notice had been given and what legislative changes and whatever would be required. These are all firm commitments of the Government. In addition, the present legislation establishes an air fares committee. On the deregulation inquiry and in the examination of matters relating to TAA as a public corporation we clearly need people of fair and independent mind who can make their own judgments about what will be in the best interests of Australia's travelling public.
TAX CONCESSIONS FOR THE AUSTRALIAN FILM INDUSTRY Mr HAYDEN-I refer to reports of the Treasurer's latest and embarrassing contortion in relation to tax concessions for the Australian film industry whereby apparently the Government will now' honour its initial undertaking to the industry. Are those reports correct? If so, is it a fact

that the total cost of this undertaking is nearly $120m? Is it a fact that it is possible for an individual on the marginal personal tax rate of 60 per cent to rig a $lm outlay to arrange a return that merely breaks even and thereby achieve a handsome saving on tax, at the expense of the rest of the community, of some $600,000? Is it further a fact that because of his latest undertaking these sorts of benefits will be available even where films fail to reach the production stage? Is it a fact that the Government is refusing to divulge the beneficiaries of these extraordinarily generous arrangements and that among the major beneficiaries eligible to draw on the benefits of these arrangements are the large commercial television corporations? Finally, will he state the justification for this undesirable secrecy in view of the opportunity it offers for huge and expensive tax avoidance?
Mr HOWARD-It is a very odd circumstance that the thrust of the question of the Leader of the Opposition on this matter concerns the very proper refusal of my colleague, the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, to divulge the identity of the companies that have lodged applications. The reason for the ambivalence of the Leader of the Opposition is that the Labor Party cannot make up its mind where it stands on the concession. No doubt the shadow Treasurer will have a few things to say about the taxation aspects. Yet last week the Labor Party spokeswoman on these matters in another place was critical of the fact that the generous concessions that the Leader of the Opposition now, by implication, impugns were not fully met, in her view, by the announcement I made last week. So the Labor Party's ambivalence on this issue is underlined very clearly by the nature of the question of the Leader of the Opposition.
I will deal with each element of the question. The effect of the statement that I made yesterday is that people who made investments prior to 27 May-that is, the date the legislation was introduced last week-will have those investments treated for tax purposes fully in the manner outlined in the statement made by the then Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and me on 18 December. That was the intent of the decision that I announced yesterday. An amendment to give effect to that announcement will be introduced in the Committee stage of the debate on the legislation in this place tomorrow. So the Leader of the Opposition and everybody else will be able to see the legislative effect which that decision is given. I stress, in answer to the Leader of the Opposition, that the change I announced last Wednesday will continue to apply in respect of all

Questions Without Notice

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3107

investments made after 27 May. That change was designed to remove some of the potential for abuse that may have existed had the full etTect of the original announcement been maintained.
I have never denied that this is a very generous concession. It is a concession which is, to a particular industry, probably without precedent in our taxation laws. Against that background, T stress that the complaints of some people in the film industry are in fact without substance. So far as the example cited by the Leader of the Opposition-a 150 per cent write-ofT being available and up to 50 per cent of the amount of the original contribution being exempt from taxation-there can be no argument about that. If a person invests $500,000 in a movie-providing the conditions of the legislation are fulfilled; these involve a number of very important safeguards, particularly in respect of those who made investments prior to 27 May-to qualify for the concession the money must be fully expended on the production of the movie before the end of the financial year following the year in which the investment was made. If the Leader of the Opposition seeks to establish--
Mr Barry Jones-Does that include the preshooting stage?
Mr HOWARD-It includes all eligible expenditure which is defined both in the EllicottHoward statement and in the legislation.

product by a certain period. In recent years a number of countries, especially because of economic difficulties within their economics, have been providing a lesser percentage than they earlier had. This is one of the matters which has sharpened the North-South debate, the debate between the wealthier and the poorer countries. It is one of the matters that has cast doubts on the credibility of wealthier countries about their real intentions in these matters.
I think it is worth noting that because of financial stringency and even though, by and large, the real value of the aid dollar has been maintained over the past several years, as a proportion of GDP in 1974-75, when the level was 0.56 per cent, the figure has fallen to an estimated level of 0.42 per cent or 0.43 per cent for 1980-81. Whilst by and large the actual real value of the aid vote has been maintained, there has been a relative fall in the proportion of gross domestic product that Australia provides. This trend becomes more marked when our economy is growing strongly. We know the growth figures for the six months to December. We know the estimates of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, which place Australia above all other OECD countries in terms of estimated growth throughout this year. There are additional reasons, perhaps, why Australia should seek to set some kind of example in this area.

Mr Barry Jones-Prior to shooting?
Mr HOWARD-If the honourable gentleman will look at the legislation we will be able to save the time of the House by his knowing what the legislation provides. I conclude by saying that I believe the refusal of the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment to disclose the names of companies that have lodged applications is an entirely proper stance. It involves a question of confidentiality of commercial information between the Government and the people who have sought certification from the Minister under the legislation. When this Bill comes on for debate it will be very interesting to find out where the Labor Party stands on the concession in the legislation.
OVERSEAS AID
Dr EDWARDS-l ask the Prime Minister: What is the Government's policy as to overseas aid? Does the Government have a particular percentage of gross domestic product as a target for overseas aid?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Government has had, and Australia has had, a best endeavours policy of reaching 0.7 per cent of gross domestic

We need to understand that there are many reasons for aid being provided. There are moral and humanitarian reasons which for many people are sufficient in themselves. There is also, as 1 believe, a very substantial self-interest reason in helping to promote higher standards of living in many countries-self-interest in terms of promotion of peace and stability but also in terms of encouraging greater growth of economic markets. As a result of the removal of Australia's access to the European Economic Community, if it were not for the newly industrialising countries of Asia and the Pacific we would have been in great difficulty in terms of our own trade. It is those newly industrialising countries that have provided great opportunities for trade. As there is greater economic advancement in more of the developing countries, so those opportunities will be broadened. I believe that there are economic benefits for everyone in relation to that.
There was a report in one of the journals this morning which was, in fact, jumping far ahead of itself. The Minister for Foreign Affairs will have his aid submissions dealt with in the Budget context. I expect that any decisions being made about aid would be largely Budget decisions, although I

3108 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

do not rule out the prospect of some aspects of decisions being made in relation to the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in October. Basically, these are Budget matters. They need to be looked at against the total overall context of Australia's requirements and Australia's interests. At the same time, I think we need to understand that this is a serious matter, that the North-South debate has been stalled, and that there is a very real need to promote greater opportunities amongst developing nations, and especially amongst the least developed nations. There is an obligation on all countries, especially relatively wealthy countries such as Australia, not just on a moral and humanitarian basis but also on a self interest basis. I hope that this might be another matter on which the Australian Labor Party will agree with what I have been saying.
SPENCER GULF; RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
Mr WALLIS-My question is directed to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment. In view of the report that the extremely high tides experienced in the upper reaches of Spencer Gulf in South Australia last Monday breached the walls of the tailings dam containing radioactive wastes from the former uranium processing plant at Port Pirie, can the Minister give any information on whether any radioactive material was released into Spencer Gulf? If so, what steps have been taken to eliminate any dangers created by the release of these radioactive materials?
Mr WILSON-I do not have available to me today any information on the matter raised by the honourable member. I will investigate it as a matter of urgency and communicate with him to see whether there is any cause for concern about the matters which he has raised.
MALAYSIA: WITHDRAWAL OF ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE AIRCRAFT Mr FALCONER-I refer to statements made
by the Minister for Defence in Malaysia and Singapore concerning the withdrawal of Royal Australian Air Force aircraft and personnel from Butterworth, Malaysia and Tengah, Singapore, by 1987 at the latest. What information can the Acting Minister for Defence give to the House about the proPQsed changes in our Butterworth deployment? Will the Government give full consideration to the interests of the 1,200 locally engaged civilians who are employed by the RAAF and other personal domestic staff who are employed by Australian servicemen and who are dependent upon that employment? Can the Minister explain the implications of our changed deployment for

the Five-Power Defence Arrangements and the Integrated Air Defence system?
Mr NEWMAN-It is true that my colleague the Minister for Defence is presently in Malaysia and Singapore having discussions on the subject of Mirage squadrons. He has completed discussions with the Malaysian authorities and yesterday he had discussions with the Singaporeans. He is due back in Australia today. The honourable member has raised very important questions-questions which I am sure the Minister has been discussing. I think it would be best for this matter to wait until he can answer it properly. I will make sure that the question is referred to him so that he can give the honourable member a complete answer.
TAXATION LEGISLATION Mr SCHOLES-In answer to a question yesterday the Treasurer indicated that the Government did not intend to honour its commitment to introduce legislation to deal with the matter of rent vis-a-vis taxation in remote areas, which would leave the law as it was when it was interpreted to the disadvantage of miners and caused serious problems in Australia last year. I ask: Does the agreement between the Treasurer and the Commissioner of Taxation to ignore the law as interpreted constitute a satisfactory means of dealing with a government promise in an area as sensitive as taxation? Would such an agreement by the Taxation Commissioner be open to challenge as a breach of the taxation Acts? Will the Treasurer as a matter of urgency bring in legislation to deal with the matter so that there can be no suggestion of the Taxation Commissioner's position being compromised and no suggestion that the tax will be applied? The Commissioner has been compromised by being asked to ignore the law.
Mr HOWARD-With great respect, the honourable member for Corio is wrong. I did not say yesterday that we would not meet the arrangement that was concluded last October. I said that that legislation would not be introduced during this session of the Parliament. It is the intention of the Government, and always has been, to legislate to give effect to the arrangement that was made last October when that unfortunate dispute was settled. We would expect that when the legislation is introduced it will have the total support of the Opposition in putting it through the Parliament. In response to the honourable member for Griffith I indicated yesterday that the Commissioner of Taxation had informed me that the taxation law, pending the introduction of the legislation, would be administered in a common sense fashion and it would be patently ridiculous

Questions Without Notice

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3109

for it to be administered contrary to the understanding which the honourable gentleman is aware of and which is patently in opposition to the expressed wishes of everybody in this House.
DEPARTMENT OF THE CAPITAL TERRITORY
Mr SAINSBURY-Can the Minister for the Capital Territory inform the House who will be the next permanent head of the Department of the Capital Territory? Further, will the Minister and the new permanent head ensure that the interests of Queanbeyan are fully considered in all policy decisions affecting the Australian Capital Territory?
Mr HODGMAN-I thank the honourable member for Eden-Monaro for the question. It gives me very great pleasure to inform the House, the people of the Australian Capital Territory and, indeed, the people of Australia that the next permanent head of the Department of the Capital Territory will be Mr Tony Blunn. He will succeed that very great Australian and most distinguished Commonwealth public servant, Mr Lauric Daniels, C.B., OBE., who retires on 10 August next. I have every confidence and, I believe, this would be accepted on all sides of politics, that Mr Blunn will be a most worthy successor to Mr Daniels.
In response to the second part of the honourable member's question, I draw attention to the fact that I do recognise, as a result of strong representations by the honourable member, that the interests of Queanbeyan are very closely interrelated to the interests of the Australian Capital Territory. A very substantial number of people reside in Queanbeyan but work in the national capital. It is impossible to consider the future of the Australian Capital Territory without having regard to the interests of Queanbeyan. The interests are identical economically, socially and in many other ways. I am somewhat surprised that members of the Australian Labor Party do not regard this matter seriously. I assure them that I do. I assure the honourable member for Eden.. Monaro, the Mayor of Queanbeyan and others living in that area that while I have had the honour to be the Minister for the Capital Territory I have accepted the point that, economically, what is good for Canberra will be good for Queanbeyan. In every decision that I am called upon to make relating to the Australian Capital Territory I will respond to representations which are made by the honourable member for Eden-Monaro, who has been a most assiduous worker for the welfare of the citizens of the City of Queanbeyan.

MI' SPEAKER-The Minister will end his answer.
MI' HODGMAN-I only regret that the Labor Party does not regard Queanbeyan as importantly as do the honourable member and I.
HOUSING LOANS
Dr EVERINGHAM-I direct my question to the Minister for Housing and Construction.
Honourable members interjecting-
MI' SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order. Does the honourable member for Capricornia wish to reconsider?
Dr EVERINGHAM-It has taken me a long time to get up the courage. Can the Minister for Housing and Construction confirm a statement made by Mr Barry Carlton of the Permanent Building Societies Association Ltd that some societies have put a freeze on lending and have imposed tough eligibility conditions such as a constant deposit level of at least $5,000? Does he accept the view of Mr Carlton that the building societies have been hard hit by the deregulation of bank interest rates and are unable to compete with finance companies offering 15.5 per cent? If so, what measures does the Government intend to take to ensure availability of housing finance at a reasonable price for low and middle income earners?
Mr McVEIGH-As the honourable member for Capricornia is jittery I will treat him like a lamb. The fact is, as he said, that there is a problem of permanent building societies in New South Wales and Queensland attracting sufficient funds. The problem, of course, stems from the decisions of the respective State governments to control lending and borrowing rates by the building societies. I suggest, therefore, that those States give consideration to adopting the policies which are relevant in other States. Yesterday I said to the House that we have to look at the total amount of finance available for home borrowers. There was a slight decrease of 3 per cent in the March quarter of this year compared with the March quarter oflast year.
The honourable member asked about loan funds being made available to medium income and low income families. I hope that the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement, which is a very generous agreement, will be piloted through the Senate today. I hope that the States will take up the challenge given to them by the Commonwealth to be responsible for the development of initiatives. Never before have they had the opportunity to prove that they are interested in welfare housing.

3110 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

BEEF SALES TO THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
Mr KATTER-Can the Minster for Trade and Resources inform the House of the latest developments in the Korean beef market and the extent to which Australian beef exporters have been successful in gaining re-entry to the Korean market?
Mr ANTHONY-I am very pleased to be able to say that the Republic of Korea has re-entered the Australian meat trade after being out of it for the last two years. Korea was a significant market in the 1976, 1977 and 1978 period but because of domestic meat marketing problems and a very tight balance of payments situation Korea cut out any importation of meat from Australia. In March this year it issued tenders for meat and an Australian company won the contract for 4,500 tonnes. Korea issued another tender in April and Australia won a contract for a further 4,000 tonnes. A tender is now out for another 4,000 tonnes and I am very hopeful that the Australian industry will be able to get the contract. The Government, of course, was working closely with the Korean Government during the period that we were not able to get access. It is now a very valuable market because the international market for meat is soft; the American market has been very slack, and the Japanese market also has been cutting back on the importation of chilled meat. This additional sale to Korea is very welcome.
EL SALVADOR Mr HOLDING-Does the Minister for Foreign Affairs still maintain the correctness of his Government's policy of unequivocal support for President Reagan's policy of providing armaments and military advisers to the present military junta in El Salvador? Is he not concerned that Australia is one of the few Western nations publicly to endorse all aspects of President Reagan's policy? Does he believe that Australia's policy should be modified at least to give support to the recommendations of the United States Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the United States House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee, which latter Committee voted 11 to one to cut off United States aid and to withdraw United States advisers from El Salvador unless President Duarte certifies in writing that his Government can control its armed forces, observes basic human rights and is making progress on political reform? If Australia's present policy in respect of United States intervention in El Salvador is not modified, is he not concerned that Australia's general standing on human rights issues will be seriously undermined both in the United Nations and in other world assemblies?

Mr STREET-The first point I want to make is that Australia has made known its opposition to violations of human rights in El Salvador to the United Nations and, in particular, the United Nations Commission for Human Rights. As long as the present situation exists we will continue to make our views known. The second point I want to make is that the honourable gentleman is not correct in referring to Australia's unequivocal support for the policies of the United States of America in El Salvador. What we have said is that we understand completely the view of the United States Administration that externally supplied military aid should be cut off; that it is a source of instability in Central America. We have said further that we believe the problems of El Salvador have to be attacked at two levels. One is to cut off supplies of foreign-supplied military aid, to which I have referred, and the other is to support social and economic reform. So long as a situation of terrorism and violence prevails, it is extremely difficult to get the social and economic reform that is needed.
It was made clear to me in my discussions with Vice-President Bush in Washington a few months ago that the United States Administration shares the view that the problem has to be tackled at two levels. In fact, quite recently the United States Administration made a gift of civil aid to El Salvador of about $USI26m. Until the acts of terrorism and violence are contained it will be very difficult to make the social and economic progress we would all wish to see in that violence-ravaged country. The United States Government by its recent gift of civil aid, clearly recognises that there is a dual problem.
NEW ZEALAND: IMPORTATION OF AUSTRALIAN WINE
Mr GILES-My question, which is addressed to the Deputy Prime Minister, refers to his recent trip to New Zealand and his discussions on matters involving a closer economic relationship. Does he regard the current New Zealand attitude on the possible increase in importation of Australian white wines as being quite extraordinary? Does he see any chance of a change in the New Zealand attitude?
Mr ANTHONY-In the course of my recent discussions in New Zealand on the closer economic relationship, the recent decision by the equivalent New Zealand body to the Industries Assistance Commission to increase protection for New Zealand's wine industry was a matter of concern. Certainly it has been an impediment in the development of that market, particularly for the cheaper casket and pack wines. The increases in

Questions Without Notice

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3111

duty levels are of several hundred per cent, and that will make the sale of that wine very difficult. However, New Zealand does argue strongly that it has increased the import licences from $6m to $10m a year, which will mean that the Australian wine industry will be able to penetrate the market with the higher quality wines and should make more extensive sales in terms of value than had previously been the case. However, because of the irritation and because of the diffiqulties that have been created, I have arranged for the two wine industry bodies to meet and discuss the issue to see whether they cannot work out what might be a suitable accommodation of both industries' points of view.
RUSSIAN CRUISE VESSELS
Mr MOUNTFORD~I draw the Prime Minister's attention to the various bans and limitations that were placed on shipping, trade and personal exchange visits with the Soviet Union following that nation's invasion of Afghanistan some 18 months ago. One of the bans affected the operation of Russian cruise ships out of Australian ports, which until that time had been providing reasonably priced cruises through the CTC travel organisation for Australian travellers. In view of the fact that other shipping and trade bans imposed on the Soviet Union at that time have been lifted, will the Government now give approval for Soviet cruise ships to operate again from Australian ports?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The decisions the Government took in relation to this matter followed decisions taken in the United States and Canada which made it quite plain that the continuation of some aspects of Australia's earlier position were no longer tenable. Going beyond that, no further decisions remain; the position is as it was. It is worth reminding the House that the Soviet invasion and occupation of Afghanistan continues. There is still a very great degree of continued fighting, with the Soviet Union having great difficulty establishing its own order in that area. The decisions taken were taken as a consequence of decisions in Canada and the United States of America which would have made quite futile the maintenance of Australia's earlier position.
AUSTRALIAN WOOL TESTING AUTHORITY
Mr BUNGEY~I direct my question to the Acting Minister for Primary Industry. What additional costs are likely to result firstly to the Government, secondly to the Australian Wool Corporation, thirdly to wool growers and fourthly

to wool users because of the disposal of the Australian Wool Testing Authority? In particular, will the Minister comment on the recent statement by Mr David Asimus, the Chairman of the Australian Wool Corporation, that all alternatives would result in an increase in costs to the industry with no discernible benefit to it?
Mr SINCLAIR-My advice, and certainly I have had only telephone discussions with the Chairman of the Australian Wool Corporation, is that the basis of sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority and its intended operation will result in very little net increase, if any, in costs to growers. The terms and conditions of the sale and the arrangements by which the body to continue the responsibilities of the Australian Wool Testing Authority are to be constituted are still to be concluded. Indeed, the Government's objective, as a result of discussions that have been held between my colleague the Minister for Primary Industry and, I believe, the Prime Minister with representatives of the Australian Wool Council, resulted in an agreement that there would be consultations with the industry throughout the period to determine just what alternative body would be constituted.
The Government's objective is to ensure that what is essentially a body operating in a market place should do just that, that funds presently used for that purpose through the Australian Wool Corporation should, if possible, be freed for growers' benefit within the Corporation and that the private enterprise operation which in many respects is the responsibility of the Australian Wool Testing Authority be reconstituted in such a way that without net additional cost the growers can receive the same service and the body itself can be constituted independently altogether from the Australian Wool Corporation but with an association with it.
I believe the discussions have not yet reached the point where the final structure of that body can be defined, but I have little doubt that the net benefit will be that the body itself will certainly retain the stature, reputation and service now maintained by the Australian Wool Testing Authority but with little additional cost, if any, to the Australian wool growing community.
ROYAL MILITARY COLLEGE: CADETS
Mr FRY~I direct my question to the Minister for Administrative Services. Is there any provision for immunity from the law for cadets at the Royal Military College, Duntroon, who commit offences against citizens in the Australian Capital Territory? Is the Minister aware that in May 1978 cadets detonated a bomb within one of the halls of

3112 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

residence at the Australian National University; that in a Canberra suburb in Easter 1980 three cadets shot up a car belonging to a civilian who was a former cadet; and that recently on Sunday,
May~~
Mr SPEAKER~Order! I cannot allow a request for information, which is a question, to amount to a recitation of allegations about a group in the community. That is not the purpose of Question Time. The. honourable gentleman should rephrase his question.
Mr FRY-I will. I have asked the Minister whether he is aware of these facts.
Mr SPEAKER~ The honourable member asserts they are facts. I have no knowledge that they are facts.
Mr FRY~Well, last Sunday six cadets raided the camp of anti-uranium protesters outside Parliament House and stole their banners. Will the Minister indicate whether any police charges were laid in connection with any of these offences? If not, why not? Does the Minister agree that detonating bombs, shooting up cars and stealing private property should be regarded as high spirited pranks, as some of the authorities do?
Mr NEWMAN~I am trying to restrain my temper. The purpose of the honourable member in asking the question escapes me. If it is to defame an honourable institution and the cadets in it, it does him no credit at all.
Mr Hayden~Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. With respect, very serious matters have been raised implying breaches of criminal law. I suggest that they ought to be treated seriously and investigated instead of the Minister's seeking to impugn the character of the honourable member for Fraser. They are very serious matters. The Minister is behaving like a clown.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr NEWMAN-I intended to come to the question that the honourable member asked. I have no knowledge of the acts that the honourable member asked about except the allegations that were made in regard to the prank that was carried out against the people who were demonstrating opposite Parliament House. The facts as I have been advised are that no charges were laid by the police in regard to this prank. I have also been advised that the Commandant of the Royal Military College~-
Mr Leo McLeay-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. The honourable member for Fraser has outlined what he considers to be rather serious criminal matters. The Minister keeps referring to them as pranks.

Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr NEWMAN-I am also advised that the Commandant of the Royal Military College has investigated the prank that occurred outside this House and took appropriate action under the Royal Military College standing orders against the cadets concerned.
MILITARY-TYPE WEAPONS
Mr BIRNEY-My question is directed to the Minister for Administrative Services. Is it a fact that police commissioners in Australia have expressed concern at the ease with which machine guns and military-type weapons are available in this country? What action, if any, has been taken to allay that concern?
Mr NEWMAN --It is true that the police commissioners have expressed concern about the availability of military-type automatic weapons to people in this country. The Government shares that concern. I do not think there is any threat of danger--
Mr Leo McLeay-The police think-
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Grayndler will cease interjecting.
Mr Good luck-Because he is a ratbag.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! It does not contribute to the conduct of the House if a person whom I do not identify by his voice uses a term like that.
Mr Good luck-Mr Speaker, I said it and I apologise.
Mr NEWMANI was saying that the Government shares the concern of the police commissioners. The threat of the continued importation of weapons of a high-powered automatic nature for sale to and use by private individuals is not desirable. I mentioned in the House, in answer to a previous question, that I intended to raise this matter at the Police Ministers Council. I did so at the conference that was held last Friday. I report to the House that there is general agreement amongst the Ministers that there is a need to take a common approach in the management of firearms in Australia, and they will be taking this matter back to their respective governments. I also report to the House that I told the Police Ministers Council that the Commonwealth Government intended to act to ban the importation of automatic and semi-automatic weapons of a military nature. My colleague, the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, will be taking action under his Customs powers to carry out that ban on those weapons. This is a controversial subject. I took the opportunity of speaking to national representatives of the Sporting Shooters

Questions Without Notice

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3113

Association of Australia. I think that in those discussions there was general agreement that there was a need for the Government to take this action against military-type automatic weapons.
DEFENCE FORCE OMBUDSMAN
MI' FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- For the information of honourable members, I present the report of the Administrative Review Council on the Defence Force Ombudsman. The Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) will be making a statement later outlining the Government's proposals to implement the recommendations contained in the report. The Government is in this case taking the unusual step of tabling the report in manuscript form prior to printing. This is being done to ensure that there will be an opportunity for honourable members and all other interested parties to peruse the recommendations made by the Administrative Review Council in conjunction with the Government's proposals in relation to those recommendations. Limited copies of the report will be available in the Bills and Papers Office, the Senate Records Office and in the Parliamentary Library. I hope to be able to make printed copies available shortly.
ROYAL MILITARY COLLEGE: CADETS
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I seek leave to make a short statement.
Mr SPEAKER-Before I call the honourable gentleman I remind him that he has not indicated the nature of the statement he wishes to make. The honourable gentleman should identify the subject of the statement.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I want to refer to the extraordinary casual response of the Minister for Administrative Services to the question asked by the honourable member for Fraser. Very serious allegations were implicit in that question.
Mr SPEAKER-Is leave granted?
Mr Sinclair-No.
Mr SPEAKER-Leave is not granted. The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat.
DEPARTMENT OF PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY
M1' SPEAKER-For the information of honourable members. I present the third annual report of the Department of the Parliamentary Library for the calendar year 1980. The report makes it clear that this Parliament has library and research services which serve it in an excellent manner and which rank amongst the best of their kind to be found in any parliament. Much attention is given by the Library to forward planning,

taking into account the need of modern democratic institutions for reliable, accurate and prompt information services, free of bias or partisan views and accessible beyond the limits of this or the proposed new building or even this city. Recently, other parliamentary libraries have started to explore with our Library ways in which they could share resources through computerised net .. work systems. Such an arrangement would benefit all participants and greatly enhance the amount of relevant information available. I am sure that all honourable members would wish me to thank the Library Committee for its services and progressive approach and to congratulate the Parliamentary Library stair on their achievements during the past year.
COMMONWEALTH EDUCATION POLICY AND FINANCIAL GUIDELINES
TO THE COMMONWEALTH EDUCATION COMMISSIONS
Ministerial Statement
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- by leave-The purpose of this statement is to announce the Government's decisions on guidelines for its major education programs in 1982 and, as appropriate for the triennium 1982-84, against the background of the recent triennial reports of the Tertiary Education Commission and the School Commission and of the Government's decisions on the Review of Commonwealth Functions. In that context, we have given further consideration to the report of the National Inquiry into Teacher Education and have undertaken a review of education and training opportunities for youth.
The overall financial outcome for 1982 for Commonwealth programs administered by the education commissions is that total spending will be maintained at the 198 t level in real terms with the cost of election initiatives provided as an addition. There will, however, be some reallocation of resources between areas reflecting the Commonwealth's approach to priorities. The total sums to be made available for 1982, in outturn prices, will be $1,867.6m for tertiary programs and $1,003.6m for schools programs-an overall total of $2,871.2m and an increase over 1981 of 1.5 per cent in real terms. The present practice under which programs are supplemented retrospectively for cost increases will be changed so that a prospective allowance is built into the figures in advance to take account of cost increases.
Commonwealth's Role in Education
The States have the primary responsibility for the administration and delivery of educational

3114 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

services, particularly at the schools level. The Commonwealth provides full funding for universities and colleges of advanced education and supplementary funds for quality improvement, for general development and for priority areas in schools and colleges of technical and further education. The Commonwealth believes it has a particular role in identifying and bringing resources to bear on educational issues of national importance. We have been reviewing our priorities across the range of tertiary and schools programs and have taken some decisions on the reallocation of resources. As set out in our 1980 election policy, we will continue our extensive support for education with increased emphasis on vocational and technical training. We will give greater priority to the school to work transition program, to the education of migrants, and to the handicapped.
Review of Commonwealth Functions
In the application of its policy of maximum expenditure restraint, the Government has already announced a number of decisions on education arising from the Review of Commonwealth FUnctions, and action to put these into effect is proceeding. Tuition fees will not be reintroduced for the majority of students-those taking first qualifications or recognised combined degrees and diplomas-in universities and colleges of advanced education. Fees will apply for second and higher degree students; this is in practice a very limited basis and reflects the Government's view that the principle of free tertiary education should be restricted to a basic qualification. Beyond that, those who wish to further their tertiary studies should pay fees, which in any event will represent only a minor proportion of the full costs of that tertiary study. The arrangements will be phased in, so that students already on course will be exempt. The Government plans a new initiative to assist tertiary students; it proposes to introduce, from the beginning of 1982, a loans scheme which will be in addition to the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme and not in substitution for it. Details of both these decisions will be announced as soon as possible.
The Curriculum Development Centre is to be abolished unless State governments agree to meet 50 per cent of the cost of the Centre's operations. I have sought the views of State education Ministers, and several have requested further clarification of what is proposed. I have proposed a meeting of officers to discuss funding, management and other implications if the CDC were to continue as a joint responsibility of the Commonwealth, the States and the Northern Territory. Whatever the

final decision on the future of the CDC, I want to reiterate that the Commonwealth will continue to be prepared to share in the costs of curriculum projects sponsored by the Australian Education Council and in any projects it assesses as being of national significance that are not so regarded by the AEC. Whilst the Government has decided to abolish the Education Research and Development Committee and its special research program, some funds for education research will be available under co-ordinated arrangements across the education portfolio. Projects currently supported under ERDC grants will be maintained until the end of 1981 and further funding will be available to meet contractual obligations during a phasing-out period.
The Government also announced in the context of its Review of Commonwealth Functions that it was concerned at the proliferation of separate tertiary institutions, and it has taken prompt action to provide for more efficient use of resources. Both this and the Government's decision to reduce the involvement of the Commonwealth Schools Commission in program administration will be discussed later in this statement. Consistent with the Government's approach to seek greater identification of its very considerable support for education, we have decided to include the word 'Commonwealth' in the titles of the Schools Commission and the Tertiary Education Commission. This change is provided for in the Statute Law Revision Bill 1981 recently introduced.
Review of Opportunities fol' Youth ami Transition Program
The review of education and training opportunities for young peoplc, announced on 16 January 1981 by the then Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and myself, has been considered by the Government in the context of deciding on guidelines for the education commissions for 1982 programs. The review was undertaken because of concern to find alternative approaches for those young people who leave school ill prepared for work and with inadequate educational standards. The Schools Commission in its recent report 'Schooling for 15 and 16 Year 0lds' concluded that 'in their general orientation, most schools lag in their adjustment to the needs of the full range of students'. The report goes on to comment that secondary schools seem preoccupied with preparation for tertiary study.
Against this background, the Government wishes to accelerate the development of appropriate transition courses in secondary schools, with emphasis on basic changes in curricula relevant particularly to the needs of low achievers. We will

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3115

be pursuing this through the Australian Education Council. With a view to encouraging more early school leavers to continue their education, we will also promote in TAFE colleges the development of courses to meet a wider range of vocational needs. In addition to the trades area, it is particularly important to expand vocational edlJcation relevant to occupations which require skill but are not apprenticeable trades. These two initiatives together represent the first step in improving the prospects of young people 'at risk', including both those in school who are tempted to leave early and those who have already tried unsuccessfully to obtain work.
The review of education and training opportunities was undertaken against the background of the announcement by the Commonwealth in November 1979 of the introduction of the school to work transition program for young people aged 15 to 19 who were likely to be 'at risk' in the tran-
sition process. At that time the Commonwealth and States had agreed that concerted action should be taken from both quarters. The Commonwealth undertook to provide a total of $150m in real terms over five years from 1980 for the program and asked the States to match this expenditure dollar for dollar for government schools and TAFE colleges from 1982 onwards. This was designed to provide a total additional effort costing $250m over the five-year period. The program commenced in 1980, and the Commonwealth continued it in 1981 without a State contribution for that year. Although the program is still being developed, all State Ministers have reported an excellent response to it. A large number of transition courses and activities have been initiated or expanded in government and non-government secondary schools and in TAFE
colleges:
It is expected that approximately 5,900 young people will undertake full time TAFE courses of up to one year's duration under the program in 1981. At least 8,000 students in secondary schools are undertaking alternative courses receiving significant financial support under the program. In addition, many thousands of young people are being assisted through improvement and expansion of such activities as vocational guidance and counselling services, work experience schemes, link courses and alternative course curriculum development. However, to date the States have not been prepared to indicate their readiness to make additional contributions to match the Commonwealth's expenditure, which was $15.7m in 1980 and is estimated at $25m in 1981 for govern-
ment schools and TAFE. This has meant that the transition program has not helped as many young

people as the Government envisaged when it was introduced.
Accordingly, we feel compelled to take special action to increase significantly the resources devoted to transition activities. Up to $75.4m wil1 now be allocated in 1982. Specifically, we have decided to earmark up to $27m within Commonwealth general recurrent grants to the States for government schools in 1982 for expenditure on the transition program in secondary schools. The Commonwealth's direct expenditure of $27m on the transition program in 1982 will then be directed to TAFE. If, however, the States increase their own expenditure on transition, this will be offset against the sum to be earmarked. Whatever the States decide, the total recurrent expenditure on transition in the government sector in the States and the Northern Territory in 1982 will be brought up to $54m, the level originally envisaged in the Commonwealth's November 1979 statement. Non-government schools will continue to receive grants from the Commonwealth under the program as originally intended. These will amount to $2.4m in 1982.
Within the total of $27m to be earmarked from the Commonwealth Schools Commission general recurrent program for expenditure on transition activities, a component of about $9m will be set aside for cash grants to government secondary schools boards or committees at the rate of $10 per pupil-$500 minimum per school. These funds will be able to be spent on a wide range of activities in the transition area subject to guidelines to be developed in consultation with the States. The Government's purpose here is to ensure that all government secondary schools have an opportunity to participate in the transition program and to encourage school communities to take an active interest in the program. Similar pr-)visions for the Australian Capital Territory will be considered in the Budget context.
As a further indication of the Commonwealth's commitment to this priority area, we propose to earmark 15 per cent, about $19m, of the government schools capital program for equipment and facilities for transition education in secondary schools in 1982. We shall also ask the Commonwealth Schools Commission to consult with nongovernment schools and to consider ways, within current allocations and commitments, of ensuring that the activities of these schools in the transition area are given high priority. The net effect of these measures will be to more than double the resources to be devoted to the transition program in 1982 as compared with 1981. The capacity of TAFE and of secondary schools to admit students to transition courses will be very greatly enlarged

3116 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

as was foreshadowed in the 16 January announcement of the review of education and training opportunities.
Through these changes the Commonwealth hopes to see more young people who may be at risk in the transition process staying on to complete their secondary education and/or pursuing further study in TAFE. In all of this we are endeavouring to assist the education system to do a better job in serving the needs of all children and in maintaining their interest in formal education. The objective is to improve the basic skills and employment prospects of young people as they leave the education system, particularly in the face of a decline in the number of unskilled jobs in the community. A second step in alleviating the problems faced by young people is to ensure that there is an adequate system of financial support for those undertaking education and training.
The Government is also very concerned about young people who have already left school and are having difficulty in finding work. Improved training subsidies were introduced following the announcement of the Government's commitment to youth policy in October 1980. These have made an immediate impact in meeting the needs of the longer term young unemployed. The Government will continue to pursue'the program and promote it vigorously so that as many young people as possible can be assisted. The Commonwealth has recently introduced a new transition allowance-at the level of unemployment benefit plus $6 per we~k-to encourage young people who have been,unemployed for some time to take up transition or other TAFE courses. This allowance has been paid from the beginning of the current academic year.
Among th~ young unemployed there are those who are severely disadvantaged and for whom f\,lrther education or work experience WQuid be insufficient. These young people may need other forms of assistance. The reasons for their disadvantage are numerous, but generally include a range of physical, mental or social handicaps that combine to deny them the ability to compete on the open labour market. My colleagues, the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) and the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) will be giving further consideration to this issue. The Government is particularly concerned to ensure the adequacy of allowances for low income families and other disadvantaged groups. Young people should not be forced into unemployment benefit, or prematurely into the work force, because their families are unable to support them. We will be giving further consideration to the range of allowances for young people

in the Budget context. The Government also has under review the payment of unemployment benefit to 16 and 17-year-olds. The Government restates its position that no adverse changes to unemployment benefit will be made unless better alternatives are available to the young people affected and the Government is satisfied that the interests of low income families and other disadvantaged groups would be protected.
The Government will be giving further cohsideration to the development of more comprehensive arrangements for young people as they make the transition from school to work or further education and training. Our objective is to bring about a substantial shift of emphasis within schools. We will co-operate with the States, through the Australian Education Council, in efforts in this direction and will invite the Commonwealth Schools Commission and the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission to share in this endeavour. The Government has noted and will give careful consideration to the report which has just been handed down by the Senate Standing Committee on Education and the Arts entitled 'Preparation for the Work Force'.
National Inquiry into Teacher Education
As part of its review of policy directions the Government has consulted the States on the report of the' national inquiry into teacher education. The Australian Education Council has accepted that, since the quality of school education is in turn dependent on the quality of teachers, teacher development should be a continuous process of pre-service education, induction and inservice activities. Implementation of most of the report's recommendations will be the responsibility of employing authorities and tertiary institutions. The Commonwealth has examined its direct finimcial contributions in these areas as part of its consideration of the forward programs for the education commissions. Specifically, the Commonwealth will continue to provide for professional development programs for teachers in 1982, including grants to education centres within the Schools Commission's program, at the level of $17.5m in 1982. The Commonwealth does, however, see in-service education as the responsibility of the employing authorities.
Programs Administered by tbe Education Commissions
The guidelines set out the total funding levels to be made available for the programs administered by the Commonwealth education commissions, which will report back in the forthcoming Budget sittings of Parliament on the detailed allocation of

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3117

these funds. The decisions on the commissions' reexpressed in estimated December 1980 prices, the

ports have been taken in the context of Commonfunding levels determined by the Government for

wealth policies as outlined previously. They also programs administered by the commissions are set

reflect the advent of stabilised enrolments in out in those price levels in attachment III. In the

higher education. Despite the Government's guidelines themselves-attachments I and II-the

hopes for greater retention in secondary schools Government's financial allocations are shown in

and the enrolment pressures in the non1982 out-turn price levels. This statement and the

government sector, we expect that there will be a attached guidelines respond to the major rec-

continued decline in overall school enrolments ommendations in the commissions' reports. The

due to demographic factors. I will seek leave at commissions are being asked to report to the

the conclusion of my statement to have the Government in response to the guidelines by 31

guidelines and other attachments incorporated in August 1981. There are other matters in the re-

Hansard.

ports which the Government has endorsed; these

Cost Adjustment Procedures
The Government has decided to adopt a new method of cost adjustment for the programs

are set out in attachment IV. I will be responding later to other issues raised by the commi~sions as appropriate.

administered by the Commonwealth education

commissions. From the beginning of 1982 a prospective allowance will be made to take account of forecast cost increases in substitution for the previous arrangement whereby costs have been adjusted on a retrospective basis. In adopting this new arrangement, the Government has taken a more rigorous approach towards cost adjustment which in the past has provided additional funds automatically and has had a tendency to insulate educational institutions from the effects of inflation and from the need to contain excessive wage claims. It is designed also to encourage greater efficiency in institutions. The new arrangements will reduce the need for frequent amendments to legislation which were necessary under the previous retrospective cost adjustment arrangements. The following amounts, which include a prospective allowance for cost adjustment, will be provided in 1982, in comparison with 1981. I seek leave to have a table detailing these amounts incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.

Tertiary Programs
When it announced its decisions on the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the Government stated that it had been concerned at the proliferation of separate higher education institutions and proposed immediate action to reverse this trend and to provide for more efficient use of resources. The Government announced that, arising from the recommendations of the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission, it would promote a major rationalisation and reallocation of resources in higher education. This will involve: Consolidation into larger units of 30 colleges of advanced education for which teacher education is the main activity by their incorporation into multi-purpose or multi-campus colleges with a single governing body or by integration with neighbouring universities; redirection of effort in advanced education from teacher education to the technologies and business studies and reallocation of resources to occur in and between universities, as necessary; the provision of additional re-

The table read"as follows-

sources for colleges of advanced education which

COMMONWEALTH PROGRAMS ADMINISTERED BY THE EDUCATION COMMISSIONS (Constant Prices-1982 Outturn)

are able to expand their effort in the technologies and business" studies-having regard to the recommendations of the Commission, an amount of
$5m has been earmarked within the general recur-

1981 1982 rent grants for advanced education in the years

$m

$m

Universities and Colleges of Advanced

Education . . . . . .

1,670.2 1,660.8

1982 and 1983 for this purpose; phasing out of the engineering schools at Deakin University, Bendigo College of Advanced Education and Preston

Technical and Further Education

195.1 206.8 Institute of Technology, with no new students

Total Tertiary Schools

1,865.3 1,867.6 admitted after 1981-the future role of the engin963.6 1,003.6 eering school at Caulfield Institute of Technology

Total

2,828.9 2,871.2 (+ 1.5%)

is to be examined; and the assessment of grants for the University of Western Australia and Murdoch

University to be based on a greater sharing of re-

Mr FIFE-I thank the house. As the financial sources and collaboration between these two

recommendations in the commissions' reports are institutions.

3118 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

In connection with the consolidation of colleges teachers colleges receive up to 50 per cent of the

of advanced education, the Government anrecurrent costs of teacher education courses in

nounced its intention to reach agreement with colleges of advanced education and has decided

each State concerning rationalisation measures by that from 1982 these will be fully supported. Pro-

the end of 1981. If this could not be done, the vision has been made in the total allocation for

Commonwealth would not be prepared to conthis purpose. The Government also considers that

tinue recurrent funding for the colleges concerned non-government teachers' colleges should be eli-

after the end of 1981. If a State government gible for consideration for capital grants within

wished these colleges to continue as separate entithe total funds available. The Commission is

ties it would have to make its own separate finanasked to advise on the implementation of this de-

cial provision. The list of the 30 colleges concision after consultation with State authorities

cerned is part of attachment I. The Government and the institutions concerned.. The Government

intends that the consolidation of institutions asks that, within the level of funds available, the

should result in genuine amalgamations with one Commission should give consideration to the

governing body and a real saving of resources. In establishment of a national school of fisheries.

determining the level of recurrent funds for The Commission is requested in particular to

1982-84 the Government has taken account of advise on the desirability of locating the school in

such savings in respect of institutions which have Tasmania.

been or will be consolidated during the triennium. The Government will expect the Commission to continue to promote the most efficient use of resources available for tertiary education and requests it to consider the opportunities for greater efficiency and savings by reducing unnecessary duplication of effort among faculties and schools. The Government will continue to look to the Commission to provide on-going advice on the relationship of manpower supply to demand in areas which are critical for education planning.

The Government has announced in the Review of Commonwealth Functions context that it does not see a need for a university in the Northern Territory at this time and will not be providing funds for this purpose in the forthcoming triennium. The Government has asked the Tertiary Education Commission for a detailed report and expects to receive and release this shortly. Special provision has been made for the Australian Maritime College which is still in its developmental stage. For equipment expenditure in universities

When the Government announced its Review and colleges of advanced education, the allo-

of Commonwealth Functions decisions, it noted cations for 1982 include an additional $4.2m to

that some action has already been taken in the assist institutions in replacing outdated equip-

States on consolidation. Since that announcement and in responding to needs arising from

ment, further steps have been announced by some technological change. While the total grants for

States. In view of the progress which has been capital programs for these institutions will decline

made towards consolidation and the need for the by $5.6m, there will be some provision for high

changes to be taken into account in legislation priority projects to commence in 1982 as a result

during the 1981 Budget sittings, the Commission of a lower expenditure commitment to ongoing

is asked to provide me with a progress report on projects.

consolidation by 30 June. I should add that whilst

the principle of rationalisation and the timetable

are not negotiable from the Commonwealth's

viewpoint, the Government is willing to discuss

with the States particular arrangements in re-

lation to individual institutions. Funds have been

provided for commitments

the for

thGeoveesrtanbmliesnhtm'sen1t98o0f

election research

centres of excellence in universities; the develop-

ment of community language courses in universi-

ties and/or colleges of advanced education and

the provision of 350 additional basic nurse train-

ing places in colleges of advanced education, in-

cluding the establishment of new pilot courses in

Tasmania and Queensland.

The Government has noted the Commission's recommendation that additional funds be provided in 1983 and 1984 to higher education institutions for superannuation purposes. This matter requires special consideration and is being examined separately by the Government. The Government has confirmed its commitment to the triennial principle which it reintroduced at the beginning of the present triennium. Recurrent programs for universities and colleges of advanced education will be funded on a fixed triennial basis for the 1982-84 triennium so that base recurrent programs will be maintained at the 1982 level. The Commission's recommendation that triennial funding be extended to include TAFE

The Government has reviewed the existing recurrent programs and all equipment programs

scheme of assistance under which teacher eduhas not been taken up, as it would be inappropri-

cation courses in certain non-government ate in view of the Government's policy of

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3119

minimising forward commitments into future administration of its special purpose programs, in-

budgets in the interests of maximising budgetary cluding reductions in the requirements presently

flexibility.

placed on State and non-government school

The Government has allocated $206.8m for TAFE in 1982. This represents an increase of $11.7m and emphasises the importance the Government places on vocational and technical

authorities. Measures to be adopted will include a substantial relaxation of the program guidelines and the abolition or consolidation of some committees.

education. The 1982 allocation for TAFE recurAt the same time, the Commonwealth will con-

rent programs consists of $59.4m for general retinue its involvement in the determination of

current and $25.2m for specific purpose recurrent priorities in a number of program areas through

programs. The increase for these latter programs the Schools Commission and will retain edu-

will enable the Commission to develop programs cational and financial accountability require-

for quality improvement in TAFE as advocated ments for all programs. Further details of these

by the Williams r~port and by the Commission. measures are set out in Attachment V. The

The Government agrees that the Commission's Schools Commission will continue in its role of

recommendations on the distribution of these advising the Government on the needs of both

funds should take account of the record of indigovernment and non-government schools.

vidual States' own efforts for quality improveAgainst the background of overall financial re-

ment in TAFE and for equipment and capital in straint the Commonwealth has been reveiwing its

TAFE. The TAFE Council undertook a review of priorities while maintaining its total schools

the equipment needs in TAFE and recommended spending in real terms. As indicated earlier, we

the establishment of a TAFE equipment program have decided to direct more resources into the

in 1982. The Government has allocated $10.1m transition area, to migrant education, the country

for this purpose. These funds will assist the States areas program and special education in non-

in meeting the need for updated equipment, government schools. A small reduction has been

particularly in the technologies.

made in the government schools capital program

For 1982, $112.1m has been provided for capital programs. Of this amount, $21.4m represents the final instalment under the Government's original supplementary '$50m' grant over the period 1979 to 1982. Although the total allocation is slightly less than in 1981 it will enable expenditure of about $37m on new projects in 1982. The cost of the election commitments in the tertiary area in 1982 is being provided as an addition to the overall 1981 level of expenditure in real terms. However, there has been a reassessment of priorities within the program. Additional funds are to be made available in 1982 for general and special purpose recurrent grants and for equipment in the TAFE sector and also for equipment and certain non-government teachers colleges and the Australian Maritime College in the higher education sector. This has required a reduction in capital allocations for both sectors and in the basic recurrent grants for universities and colleges of advanced education.

and savings will accrue from the termination of the innovations program from the end of 1981.
In the Review of Commonwealth Functions, we decided that both government and nongovernment school building projects being supported with Commonwealth funds should not exceed certain standards developed in a cooperative Commonwealth-State school building standards study. The Commonwealth Schools Commission is being asked to give effect to this decision from the beginning of 1982. In the funding of government schools, the Commonwealth will continue to determine its contribution in the Budget context each year and will not be tying its grants to a fixed standard of services, as proposed by the Commission. It has maintained the real level of these grants for 1982 notwithstanding the expected further decline in enrolments. In making its recommendations on the distribution of general resources funds, the Commission should note that the Government has decided to discontinue the present arrangement which permits States to

Schools Programs

seek transfers of amounts between general recur-

As a result of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, there will be a reduction in the School Commission's direct involvement in program administration and information collection and the activities of its State offices will be scaled down.

rent and capital allocations. These amounts have been determined by the Commonwealth in the light of its assessment of needs and priorities for those programs and therefore should not be redistributed on any other basis.

The buildings unit in the central office has been For non-government schools the Government

disbanded. The Commission is asked to achieve will meet its election commitments to maintain

these objectives through modifications to the the percentage link between its general recurrent

3120 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

grants and average government schools standard costs and to compress the existing six subsidy levels to three. The latter will be achieved by combining the existing levels 1 to 3 into a new group 1, levels 4 and 5 into a new group 2, and level 6 will become the new group 3. The 1982 per capita rates for the new group 1, 2 and 3 schools will be 20 per cent, 30 per cent, and 38 per cent respectively of average government schools standard costs. Per capita subsidies for group 3 schools will be raised to 40 per cent of average government schools costs in 1983. The estimated additional cost of these provisions will be $25.9m in 1982, subject to actual enrolments. The Government has accepted a number of the Commonwealth Schools Commission's recommendations for changes in the per capita grants scheme for nongovernment schools to the extent that these do not conflict with the Government's basic policies. These are detailed in the attached guidelines.
In recognition of the fact that some nonsystemic non-government schools would be reclassified to a lower subsidy level as a result of the approved changes, the Minister, on the advice of the Schools Commission and its State planning and finance committees, will permit those schools to remain at a higher subsidy level for up to two years until they adapt their resources to the new arrangements. The Government will review any cases where this is not achievable within two years. The Commission, through its State planning and finance committees, is to give consideration to school income as well as expenditure in the assessment of subsidy levels but the assessment will continue to be based primarily on recurrent expenditure. Principles to be used for this change will be approved by the Minister following consultation by the Commission with nongovernment school authorities. Any subsequent changes in schools' subsidy levels will continue to be subject to ministerial approval following advice from the Commission.
The present provisions for new non-systemic schools will be varied so that they receive supplementary establishment grants over and above the general recurrent subsidy for the first four years at the rates of 10 per cent, 7.5 per cent,S per cent and 2.5 per cent respectively of government schools' standard costs. The Government has not accepted the proposal to base its grants on a fixed standard based on the Commission's proposed 'basket of services '. This would represent a fundamental departure from the Government's long standing policy of linking its grants to nongovernment schools to movements in average government school running costs. Similarly the proposal to assess non-government school systems

for funding purposes by aggregating individual schools' entitlements rather than by averaging the system as a whole, is not accepted.
The Government is also anxious to ensure that non-government schools continue to adapt their facilities to the special transition needs of students who are in secondary schools. The Commission is asked to give particular consideration to transition needs in developing the capital program for non-government schools. In addition, the Government expects that non-government schools will continue to give special attention to the allocation of their recurrent resources to help meet the needs of transition students. The Commission is asked to monitor closely through its State planning and finance committees progress in this direction. The Government has accepted the Commission's recommendation that basic per capita grants at the rate of 20 per cent of government primary schools' standard costs be provided for nongovernment special schools. This arrangement will mean that special schools in both the government and non-government sectors will receive basic per capita Commonwealth funds in addition to grants from the special education programs.
The Government's allocation to the nongovernment capital program includes its election commitment to prC'vide an additional $25m over the three years 1981,1982 and 1983 to assist nongovernment schools with the provision of new places; $8m will be allocated for this purpose in 1982. In addition to the reallocation of resources within the general purpose programs, the Government has decided to redirect its effort among and within a number of special purpose programs in the light of Commission advice and the Government's own priorities. An additional $6.6m has been allocated for the migrant education program. As proposed by the Commission, the program will be retitled 'English as a Second Language'. It will also incorporate an element from the former contingency program for refugee children which has been transferred from the Department of Education. This latter element will be redesignated as being for new arrivals and will be widened to provide intensive English language instruction for non-refugees. In view of the significant restructuring of these programs, the Commission should review arrangements, in consultation, with State and non-government school authorities, at the first opportunity.
The Commonwealth's programs for the handicapped will also be restructured in 1982. The joint program for integration of handicapped children into regular schools will be more closely related to the special education programs for government and non-government schools by incorporating the

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3121

former as an element of these programs. Again, the Commission should enter into early negotiations with State and non-government school authorities to ensure that the restructuring can be effected without disruption. As proposed by the Commission, the former disadvantaged country areas program will be increased by $1.5m in 1982 and retitled as the country areas program to reflect the approved new criteria for allocation of funds in terms of relative isolation and size of settlements. In the context of the policies underlying the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the Government is not prepared at this time to consider commencing any further programs. Whilst the proposed school improvement program will not be implemented, the joint program for professional development will be retained at its existing level of funding.
An amount of $IAm, equivalent to the 1981 grant, will be allocated to the special projects program in 1982 for projects of national significance. The Commission is asked to advise on the proposed distribution of these funds between particular projects. The Commission is asked to consider its proposals for new initiatives in respect of gifted children and students and the community within the context of the total level of funds available. The Government has accepted the Commission's advice that schools in the Australian Capital Territory be eligible to participate in an extended range of programs for disadvantaged schools, special education, and services and development, and will consider the extent of funding in the 1981-82 Budget.
Priorities in Education
The Government believes that Commonwealth grants for the accelerated advancement of education in the past decade and a half have made possible a very great development of facilities and opportunities. We are now going through a process of consolidation in education which, in substantial part, is a reflection of the adjustment to changing demographic patterns being experienced in Australia as a whole. We are now at a stage when it is necessary to take stock of the real gains that have been made and to assess future needs. I have convened a meeting of State and Northern Territory Education Ministers next week to discuss the decisions announced recently as a result of the Review of Commonwealth Functions and those I am announcing today.
The Government is mindful of the stabilisation of enrolments that has taken place in universities and colleges of advanced education after a decade of steady growth and the reduced level of enrolments which is being experienced in government

schools. These elements indicate the changing needs that have to be taken into account in determining the future shape of our education commitment. On the basis of current assessments, the Commonwealth will continue to give priority to the areas of technical and further education, vocational education, and transition education. The Commonwealth will maintain its overall commitment to education as a priority area of direct Commonwealth endeavour. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard the attachments to which I have referred.
Leave granted.
The documents read as follows-
Attachment I
TERTIARY EDUCATION COMMISSION GUlDELINES 1982-84
The Government endorses the Commission's view that the 1982-84 triennium will be a period of growth and diversification for TAFE and of adjustment and consolidation for higher education.
For 1982 a total of $1 ,867.6m has been allocated for tertiary education. All 1982 program amounts in this statement are on an oullum basis, while for the purposes of comparison, those for 1981 are expressed in the same price terms. The allocations include provision for the Australian National University, the Canberra College of Advanced Education, the Australian Maritime College and the Darwin Community College. The Tertiary Education Commission is asked to prepare recommendations on the distribution of these funds in accordance with these guidelines.
Universities and CAEs
When it announced its decisions on the Review of Commonwealth Functions (RCF), the Government stated that it had been concerned at the proliferation of separate institutions and proposed immediate action to reverse this trend and to provide for more efficient use of resources. The Government announced that, arising from the recommendations of the Commission, it would promote a major rationalisation and reallocation of resources in higher education. This will involve:
consolidation into larger units of 30 CAEs for which teacher education is the main activity by their incorporation into mUlti-purpose or multi-campus colleges with a single governing body or by integration with neighbouring universities;
redirection of effort in advanced education from teacher education to the technologies and business studies and reallocation of resources accordingly; a similar reallocation of resources to occur in and between universities, as necessary;
the provision of additional resources for CAEs which are able to expand their effort in the technologies and business studies. Having regard to the recommendations of the Commission, an amount of $5 million has been earmarked within the general recurrent grants for advanced education in the years 1982 and 1983 for this purpose;
phasing out of the engineering schools at Deakin University, Bendigo CAE and Preston Institute of Technology, with no new students admitted after 1981; the future of the engineering school at Caulfield Institute of Technology to be examined;
the assessment of grants for the University of Western Australia and Murdoch University to be based on a greater

3122 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

sharing of resources and collaboration between these' two institutions:
no provision of funds to establish a University in Northern Territory. In connection with the consolidation of colleges of advanced education, the Government announced its intention to reach agreement with each State concerning rationalisation measures by the end of 1981. If this cannot be done, the Com-
monwealth will not be prepared to continue recurrent funding
for the colleges concerned af~er the end of 1981, and if the State Governments wish these colleges to continue as separate entities they wiJI have to make their own separate financial provision. :rhe list of the 30colleges concerned is attached.
The Government intends that the consolidation of institutions should result in genuine amalgamations with one governing body and a real saving of resources. In determining the level of recurrent funds for 1982-84, the Government has assumed ,such savings in respect of institutions which have been or wiJI be consolidated during the triennium. The Government will expect the Commission to continue to promote the most efficient use of resources available for tertiary education and requests it to consider the opportunities for greater efficiency and savings by reducing unnecessary duplication of effort among faculties and schools. The Government will continue to look to the Commission to provide ongoing advice on the relatiol1llhip of manpower supply to demand in areas which are critical for education planning.
When the Government announced its Review of Commonwealth Functions decisions, it noted that some action had already been taken in the States on consolidation. Since that announcement, further steps have been taken by some States. In view of the progress which has been made towards consolidation and the need for the changes to be taken into account in legislation during the 1981 Budget Sittings, the Commission is asked to provide me with a progress report on consolidation by3pJune.
In accordance with the policies outlined above, and the Government's commitment to maximum expenditure restraint, a total of $I,558.4m has been allocated for recurrent programs for universities and colleges of advanced education in 1982.
Specific Provisions The Government has reviewed the existing scheme of assistance under which teacher edt;cation courses in certain non-government teachers colleges receive up to 50 per cent of the recurrent costs of teacher education courses in CABs and has decided that from 1982 these wiJI be fully supported. Provision has been made in the total allocation for this purpose. The Government also considers that non-government teachers colleges should be eligible for consideration for capital grants within the total funds available. The Commission is asked to advise on the implementation of this decision after consultation with State authorities and the institutions concerned. Funds have been provided for the Government's 1980 election commitments for the establishment of research centres of excellence in universities: the development of community language courses in universities and/or CABs; and, the provision of 350 additional basic nurse training places in CABs, including the establishment of new pilot courses in Tasmania and Queensland. An additional $50,000 will be provided for evaluation programs with the special objective of expanding the evaluation ofbasic nurse training. Special provision has been made for the Australian Maritime College which is still in its developmental stage. The Government asks that within the level of funds available, the Commission give consideration to the establishment

of a national school of fisheries. TheComm~ion is requested in particular to advise on the desirabil.ity of locating the school in Tasmania.
The Government has previously announced its intention to introduce tuition fees from 1982 in universities and CABs for students newly enrolled in degrees and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification. The scale of fees will be an- . nounced in the Budget context and universities and colleges will be advised. on the mannet: in which adjustments will be made to theJevels ofrecurrent grants.
For equipment expenditure, the allocations for 1982 include an additional $4.2m to -assist institutions in replacing outdated equipment and in responding to .nCOlls arising from technological change. While the total grants for capital programs wiJI decline by $5.6/11, there will be some provision for high priQrity projects to commence in 1982 as a result of a lower expenditure commitment to on-going projects.

Technical and Further Education

The Government has. allocated $206.8m for TAFE in 1982. This represents an increase of $11.7m and emphasises the importance the Government places on vocational and technical education.

The 1982 allocation for r,courrent programs consists of $59.4m for general recurrent andS25.2m for specific purpose recurrent programs. The increase for these latter programs will enable the Commission to develop programs for quali~y improvement in TAPE as advocated by the Williams Report and by the Commission: The Commission's recommendations on the distribution of these funds sho1Jld take account of the record of individual States in using their own funds to bring about improvements in TAFE.

An amount of $lO.lm has been allocated for the establish-

ment of a TAPE equipment program in 1982. These funds

will assist the States in meeting the needs for updated equip-

ment particularly in the technologies.

.

For 1982 $112.lm has been provided for capital programs.

Of this amount, $21.4m represents the final instalment. under

the Governnient's original supplementary "S50m" grant over

the period 1979-82. AlthQugh the total allocation isslightly

less than 1981 it will enable expenditure of about $37m on

new projects in 1982.

.

Terdary Education The table which follows sets out the funds which will be provided for iridividuatprograms for 1982 compared with the funds for 1981, in the same price terms. The Government has decided that from 1982 the cost adjustment will be made on a prospective basis. As has been the case for previous retrospective adjustments, the prospective allowance will take account_ of cost increases in all progrluns up to the beginning of the program year: during the program year the allowance will be . in respect of estimated increases in the wages' and salaries components of recurrent grants. 111 adopting this new arrangement, the Government has taken. a more rigorous approach toward cost adjustment which in the past has provided additional funds automatically and has had a tendency toinsulate educational insitutions from the effects of inflation and from the need to contain excessive wage claims.

TERTIARY EDUCATION COMMISSION PROGRAMS
Expenditure in 1982 ($m-)

1981

1982

Universities a&d CollegesRecurrent Equipment . . . . .

1,566-.5 1,558.4

62.9

67.1

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3123

1981

1982

Capital

4004

34.8

Total

1,669.8 1,660.3

TAFERecurrentt Equipment
Capital

77.7 117.4

84.6
10.1 112.1

Total

195.1

206.8

Total Tertiary-
Recurrent* Equipment Capital

1,644.6 1,643.45

62.9

77.2

157.8

146.9

Total

1,865.3 1,867.55

* Amounts for 1982 are on an outturn basis; those for 1981
are expressed in the same price basis. t Includes $5904m for TAFE general purpose recurrent
grants in 1982. * Includes evaluative studies: $Oo4m in 1981 and $0045m in
1982.

Expenditure in 1983 and 1984
The total recurrent allocation for universities and colleges for 1983 and 1984 will be at the level of$1,558.4m per annum. Under the new cost adjustment procedures, these grants will be adjusted finally on a prospective basis before the commencement of each program year.
The Government has noted the Commission's recommendation that additional funds be provided in 1983 and 1984 to higher education insitutions for superannuation purposes. This matter requires special consideration and is being examined separately by the Government.
The Commission is asked to submit its report by 31 August 1981 to permit time for consideration of its recommendations and passage of the necessary legislation during the Budget sittings of the Parliament.

COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION TO BE CONSOLIDATED
Alexander Mackie CAE Armidale CAE Catholic Teachers College Goulburn CAE Guild Teachers College MiIperraCAE Newcastle CAE Nursery School Teachers College Polding College Sydney Kindergarten Teachers College Sydney Teachers College Wollongong Institute of Education SCVBurwood SCVCoburg SCV Frankston SCV Hawthorn SCV Institute ofCatholic Education SCV Institute of Early Childhood Development SCV Melbourne SCVRusden SCVToorak Brisbane Kindergarten Teachers College
Kelvin Grove CAE Mount Gravatt CAE Townsville CAE

Hartley CAE Salisbury CAE
Claremont Teachers College
Mount Lawley Teachers College
Nedlands Teachers College
SCHOOLS COMMISSION GUIDELINES 1982
A total of $1 ,003.6m will be provided for the programs of the Schools Commission in the States and the Northern Territory in 1982. All amounts in this statement for 1982 are expressed on an outturn basis, while for the purposes of comparison those for 1981 are expressed in the same price terms. As grants for non-government schools and part-time ethnic schools are made on a per capita basis, the final level of grants will be varied in accordance with the actual levels of enrolments in these schools. The Schools Commission is asked to prepare recommendations on the distribution of these funds in accordance with these guidelines.
General Resources Programs
Government Schools
The level of the general recurrent program will be maintained at $269.2m while the capital program will be reduced by $6.3m to $124.7m. This reduction reflects the continuing overall decline in government school enrolments projected for 1982. Within these substantial amounts for general resources in government schools, the Commonwealth has decided to earmark some funds to pursue two policy objectives: greater emphasis by schools on meeting the needs of young people who are especially disadvantaged by lack of skills and who leave school prematurely; and the need to achieve maximum involvement from parents and local school communities in planning and providing educational opportunities for young people.
Accordingly, up to $27m is to be earmarked from the general recurrent grants for programs to assist students effectively to make the transition from school to work. The Government seeks the co-operation of the States in developing programs which concentrate on the broad range of needs of these students. Within that earmarked sum, provision will be made for cash grants to secondary school boards or committees at the rate of $10 per student with a minimum cash grant of $500 per school. These cash grants are designed to provide school communities with discretionary funds and a degree of autonomy to develop transition programs. Such programs should be especially adapted to needs in local communities.
The Commission, which has recommended that general cash grants be made available for government schools, is asked to .hold discussions with the States and with parent and teacher groups to develop procedures for the implementation of these transition cash grants in 1982. If a State increases transition expenditure from its own resources, including the provision of cash grants to schools, an equivalent amount from within the Commonwealth's earmarked grant will be made available for general recurrent purposes at the discretion of the State.
Furthermore, the Commonwealth requests the Commission to earmark 15 per cent ($18.7m) of government school capital grants as a specific element for the provision of equipment and facilities for transition education in secondary schools. The types of capital expenditure to be approved under this provision are to be the subject of consultation between the Commission and the States. It is the Government's intention that as a result of this provision, schools ~hould make significant progress towards adapting their facilities to the changing curriculum needs of students preparing for the transition from school to work. The needs of students in schools whose facilities and equipment are old or outdated, or which are primarily

3124 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

oriented towards academic courses, should benefit especially from these funds.
In making its recommendations on the distribution of general resources funds, the Commission should note that the Government has decided to discontinue the present arrangement which permits States to seek transfers of amounts between general recurrent and capital allocations. These amounts have been determined by the Commonwealth in the light of its assessment of needs and priorities for those programs and should not therefore be redistributed on any other basis.
Non-government Schools
The Government will meet its election commitments to maintain the percentage link between its general recurrent grants and average government schools standard costs and to compress the existing six subsidy levels to three. The latter will be achieved by combining the existing Levels 1-3 to a new Group 1, Levels 4-5 to a new Group 2 and Level 6 to become the new Group 3. The 1982 per capita rates for the new Group I, 2 and 3 schools will be 20, 30 and 38 per cent respectively of average government schools standard costs. Per capita subsidies for Group 3 schools will be raised to 40 per cent of average government schools costs in 1983.
The Government asks the Commission to implement a numbCr of changes to the procedures for assessing nongovernment schools' subsidy categories from the beginning of 1982, as recommended in the Commission's Report, on the following bases: .
First, the initial classification of non-government schools subsidies will be as follows:
Group I: Schools whose expenditure from private sources is equal to or above 51 per cent of government schools standard costs.
Group 2: Schools whose expenditure from private sources lies in the range of 31-50 per cent of government schools standard costs.
Group 3: Schools whose expenditure from private sources is 30 per cent or less of government schools standard costs.
Second, the Government recognises that some non-systemic non-government schools would be reclassified to a lower subsidy level as a result of the above changes. The Minister, on the advice of the Schools Commission and its State Planning and Finance Committees, will permit those schools to remain at a higher subsidy level for up to two years until they adapt their resources to the new arrangements. The Governments will review any cases where this is not achievable within two years.
Third, the Commission, through its State Planning and Finance Committees, is to give consideration to school income as well as expenditure in the assessment of subsidy levels. However, this assessment will continue to be based primarily on recurrent expenditure. Principles to be developed for including disposable income in the assessment procedure wiII be approved by the Minister following consultation by.the Commission with non-government school authorities. Any subsequent changes in schools' subsidy levels will continue to be subject to Ministerial approval following advice from the Commission.
Fourth, the provisions for new non-systemic schools will be varied so that they receive supplementary establishment grants for the first four years, over and above the general recurrent subsidy. The respective rate for each year will be 10 per cent, 7.5 per cent, 5 per cent and 2.5 per cent of government schools standard costs.
The Government is also anxious to ensure that nongovernment schools continue to adapt their facilities to the special transition needs of students who are in secondary

schools. The Commission is asked to give particular consideration to transition needs in developing thi: capital program for non-government schools. In addition, the Government expects that non-government schools will continue to give special attention to the al1ocat!~n of their recurrent reso.ur~es to help meet the needs oftransll1on students. The COmmission is asked to monitor closely progress in this direction, through its State Planning and Finance Committees.
For non-government special schools, the Government has accepted the Commission's recommendation that basic per capita grants at the rate of 20 per cent of government primary schools standard costs be provided. This arrangement will mean that special schools in both the government and nongovernment sectors will receive basic per capita Commonwealth funds in addition to grants from the special education programs.
The Government's allocation to the capital program includes its election commitment to provide an additional $25m over the three years 1981-83 to assist non-government schools with the provision of new places; $8m will be allocated for this purpose in 1982.
Special Purpose Programs
In addition to the reallocation of resources within the general purpose programs, the G?v~rnment has decide~ to redirect its effort between and wlthm a number of speCial purpose programs in the light of Commission advice and the Government's own priorities.
An additional $6.6m has been allocated for the migrant education program. As proposed by the Commission, the program will be retitled 'English as a second language:. It will also incorporate an element for the former contmgency program for refugee children which has been transferred from the Department of Education. This latter element will be redesignated as being for new arrivals and will be widened to provide intensive English language instruction for nonrefugees. In view of the significant restructuring of these programs, the Com.ion should review arrangements, i!1 consultation with State and non-government school authOrities, at the first opportunity.
The Commonwealth's programs for the handicapped will also be restructured in 1982. The joint program for integration of handicapped children into regular schools will be more closely related to the special education programs for government and non-government schools by incorporating the former as an element of these programs. Again, the Commission should enter into early negotiations with State and non-government school authorities to ensure that the restructuring can be effected without disruption.
As proposed by the Commission, the former disadvantaged country areas program will be increased by $1.5m in 1982 and retitled as the country areas program to reflect the approved new criteria for allocation of funds in terms of relative iso- .lation and size ofsettlements.
In the context of the policies underlying the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the Government is not prepared at this time to consider commencing any further programs. While the proposed school improvement program will not be implemented and the school level innovations program will be discontinued, the joint program for professional development will be retained at its existing level of funding. In so doing, the Government has had regard to the proposals of the Schools Commission and the National Inquiry into Teacher Education.
An amount of $1.4m will be allocated to the special projects program in 1982 for proj~cts of national signi~c~nce: The Commission is asked to adVise on the proposed dlstnbutton of these funds among particular projects and to consider its

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3125

proposed initiatives for gifted children and for students and the community within the total available level of funds.
The Government will also continue in 1982 the programs for severely handicapped children and for part-time ethnic schools commenced in 1981 as part of its election commitments.
The Government has accepted the Commission's advice that schools in the Australian Capital Territory be, eligible to participate in an extended range of programs for disadvantaged schools, special education and professional development and will consider the extent of funding in the 1981-82 Budget.
All Programs
The table which follows sets out the funds which will be provided for individual programs for 1982, compared with the funds for 1981 in the same price terms. The Government has decided that from 1982 the cost adjustment will be made on a prospective basis. As has been the case for previous retrospective adjustments, the prospective allowance will take account of cost increases in all programs up to the beginning of the program year; during the program year the allowance will be in respect of estimated increases in the wages and salaries components of recurrent grants, In adopting this new arrangement, the Government has taken a more rigorous approach toward cost adjustment which in the past has provided additional funds automatically and has had a tendency to insulate educational institutions from the effects of inflation and from the need to contain excessive wage claims.
The Commission is asked to report on the detailed distribution of the 1982 allocations by 31 August 1981 to permit time for consideration of its recommendations and passage of the necessary legislation during the Budget sittings of the Parliament.
SCHOOLS COMMISSION PROGRAMS
($'000)*

1981

1982

Government SchoolsGeneral recurrent . English as a second language (including new arrivals) Disadvantaged schools Special education (including integration) Capital grants

269,174
38,467 25,628
17,768 131,086

269,174
42,848 25,348
17,768 124,749

Total

482,[23 479,887

Non-government schoolsGeneral recurrent . . Emergency assistance English as a second language (including new arrivals) Disadvantaged schools Special education (including integration) Capital grants

37[,907 796
[3,892 3,971
4,752 45,688

414,102 796
16,074 4,251
4,752 44,856

Total

441,006 484,831

Joint programsMulticultural EducationGeneral support Ethnic schools Country areas Special EducationChildren in institutions Severely handicapped

4,031 3,262 6,928 1,892 2,472

4,109 3,000 8,451
1,892 2,472

1981

1982

Professional deveJopmentProfessional development and replacement Education centres
Special projects-Innovations Projects of national significance

15,562 1,977
2,916 1,403

15,562 1,977
1,403

Total

40,443 38,866

All programs

963,572 1,003,584

- Amounts for 1982 are on an outturn basis; those for 1981 are expressed in the same price terms.
Attachment III APPROVED FUNDING LEVELS FOR EDUCATION
COMMISSIONS' PROGRAMS-IN ESTIMATED DECEMBER 1980 PRICES
Tertiary Education Commission Programs ($m-est. December 1980 prices*)

1981 1982

Universities and collegesRecurrent Equipment Capital

1,340.6 1,333.7 56.2 59.9 36.1 31.1

Total

1,432.9 1,424.7

TAFERecurrentt Equipment Capital

68.1 104.8

74.15 9.0
100.1

Total

172.9 183.25

Total tertiaryRecurrentt Equipment Capital

1,409.1 1,408.3 56.2 68.9
140:9 131.2

Total

1,606.2 1,608.4

* Estimated December quarter 1980 price levels for recur-
rent and equipment grants, estimated December 1980 price levels for capital grants. The estimated December 1980 price basis does not inelude provision for the cost of implementing the Academic Salaries Tribunal's decision of June 1980 concerning the remuneration of part-time academic staff.
t Includes $52.1m for TAFE general purpose recurrent
grants in 1982.
t Includes evaluative studies: $O.4m in 1981 and $0.45m in
1982.

SCHOOLS COMMISSION PROGRAMS ($'000)
(est. December 1980 prices*)

1981

1982

Government schoolsGeneral recurrent English as a second language (ineluding new arrivals) Disadvantaged schools

229,671 32,822 21,867

229,671 36,560 21,628

3126 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

1981

1982

Special education (including integration)
Capital grants

15,160 118,737

15,160 112,997

Total

418;257 416,016

Non-government schoolsGeneral recurrent Emergency assistance English as a second language (including new arrivals) Disadvantaged schools
Special education (including integration)
Capital grants

317,327 679
11,853 3,388
4,055 41,384

353,329 679
13,715 3,627
4,055 40,630

Total

378,(j86 416,035

Joint programsMulticultural educationGeneral support Ethnic schools
Country areas Special education-
Children in institutions Severely handicapped Professional developmentProfessional development and
replacement Education centres Special projectsInnovations Projects of national significance

3,439 2,783 5,911
1,614 2,109
13,278 1,687
2,488 1,197

3,506 2,560 7,211
1,614 2,109
13,278 1,687
1,197

Total

34,506 33,162

All programs

831,449 865,213

* The estimated December 1980 price basis does not in-
clude any wage or other price increases which have occurred after the end of September 1980.

Attachment IV
SOME POLICY ISSUES RAISED BY THE EDUCATION COMMISSIONS' REPORTS
In addition to giving consideration to those recommendations put forward by the Commissions which have specific financial implications, the Government also has considered a number of other policy issues raised in their Reports.
Tertiary Education
The Government has specifically endorsed the following matters raised by the Tertiary Education Commission:
that universities should be recognised as having a special institutional commitment to scholarship and research and to training scholars and research workers-the Government's commitment to the establishment o( research centres of excellence in universities is evidence of its support;
that special funds not be provided for research in advanced education but individual members of academic staff with appropriate expertise be encouraged to seek outside support for tactical problem-oriented research;
the Commission's revised policy guidelines for masters degrees in CAEs be implemented. These include the requirements that such programs have an applied nature; be provided by CAEs as designated by the Commission, with the appropriate capacity in terms of staffing and facilities;

and should not duplicate activities in universities or other colleges;
that the advanced education sector should maintain its vocational objectives and not provide for significant enrolments in liberal studies courses;
that continuing education is an important function of higher education institutions and should be regarded as part of the normal duties of teaching staff. Costs of continuing education programs should be met in the manner proposed by the Commission;
that groups seeking assistance for child care centres should do so from agencies with specific responsibilities in this field_
The Government has noted that the Commission's Report made no separate provision for the proposed Northern Territory University or for university level studies in the Territory. This matter has been examined separately by the Commission and the Government will respond to its findings when the Commission's special report is available in June.
The Government has noted the Commission's concern that proliferation of external studies courses may have led to a degree of duplication in higher education. It asks the Commission to report further on this matter during the course of the forthcoming triennium.
Schools
In regard to the Schools Commission's proposal to participate in a review of youth training and support programs, the Government has agreed that the Commission will participate in the administration of Commonwealth transition programs and will provide advice to the Government on appropriate policy developments.
The Government has decided not to accept the Commission's recommendation that the funding levels for government and non-government schools' general recurrent grants be linked to the fixed standard cost of a revised basket of educational services. To do so would be contrary to Government policy and, in the case of non-government schools, would be an abrogation of its election commitments. The Government is not able to agree to the proposed 'aggregation' of systemic non-government schools' subsidy level entitlements. It is the Government's view that such an approach would reduce the flexibility of non-government school systems in making provision for those schools most in need; the existing 'averaging' approach to entitlements will therefore continue.
The Government is unable to accept the recommendation that the level of capital grants for government schools be determined, and maintained, on a triennial basis.
The Government endorses the proposals that the notional funds for the disadvantaged schools element of the government and non-government schools' capital programs be based on the proposed updated index of disadvantage and that these funds be applicable to minor refurbishing and upgrading projects as well as other works.
The Government does not wish to impose further restrictions on the States and non'government school authorities and is therefore unable to agree to the proposal that notional library development funds be directed only towards the provision of book and non-book materials, library equipment and library furniture.
The recommendation that non-government capital. grants be available to enable new non-government schools to lease facilities over a period of up to three years is endorsed, while a decision on the proposed use of these grants for assistance to privately run student hostels is deferred for further consultation. The Government accepts the Commission's advice that provision be included in the legislation for the Minister to reallocate the grants specified for new enrolments in nongovernment schools should that prove desirable.

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3127

The Government has endorsed a number of other policy recommendations put forward by the Commission in relation to special purpose programs. These include:
that funds for special education be available to engage professional services other than those of teachers, when appropriate;
that the allocation of funds for the recurrent elements of the government and non-government disadvantaged schools programs be based on a revised index of disadvantage;
that twenty per cent of the funds for the Professional Development program be allocated in accordance with an index reflecting the geographical dispersion of teachers in each State and Territory.
Attachment V
MODIFICATIONS TO PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION OF THE SCHOOLS
COMMISSION .
The following modifications to the administrative arrangements for various Schools Commission programs are in response to the Review of Commonwealth Functions. These measures are designed to improve administrative efficiency and reduce unnecessary entanglement in the operation of State and non-government schools.
The Commonwealth, with the assistance of the Commission, will define the aims of programs and set out indicative rather than prescriptive guidelines on the activities which might be supported. Educational and financial accountability statements will then be provided by State and nongovernment school authorities to indicate the level and purposes and, if possible, the effects of expenditure of Commonwealth funds. The Commission will have regard to these accountability statements in drawing up its triennial reports. The Commission is asked to consult with State and nongovernment authorities in the development of educational and financial accountability arrangements. The revised arrangements will be settled between the Minister and State Ministers and authorities representing non-government schools.
1. Severely Handicapped Children
(i) The Commission (subject to Ministerial endorsement) to issue detailed statements on the aims of the program and a sllggested range of activities which might be, undertaken.
(ii) State and non-government authorities to proceed to implement programs as they see fit according to local needs and circumstances..
(iii) State:s to provide assurances to the Commonwealth that oversight committees are constituted in accordance with the joint nature of the program.
(iv) State and non-government authorities to provide detailed educational and financial accountability statements.to the Commission at the end of each year of the program's operation. Format of accountability statements to be decided following consultation between the Commission and the States.
2. Integration of Handicapped Children into Regular Schools
(i) Withdraw prescriptive guidelines for this program. (ii) The Commission (subject to Ministerial endorsement)
to issue a detailed statement on the aims of the program and' a suggested range of activities which might be undertaken. (iii) State and non-government authorities to proceed to implement programs as they see fit according to local needs and circumstances. (iv) State and non-government authorities to provide detailed educational and financial accountability statement's to the Commission at the end of each year of the

program's operation. Format of accOI1fitability statements to be decided following consultation.
3. Special Education Program
(i) Removal of requirement for State Ministers to notify Commonwealth Minister of deletions and additions to lists of special schools. Consideration (following discussions with States) to be given to elimination of lists completely.
(ii) Investigation of possibility of non-government school program being administered by Committees representative of non-government schools (perhaps as sub-committees of State Planning and Finance Committees) .
4. Multicultural Education Program
(i) Abolish regular national meetings of State coordinators. Meetings to be called on an ad hoc basis when necessary.
(ii) Abolish production of separate reports on the program. All such reporting to be encompassed within the Commission's regular triennial reports.
5. New Arrivals Program
(i) Detailed guidelines for the new arrivals program, including refugees, to be presented as indicative rather than prescriptive, No requirement for States or nongovernment schools to adhere to precise parameters.
(ii) State and non-government school authorities, in first year of program, to be asked to provide the Commission with broad outlines of implementation proposals, including the extension of the funds to groups previously not covered and indication of how the proposals dovetail with the general ESL program.
(iii) Educational and financial accountability arrangements to be established following consultation.
(iv) Funds to be allocated to States by Commonwealth on a per capita rather than detailed request basis.'
6. Services and Professional Development Program
(i) Eliminate requirement that between 40 and 60 per cent of funds be spent on the replacement and remuneration cost of teachers attending courses of 10 days or more duration. No prescriptive guidelines to be issued for this program. Commission to issue broad statement of aims and suggested range of activities. Implementation (including involvement of tertiary institutions) a matter for State authorities.
(ii) Abolish National Advisory Group (which meets 2-3 times per year). Where necessary functions can be met by calling together on an ad hoc basis State coordinators of the program.
(iii) States to provide assurance that oversight committees are constituted in accordance with joint nature of the program.
(iv) Educational and financial accountability statements to be provided but annual reviews to be eliminated, Reviews to be confined to Commission triennial reports.
7. Disadvantaged Schools Program
(i) Retain the current Commonwealth determination of the numbers of students in the program and the school as the unit of funding. States to continue to provide Commonwealth Minister with annual list of declared disadvantaged schools.
(ii) Remove current administrative guidelines on the rate of turnover of schools on the list and the requirement that each school remain on the list for three years. Such matters to be left to discretion of States on advice from oversight committees.
(iii) Eliminate annual reviews of the program. Reviews to be confined to triennial reports of the Commission.

3128 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

(iv) Eliminate regular meetings of State co-ordinators of program. Meetings to be called on an ad hoc basis as necessary.
(v) Commonwealth Minister to continue to declare disadvantaged non-government schools.
(vi) Maintain other main features of the program, including parent/community participation requirements. States and non-government authorities to provide assurances to Commonwealth Minister regarding parent, teacher and community representation on oversight committees.
8. Country Areas Program
(i) Eliminate present requirement that regions be 'turned over' on a regular basis. Such matters to be left to State authorities.
(ii) Delete present rule that States receive Commonwealth approval to add to or delete from list of declared regions. This is to be at State discretion. State Ministers to declare regions.
'(iii) Delete the requirement that the funds be confined to a restricted number of regions in each State. If States wish, all country regions may participate.
(iv) States to provide assurances to the Commonwealth that oversight committees are constituted in accordance with the joint and community nature of the program and that funded activities have parent and teacher support.
9. Innovations Program
Grants for school level innovations projects will be terminated at the end of 1981, although it will take perhaps two years beyond that to complete accountability and reporting requirements. The activities of the consultants and the national and State committees involved in the administration of the program will be wound up this year.
10. Program Consolidation Some consolidation will take place within the general
framework of Commission programs. The New Arrivals Program will become an element of the English as a Second Language Program, rather than operating as a separate joint entity. The program which supports integration of handicapped children in regUlar schools will become an element of the Special Education Program. This should ensure a more coherent relationship between funding arrangements and policy development in these areas.
Motion (by Mr Fife)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Fremantle speaking for a period not exceeding 45 minutes.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (12.15)-The first thing I am bound to do is protest at the way in which this matter has been handled. In the first instance, these guidelines come in response to the reports of the Tertiary Education Commission and the Schools Commission which were tabled in this Parliament months ago. No opportunity for debate was provided at that time, and there will be little or no debate in relation to the discussion of the Government's response to those reports. The other point I make is that now is the time usually set aside for private members' business. It is a matter of great regret that most of the time available for private members will be taken up with this discussion on the Government's guidelines for the Schools Commission and the

Tertiary Education Commission. We have to insist always that private members have an opportunity to bring forward matters to this Parliament and not simply have their time expropriated by the Government in this way. Because of that, because of the exigencies of time, and for other reasons, I do not intend to take the full time available to me. I think it is important that some time be available for discussion of the matter which will be brought forward by the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi). Another point is that this is a very detailed document, running to some 25 pages, with several attachments. I obtained a copy, under the normal arrangements, only a couple of hours before the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) presented it to the Parliament. Therefore it will not be possible for me to respond in great detail, which makes it all the more important that time be set aside before this Parliament rises for a full discussion of the matters that have been raised.
This is a serious and deeply disturbing document. It represents another tragic instalment of the Government's determination to disparage and finally destroy the system of education in this country. Not only is it an attack on the quality of education but also it is predicated on a drop in enrolments in government schools and in the tertiary sector. The Government seems to approach with total equanimity the fact that enrolments in government schools are declining and that, in the Minister's terms, there is a stabilisation of enrolments in the tertiary sector which will almost certainly be followed by a reduction in enrolments in that sector. I do not think it is acceptable for us to contemplate the development of a decline in enrolments in the schools and a forthcoming decline in enrolments in the tertiary sector at a time when we ought to be encouraging more of our young people to be involved in full time education. Anyone would think that the record in Australia was something about which we could be blase. In fact, we all know that that is not the case. We all know that in a comparison with other countries we fare very badly in terms of the number of people involved in full time education. What is worse, not only do we compare badly with other countries, but also we are getting worse at a time when those other countries with which we like to compare ourselves are getting better in terms of the number of people who are in and continuing in full time education.
It is not just a matter of demographic changes, as the Minister has stated, which have led to a decline in the number of enrolments in schools. We have seen an actual decline in the proportion of people remaining in school from the first year to

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3129

the last year. That decline has been from 27 per how many young people find work and how many

cent to 35 per cent in the 10-year period 1969 to remain out of work.

1979. In addition, of those who do complete secondary education, the number who go on to tertiary education is falling. Faced with those very worrying statistics, this statement by the Minister is entirely inadequate. It does not address itself to any of those'!Iorts of problems. It does not indicate what action the Government intends to take to reverse those very dislturbing trends in which a turnaround has taken place following a 25-year period of increasing participation rates and increasing enrolments in our education system.

The Government pretends that it is increasing its commitment to the school-to-work transition program. It has decided that this program will make the difference in terms of the number of young people who find work. However, it is worth having a very close look at that claim. The Government first started funding the school-to work transition program last year. It was agreed that the Commonwealth should provide the total funding for the first year for 1981. It was always intended that, from 1982 to the end of the five-

The other problem with the Minister's stateyear school-to-work transition program, the

ment is that it sets about to blame the education States would take up some of the funding. In fact,

system for the fact that there is an enormous and the States have said that they will not. As a result,

unacceptable level of youth unemployment. The the Government is trying to find other ways of

Government has been trying to maintain this filling the gap which the States have left because

position for some time. The Prime Minister (Mr of their failure or their reluctance to get involved

Malcolm Fraser) dreamed up this view as he with or commit themselves financially to this

searched for further villians to excuse this program.

Government for its total failure to do anything about the appalling economic situation in this country and particularly the appalling situation as it affects young people. He set about to blame the schools, the teachers and the education system for the fact that young people take a very long time to find employment when they leave school. This flies in the face of all the professional advice which the Government has before it.

It is very interesting that the only endorsement that the Minister has in relation to the school-to work transition program comes from the State Ministers. The Minister said at the last meeting of State and Commonwealth Ministers for Education there was ringing endorsement of the school-to-work transition program and that great enthusiasm was expressed by State Ministers at that time. What sort of support is it that forces

The Government continues to quote from the them to the decision that they are unable to back

Schools Commission report on 15 and 16-yearup their enthusiasm and commitment with the

olds, but the Government always quotes that necessary funds to keep the program going? The

document selectively in terms of what the ComGovernment has said: 'Well, if the States will not

mission had to say about some of the shortcomcontribute to it as a result of the persuasive

ings of some of the schools in relation to some of powers of the Commonwealth Minister for Edu-

the students in those schools. What the Schools cation, we will pinch it off them in other ways'.

Commission has said-it said this in its most reThe Government has said that because of the

cent report-is that it is not the failure of the State governments' failure to provide financial

schools because many young people are adsupport for the school-to-work transition

equately prepared, are keen to find work but program it will deduct an amount of $27m from

simply cannot do so because there is not enough the amount which would otherwise have been

work available for them.

made available in recurrent funding for govern-

Only yesterday the report of the Senate Standment schools which are run by State governments.

ing Committee on Education and the Arts conThe point is that this does not represent an

firmed this approach. That Committee said that increased commitment by the Commonwealth.

the education system has very little to do with That $27m is expropriated from the amount

whether people are able to find jobs. It is true that which would otherwise have been made available

the education system has much to do with to government schools. That is an amount which

whether young people find the sorts of jobs they presumably will have to be made up by the States.

want or whether people have the appropriate The Commonwealth has said: 'You were not pre-

skills for the jobs which are available, but it has pared to join with us in the school-to-work tran-

very little to do with the overall problem of reducsition program, you were unable to see the virtues

ing the level of youth unemployment. The Senate which we see in the program; therefore we are

Committee, which of course is dominated by going to ensure that you fund it indirectly by re-

Government senators, says that it is economic facducing the amount which we would otherwise

tors and not education factors which determine have provided for recurrent expenditure in

3130 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

schools and earmark it for the school-to-work
transition program'. The amount involved is not small. It represents something like a reduction of 10 per cent in recurrent expenditure which this Government is making available to government schools throughout the country.
The reason the State governments have not been sufficiently impressed with the school-to work transition program to the extent that they are prepared to fund it is that they are aware of its great shortcomings. Any success in the school-to work transition program has come about largely by accident. It has come about because a number of enthusiastic teachers out in the schools, given some small additional resources, have been able to devise extra courses and new approaches within the schools to suit the needs of some students within those schools. There is no central philosophy underlying this scheme. The Government's own statements when introducing the school-to work transition program were totally confusing and almost verging on the incomprehensible. The Government did not know what it wanted to do. All it wanted to do was to demonstrate that it was making some response, that it was engaged in some frenzied activity in assisting those kids who were leaving school and going straight onto the dole. The Government did not know what it was doing, but it had to demonstrate that it was committing funds and that it was therefore concerned about the problems of young people. The State governments do nOt know what the philosophy is
that lies behind the school-to-work transition program. It is true that the States are enthusiastic about the program to the extent that it has worked, but they do not know what it is really supposed to be doing. There has been no evaluation of the success of the program. There has been no philosophical basis to it whatsoever.
I would like to refer again to the report of the Senate Committee, which, I repeat, is dominated by Government senators. Interestingly, the Senate report emphasises the need to distinguish between the problems of transition and the problems ofunemployment. The Senate Committee heard many of the sorts of submissions from employers which have so influenced the Government in relation to this program. It was largely the Confederation of Australian Industry, which came stumbling into the education debate a year or so ago, which so influenced the Government in its determination to make funds available for the school-to-work transition program. The Senate Committee, having heard the evidence which came forward from employers and industry, rejected that evidence. It said the evidence was far too simplistiC and that it was not its view that the primary aim

of schools was to concentrate on vocational education. The Government has said that it will give consideration to the Senate Committee's report. However, I can imagine the sort of cursory examination the report will get in view of the fact that the Committee disputes and in fact rejects the Government's approach in this area.
The worst thing about this whole approach, this preoccupation with the school-to-work transition program-as if the program held the key to the problems of education in our country-is that it ignores the real problems in our schools, universities and colleges.
Mr Barry Jones--Hear, hear! And in science and technology.
Mr DAWKINS-And in science and technology, as the shadow Minister for Science and Technology points out. The point is that the Government does not address itself to the fact that there is now an increasing drop-out rate in our schools. Therehas to be some explanation for that. We cannot simply say that that is happening because the kids who were dropping out are unimpressed with what they are getting at school, that they are unexcited by the courses being offered by those schools.
There should be a number of explanations. I invite the Minister to consider for a moment that one of the explanations for the early and increasing drop-out rate after the years of compulsory education could be the fact that the brighter students are dropping out and getting the jobs which are available. They know that they will at least get some job. It will not be a job that is appropriate to their abilities but at least it will be a job. They decide to drop out of school when they have an opportunity to out-compete the other people looking for jobs rather than staying on at school and going on to a university or college of advanced education and taking the risk of not being able to find the sort of job for which they trained during that process. There is some evidence that this is one of the factors influencing the dropout rate. That is something that cannot be overcome simply by patching, it up with a crash school-te-work transition program.
This analysis, of course, neatly matches the evi. dence concerning the fall in the number of people going fro,m secondary to tertiary education. We know that in the last few years there has been a massive drop in the number of people going straight from school to tertiary education. That seems to me to be a very worrying statistic. The Government has said that it is concerned to prepare for Australia's future, particularly in relation to technological change. How can it do so if an

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3131

increasing number of young people turn away from higher education, whether it be colleges of advanced education or universities? Surely there is a need for the Government to encourage more of those people to go on rather than turn away from the problem and concentrate the predominate part of its effort on this patchwork of schoolto-work transition programs. If the Government is really serious about the school-to-work transition program being an appropriate remedy for our problems, why does it not insist that this program be extended to the non-government sector? There are no requirements on the nongovernment sector to ensure that it partakes in this program. A lot of jaw boning is directed towards the non-government sector. The Government tells it that it would be pleased if it spent more of its time or concentrated more of its etTort on this sort of approach. But there is no threat of withdrawal of $27m or 10 per cent of its recurrent expenditure to ensure that it follows this course.
What is the reason for the double standard in this approach? Why is it that only the government schools are being forced to follow the approach which the Government has decided upon? One of the problems is that the reduction in the amount of the current expenditure available to govern-
ment schools will inevitably lead to an increase in
the contribution that parents have to make to the education of their children in government schools. We have seen that the Government has already cut back funds to the States. The States' ability to make up the shortfall in recurrent expenditure in their own schools. will be limited to that extent. There is no question whatsoever that, as a result of this statement today, the Government's preoccupation with the transition program and the Government's thieving of $27m from recurrent expenditure of government schools, fees in government schools will be increased enormously as the States try to make up the $27m which they will need in order to maintain the sort of standards in their normal program.
This stance will have extraordinarily worrying consequences for all children in Australia. This brings me to the way in which the Government, in its preoccupation with this approach, has ignored the advice and recommendations of the Schools Commission. Let us have a look at some of the figures in the broad. The Schools Commission recommended that the overall expenditure on government schools should increase by 8 per cent. In fact, there has been a drop of O.S per cent. For the non-government schools an 11 per cent hike was suggested. This displays the way in which the Government has a punitive approach to the gqvernment schools because it has very nearly
.\! '

complied with the recommendations of the Schools Commission and provided a 10 per cent increase to the non-government sector. This reveals again the way in which this Government has a very selective approach to education. It is determined to penalise the government school sector at a time when the government school sector is in need of very great and increased support.
The Schools Commission has reported on a billion dollar backlog in capital expenditure in the government sector. It was calling for a 10 per cent increase in government funding. What did the Government provide? It provided for a S per cent cut in the capital expenditure for the government sector. As well as that, the Government has approved the abolition of the innovations program but has not taken the advice of the Schools Commission and replaced or extended it with the Schools Improvement program which would have provided $ISm extra in a specialised program of school improvement. The Government is overlooking the real problem which has been demonstrated by the Schools Commission in order to pursue its preoccupations with the school-to work transition program which is untested and badly based and remains unevaluated. Criticism of this approach of the school-to-work transition program comes from a number of sectors. Let me refer to a small section from the most recent report of the Curriculum Development Centre which reads:
The conclusion we draw from the lengthy debates and excited activity under the heading 'school-to-work transition' is that they are no answer to our dilemmas. This remark need not be a signal to resume a complacent attitude about what may be the school's role in preparing youth for working life. There is indeed a crucial role for the school in this respect but it is more basic and long-term and cannot be accommodated by crash programmes.
I wish that the Minister for Education would take that advice to heart and go back to a sensible consideration of the real problems that exist in our schools rather than pursuing this madness which is simply a seat of the pants response on the part of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) as he surveys the horror of youth unemployment in this country.
The abolition of the CDC is particularly madheaded. If ever there was a time when we needed imaginative approaches to the curriculum in our schools it is now. The Government has said that it will close the CDC unless the State governments come to the party. Let me read to the Minister a letter which I have received from the Office of the Catholic Education Commission of Western Australia. The last paragraph, in which the Commission indicates the value of the CDC and the work it does in the non-government sector, reads:

3132 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

I would also raise with you the question of the value of that statutory body to the school community generally (including parents and parent groups) and to the total non-government school sector. The latter stands to lose more, with the demise of the CDC, than the government school sector because it does not have access to the financial resources from within the state to promote by itself programs and projects of curriculum development, including the production of materials. I sense that it is these community and non-government school sector voices that are not being heard in much of the debate about the future of CDC.
The Government cannot just wash its hands in relation to the CDC because its impact has been felt throughout the community. It is not just a matter of the State governments taking this aspect up. If the State governments had the $70m which this Government withheld, maybe there would be some argument in asking them to contribute to the cost of the CDC. In these circumstances the Government seems to me to be extremely short sighted and ignoring the real problems it faces.
I wish to refer to a couple of issues that were raised by the Minister in relation to the tertiary sector. One of the most disappointing aspects of the Minister's statement today is that it tells us nothing more about the decisions, most of them foolish, that arose from the Review of Commonwealth Functions. There is still no estimate of the likely income which the CAEs and universities will derive from the fees which they will be forced to impose for second and higher degree students next year. There is no indication of that whatsoever, although one senses that someone has made an estimate of their likely income and has built this estimate into the amounts of money which the Government has approved for expenditure on the college and university sector.
There are still no details in relation to the student loan scheme. I recognise that the Government has serious problems. A number of universities around this country have ,said that they will not administer a student loan scheme. Obviously the Government is having a great problem in devising a scheme which will be acceptable to universities, let alone acceptable to the students. Of course whatever scheme the Government devises, it will not appropriately meet the real financial problems facing students, particularly those from lower and middle income families. A loans scheme is no answer to the inadequate financial assistance available to students today, particularly when bearing in mind that the Government intends to reduce the real level of benefits available under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme.
In the statement the Government is simply restating its position in relation to the 30 CAE's which it has threatened to close. There is still no justification for the closures. We know how the decision was made. The Government simply took

out of the TEC report a list of 30 CAEs which was drawn up to demonstrate the 30 CAEs predominantly involved in teacher education. It was not a list of colleges which the TEC said should be merged. Whilst the TEC did indicate that it thought some mergers and some rationalisation should proceed during the next triennium, that list of colleges was not identified by the TEC for that purpose. The Minister has been verging on the dishonest in saying that the decision to close colleges or to force their merging has been based on advice from the TEC. There is one small change involved in what the Minister said before and what he is saying now in relation to those CAEs. I quote from page 15 of the statement, which reads:
I should add that whilst the principle of rationalisation and the timetable are not negotiable from the Commonwealth's viewpoint, the Government is willing to discuss with the States particular arrangements in relation to individual institutions.
I find that statement entirely breathtaking. What on earth does it mean? The statement starts off by saying that the principle is not negotiable but then says that the Government is prepared to discuss with the States particular arrangements. Does that really mean that the Government is prepared to reconsider some of the colleges 0n the list? Is it prepared to reconsider some of the colleges on the list? Is it prepared to reconsider the timetable? If not, what is the Government prepared to discuss with the States? Some of the States will put to the Minister very powerful arguments as to why some of those colleges should not, in fact, be merged. People from the CAE and, indeed, the university at Armidale will say that it is inappropriate for those two institutions to merge. They are saying that already there has been a saving in resources as a result of co-operation between the two institutions. They say they have both gone about as far as they can go in' terms of sharing resources and therefore saving money which is expended by them.
The Newcastle College of Advanced Education will also put up very powerful arguments as to why it should be allowed to continue. It will point out to the Minister that the College serves a rapidly growing area, the Hunter Valley region, and that it has already taken substantial steps towards diversifying its activities away from solely teacher education into other areas. I think that the mystery of this decision and the lack of justification for it can lead us to really only one conclusion. That is that the Government is determined, by way of forcing the closure or merging of some of these colleges, to reduce the number of student places which are available in those colleges. That is what the Government is really interested in; it

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3133

wishes to reduce the number of student places and enrolments as a way of reducing expenditure on the college and university sector.
The Government has not told us in the ministerial statement what it really means when it insists that there will be a saving of resources as a result of the mergers or closures or whatever. Similarly, in relation to the University of Western Australia and Murdoch University the Government still refuses to explain what in fact it means and what it is demanding in relation to a saving of resources by those two institutions. At the same time the Government says that it has built into the guidelines given to the TEC an estimate of the amount involved in these imagined savings of resources. The point is that the Government said in the statement that it has reduced the amount recommended by the TEC for expenditure on the college sector because it has taken into account what it believes should be the savings in resources and expenditure as a result of the rationalisation and mergers of CABs. The Government has not told us how much it imagines these colleges should or could save as a result of these forced mergers and closures.

Schools Commission and of the TEC to the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission than it does in taking those bodies' advice. It really does not matter much what these bodies are called; it is what they do that is important. If the Government continues to ignore their advice then those bodies, which contain of some of the best educational minds in the country, will be of declining value not only to this Government but also to the community as a whole. Both those commissions have put in years of careful and painstaking work in preparing recommendations for the Government on education funding for the next three years. I am sure they will be extraordinarily disappointed and discouraged at the W8;y in which the Government has ignored their advice and instead heeded the obsession and preoccupation of the Prime Minister as to what he thinks is correct for education in this country. J do not know why the Prime Minister has such contempt for education and for people involved in education in this country. I can only assume that it is based on his own third rate education and particularly his antipodean and antediluvian experience.
Mr Kerin-He was no good at school.

I repeat that the Government's action is taken only with a view to reducing the number of enrolments in colleges and in universities in this country. The Minister particularly has pointed in the past to the fact that enrolments have increased substantially-I think he said by 14 per cent over the last five years. What he apparently does not understand, or alternatively ignores, is the enormous change which has occurred in the pattern of enrolments in universities and CAEs. It has been mainly in the area of mature age and part time enrolments that the great increases have taken place. There simply has not been an increase recently in the number of enrolments of young people going from schools to colleges and universities. An extra problem involved in this area, when taking into account the decision to impose fees for second and higher qualifications, is that a large number of older people will now be turned away from the colleges and universities and we will have a further reduction in the number of places available in those institutions at a time when we really ought to be encouraging more people to get involved in full time education of one kind or another.
In summing up, I think that the response of the Government to the TEe is really extraordinary. The Government has sought to ignore the advice of the bodies available to make recommendations in relation to education expenditure. It seems much more interested in the change of name of the Schools Commission to the Commonwealth

Mr DAWKINS-The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) said that the Prime Minister was no good at school. That comes as no surprise. After all, he got a third class honours degree at Oxford.
Mr Kerin-Really? Mr DAWKINS-He did. This Government's response to the pressing problems that face the education system is totally inappropriate. It does not face up to the great challenges of the future in relation to what this country ought to be demanding of its education system. It certainly does not face up to the real requirements of the education system and those people who work in it. The education of the people of this country has been put in the hands of people who despise schools, teachers, students and academics. Their only wish is to demonise the education system as a way of disguising their own inadequacies, particularly in relation to youth unemployment. The Government's action represents, most disappointingly, a further departure from the approach which the Liberal Party has had, an approach which was initiated by Menzies. Menzies had a very great interest in the education system of this country. He established a number of very important programs; he carried on with some programs which were suggested by the Chifley Labor Government. The Menzies Government involved the Commonwealth in the education system in entirely new ways. I guess that it is just a

3134 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Commonwealth Education Policy Guidelines

matter of very great regret that this Liberal Government is turning its back on the approach of the Menzies era and trying to withdraw the Commonwealth from education and demolish many of the fine programs which the Menzies Government established and which were continued and expanded by the Labor Government dUring the 1972-75 period. After six years this Government still has no idea what it is doing or where it is going. The statement of the Minister is riddled with indications of promises to review particular approaches, to review particular allowances, to review the question of support for youth, and t.o have a look at reports from the Senate and other reports. The Government has no idea. It has no llhilosophy. Its response in the Minister's statement is entirely inadequate.
The Schools Commission pointed to the total inadequacies of the policies, the total shambles in relation to the problems facing young people, the total inadequacy of the programs which are provided .to support young people in this country. There is no resp.onse to this part of the Commissions report. This document is a deeply dispiriting one. It is bad news for the kids at school, three-quarters of whom are in government schools. Il"is bad news for their parents. It is bad news for Australia, an.d eventually it will be very bad news for this Government.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION Mr FRY (Fraser)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
-Mr DEPUTV SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The honourable member claims to have been misrepresented?
Mr FRY-Yes. I claim to have been misrepresented both by Ml' Speaker and by the Minister f6r Administrative Services (Mr Newman). In Question Time this morning I asked the Minister whether he was aware that in Easter 1980 three cadets had shot up a car belonging to a civilian in a Canberra suburb. While] was asking that question Mr Speaker interrupted me and said:
I cannot allow a request for information, which is a question, to amount to a recitation of allegations about a group in the cOJllll1unity.
i pornt out that ih December] asked a number of
questions of the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen), including whether three cadets had been dismissed or asked to resign from the Royal Military College following the shooting up of a car; if so, where and when the shooting took place; and whether military or police charges were laid in relati.on to the incident. The Minister replied that three cadets were discharged, that the incident

t.ook place at Easter 1980 in a Canberra suburb, and that no charges were made.

My question was based on the information sup-

plied by the Minister in response to a question on

notice. It quite misrepresents me to say that I was

making unsubstantiated allegations. It is very dis-

turbing that both Mr Speaker and the Minister

should seek to defend the situation when the Min-

ister for Defence supplied the informati.on on the

subject about which I asked my question. These

are certainly not allegations. It is very disturbing

that they sh.ould defend a situation where these

events take place--

'

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fraser has established his point. The misrepresentation tends to be somewhat vague in nature, th.ough important t.o the honourable member. J feel that he has taken the time of the House to accommodate his requirement.

BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE The following Bills were returned from the
Senate without amendment or requests:
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1981. Roads Grants Bill 1981.

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE Membership
Motion (by Mr Fife)-by leave-agreed to:
That Mr Beazley be discharged from attendance on the Joint Committee of Public Accounts and that, in his place, Mrs Kelly be appointed a member of the Committee.

SPEClAL ADJOURNMENT Motion (by Mr Fife) agreed to:
That the House, at its rising, adjourn until tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.

SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- by leave-I move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended' as would prevent Notice No. I, General Business, being called on forthwith.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

PROPOSED SITTING HOURS
Mr SPEAKER-I would like to indicate to the House the result of a ballot which was conducted in relation to the sitting hours. On the question 'Do you wish a change in the sitting hours?', the votes for yes were 80, the votes for no were 21. There was one informal vote. We do not know who the informal voter was. I understand that a similar trend exists in the voting in the Senate.

Institute ofFreshwater Studies Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3135

Sitting suspended from 12.57 to 2.15 p.m.
INSTITUTE OF FRESHWATER STUDIES BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Jacobi, and read a first time.
Second Reading MrJACOBI (Hawker) (2.15)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The frequent calls for a national approach to solve the problems of the River Murray and the steadfast refusal of the national Government to become involved in interstate arguments about the river's management, exemplify the fact that water resources management in Australiato achieve national objectives at the highest and broadest levels is virtually non-existent. This is undeniable and has been noted by every commentator on water resources management in Australia. It is not surprising that such deficiencies should exist when the Australian Constitution omits water management as a specific responsibility of the national Government. But national governments have almost invariably attempted to adopt the narrowest interpretation of their residual responsibilities and powers with respect to water management.
The Bill I am introducing today provides for the establishment of an Australian Institute of Freshwater Studies to upgrade and extend the reo search and planning of freshwater resources; in short, to provide the framework for better management of the most basic of resources in a dry continent-water. The establishment of such a national institute will not, of itself, solve the problems of the River Murray or similar national problems. It would, however, greatly assist by providing impartial information whereby the claims and requirements of the various managing State authorities could be investigated and evaluated, whereby the problems could be better defined and whereby optimal solutions are most likely to be derived in the national interest. The manner in which the Institute can play its envisaged role can be assessed from the wording of the Bill itself. It should be noted, however, that the charter of the Institute itself would not be settled until an interim council had been established by the Government to examine the situation more closely.
Overseas Experience The establishment of an Institute of Freshwater Studies is by no means a unique proposal. Similar

institutes exist in many developed countries including, for example, Canada, the United King~ dom1 South Africa, New Zealand and Israel. Indeed, it is quite anomalous that the driest continent, Australia, presently lacks such an institute. The charters of these overseas institutes indicate the importance placed on water research by the countries in which they are located. The high priority given such institutes by Israel and South Africa, where, like Australia, water is a basic resource in short supply, is, of course, no coincidence. . "
These countries have recognised the vital role of water research, investigation and management to their nationahvell-being. These countries have recogni~ed that the problems 9[Watet manage~ ment are-e~tricably tied to the nature and complexity. of their localisedgeograpby; that is, their soils, topography, industries, agriculture and water demands. These countries have clearly seen that the problems of one country are inevitably individual to that country and eannof necessarily be solved by taking results from elsewhere. That feature, above all, applies in Australia. For example, the irrigation problems along the River Murray, which has mainly sodium salinity, require a quite different solution to those of irrigation areas of the United States of America or Israel where salinity is mainly of the calcium type. We require a solution which can be found only in Australia, by using our own brains and resources.
The Situation in Australia In comparison with other countries we can ask what organisations does Australia have and what level of effprt Australia applies to the solution of its problems. Firstly, the level of funding of fresh~ water research in Australia is totally inadequate. The allocation to the Australian Water Resources Council for research purposes in the last Budget was a mere $450,000. Let us compare this figure with that received by just one freshwater research laboratory in the United Kingdom in 1980-$2,500,000. With this limited level of funding for the AWRC, even the best organisation in the world would be hard pressed to make any impression on the growing water problems of this vast and largely arid nation. But worse than that, the organisations we do have are woefully fragmented or inappropriate to the tasks.
"Firstly, the Department of National Development and Energy, of which the Australian Water .Resources Council is. part, is involved only in administratiye and policy areas. Neither orga.nisation directly' undertakes investigation or research, although they. do have some limited control or influence on these activities by

3136 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Institute ofFreshwater Studies Bill

their funding powers. Nor do they make decisions or recommendations on specific or contentious management issues.
Secondly, there are the bureaucratic State water authorities which are the main centres of water management responsibility in Australia. These bodies attempt to allocate fairly the waters within their areas of responsibility and to keep them free from pollution. But their areas of responsibility, especially State boundaries, do not coincide with catchment boundaries and squabbles inevitably arise over interstate rivers. In general, senior officers of water authorities are competent and dedicated engineers, but the problems of water management are becoming increasingly associated with chemistry and biology. It is not surprising then that such officers are finding it ever-harder to keep abreast of the nature of the problems, let alone the solutions. The water authorities do not generally undertake fundamental research; that is, work of a basic type and of national application. Whilst they do carry out many investigations, these invariably only cover areas within their State boundaries and therefore cannot address the allocation or pollution of waters of interstate rivers.
The third organisation is the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation. The CSIRO undertakes some water research, but it is scattered among 14 different sections of the organisation. The Senate standing committee on National Resources recommended in 1978 that there be a separate water resources division within CSIRO. I concede that this could be an alternative to an independent institute. However, the CSIRO has generally not taken up research or investigations where social, legal or cultural values have to be evaluated. But these questions are of vital concern to water management, as also is the development of new technologies from previous research. Unless the CSIRO were to be significantly changed, given enlarged responsibilities and a greatly increased budget, the responsibility and activities of the proposed Institute could not be incorporated.
Fourthly, the universities perform considerable and valuable research and several have on-going interests in water subjects. However, none are adequately funded or manned to carry out the level and type of research and investigation envisaged. The last of the water organisations are the commissions specifically set up to manage interstate rivers. The best known of these is the River Murray Commission. Its deficiencies are numerous. Its powers relate only to the quantity of water in the main stream of the River Murray, plus certain offriver storages. Consequently, it has no control

over the quality of water in the river, nor over adjacent land practices, nor over activities on the tributaries of the Murray which might lead to a deterioration in quality.
The Commission has a staff of only 10 to manage thousands of miles of river and, like the State water authorities that it serves, has little real expertise in the biological questions which are increasingly important in determining water quality. Consequently, engineering works along the Murray have often been constructed by and on behalf of the Commission, without proper study of their impacts on the river ecology. The Commission does not undertake research, and it does not include Queensland under whose jurisdiction much of the headwaters of the Darling lie. Like all federalist co-operative bodies, the Commission produces lowest common denominator decisions and takes an enormous amount of time to reach them. There is much labouring to bring forth a gnat. In relation to the River Murray Commission, Professor Sandford Clark, a recognised expert on international water legislation and rivers, pointed out that 'a commission must have considerable independence and autonomy if it is to be effective' and that 'there is an inconsistency in creating an organisation and then denying it the powers to undertake its tasks'.
My criticisms of the River Murray Commission should not be taken in any way as a reflection on its staff, nor do they suggest that there is no need for such a body. The point is that the River Murray Commission and similar commissions are not institutionally structured effectively to solve many of the pressing problems of interstate rivers let alone other problems of a national nature in water resource management. Whilst changes have been proposed to widen the scope of the Commission's operation, there are fundamentallimitations which these changes will not and cannot overcome. The expanded River Murray Commission is to have responsibility for mainstream water quality but, at best, will be able to make recommendations only with respect to water quality in tributary streams. It is not possible to control river pollution without control over what enters the river. It is nonsense to think otherwise. In any case, the Commission has effectively had the power, if it can be called that, over water quality under an informal agreement made by the States and the Commonwealth five years ago. One government expert who is reported in a recent article in the Australian summed up the real barrier to resolve the mounting issues facing this river system in these terms:
If we can get rid of the need for unanimity we would have travelled a long way to solving the problems. The ability to

Institute ofFreshwater Studies Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3137

make majority decisions will give the Commission real power to censure not just to recommend, any government which bucked a three-to-one vote against it would have to stand up and be counted.
However only South Australia is prepared to do so. Further, most legal experts agree that it will be impossible to convince, or even force, New South Wales and Victoria to surrender their rights over the Murray, its tributaries and the lands adjoining them, which would be necessary if the Commission were given the power envisaged by South Australia and other organisations such as the hiver Murray Valley League.

options and can provide impartial arbitration be-
tween States. It is the only reasonable hope we
have for better management of the river system. By investigation of options before, rather than
after, a decision is taken, much of the cause for
conflict will be reduced. By adopting a national viewpoint in its investigations, the mutual con-
cern and possible distrust between the upstream
and downstream interests can be largely dispelled at the early stages. The institute would look at the
river system from a much broader perspective than can be achieved by the separate State
bureaucracies responsible for management of the

Finally, if the river's problems are to be solved, river. As consumers of water, we ask our river to

it will be necessary to conduct research and adopt dilute and carry away our sewage, cool and supply

a new approach towards them. Biologists and our industries, remove our industrial effiuents-

other scientists need to be considerably more inheavy metals, chemicals, oils and so onact as a

volved in management of the river.

means of transport and recreation, irrigate our

Problems of the Murray

crops, water our stock, carry away fertilisers and pesticides, cook our foods, clean us and provide

Much has been said about salinity, silting, poldrinking water. Yet we know next to nothing of

lution and other river problems, but it is quite the way in which rivers operate to carry out this

extraordinary and scandalous that so little remultiplicity of functions, particularly those in-

search into the cause, nature and effects of these volving waste material processing.

problems is undertaken. After 100 years of thoughtless exploitation, the viability of the River Murray system as a resource is in jeopardy. Honourable members will recall that recently it even ceased flowing to the sea. If present trends continue, it is only a matter of years-or less if there is prolonged drought-before this river and its tributaries, which supply most of South Australia and many thousands of people in New South Wales and Victoria with domestic water, become not merely unpleasant, but quite undrinkable, and practically useless for irrigation. Without the expenditure of enormous sums of money on moves to rectify past and present poor practice the river is now at crisis point. Six features of this unique system have lead to this crisis. They are:
1. the aridity of the region;

There is no current, co-ordinated research on river systems as a whole. There is only one river
laboratory in the entire River Murray Basin,
which is a small one associated with the development of Albury-Wodonga. Salinity is increasing at
an alarming rate in many river systems through-
out Australia. Numerous examples of rivers which have become unusable can be cited in western and south-eastern Australia due to unthinking
land use practices. We do not know how long it
will be before citrus and viticulture fails along the Murray but we can be sure that it will happen in
our lifetimes. We do not know how many more upstream irrigation licences will be granted before
the lower Murray irrigation industries totally col-
lapse. We have only sketchy ideas of the current cost of salinification to industry, home consump-

2. the enormous extent to which existing tion, the motor trade and to agriculture. We can

water resources are exploited;

only guess at how much it might cost to desalinate

3. the frightening rate of salinity increase from Murray water if it reaches unacceptable salt

source to sea, greatly exacerbated by irrilevels, or to find alternative sources of water. The

gation and clearing;

total cost to the public and industry would be

4. the pathetic infighting between states borastronomical, and is probably already

dering the resource, all behind the smoke unacceptable.

screen of sovereign rights;
5. the almost total lack of knowledge of the way in which the system functions ecologically; and
6. the lack of effective management based on sound knowledge.

Because the River Murray catchment does not
conform to State boundaries, the information and research on which effective management is based
must be national in character. What is done to one part of the river clearly affects conditions else-
where, yet this elementary fact has been ignored

The Institute to be established by this Bill can by State and local authorities for more than 100

overcome the problem of lack of knowledge, can years. The rapid decline of the river in its lower

investigate different and improved management reaches after 80 years of federation is testimony to

3138 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Institute ofFreshwater Studies Bill

the failure to understand the interactions of the river on a basin-wide basis. However, the River Murray is only one of Australia's interstate rivers.
The Problem of Interstate Rivers Because of the mismatch between natural catchment boundaries and State boundaries, surface run-off in rivers covering 40 per cent of the area of Australia where rivers and streams existthat is, excluding the central and western deserts-are involved in interstate transfers. These rivers are generally the interior flowing rivers with low flows. Thus competing demands of the different States and demands within the States are less likely to be readily satisfied and interstate conflicts will arise more readily with these rivers. No agreement exists for any of the interstate river systems, except for the border rivers of New South Wales, and Queensland, and for the River Murray. I suggest that all honourable members should look at the River Murray agreement. It is larger than the whole of the Canada Water Act. One can imagine the stalemate which would exist if Queensland wished to build a large dam on the headwaters of the Cooper or Diamantina, thus diminishing the flows essential to the livelihood of some South Australian pastoralists. Such a conflict did, in fact, take place in the 1960s concerning a proposal to divert part of the Cooper into Lake Yamma' Yamma. The proposal was dropped after objections by South Australia. The Institute could carry out studies into possible ways of allocating interstate waters well before conflict arose over specific issues. Parties from the various States could be brought together in an informed manner, free from political pressure, to discuss the implications of various allocations and regulations and to make sure that all their interests and concerns were fully identified and accounted for.
A national institute is also needed to coordinate other water research which must necessarily be of a national character. One such example is the Australian Representative Basins Program, a boldly conceived project which was to have been a showpiece of Australian national hydrology. Unfortunately, the project has failed, and failed miserably, because at the fundamental level the States and the Commonwealth were unable to co-ordinate their efforts. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a document detailing this program, including the reasons for its failure.
Leave granted. The document read as follows-

AUSTRALIAN REPRESENTATIVE BASINS PROGRAM
In 1964 following the introduction of the International Hydrological Decade, and as part of Australia's contribution to the decade, the concept of' a national program of hydrological investigation of some 100 m lium to small river basins throughout Australia was adopted. The program was known as the Australian Representative Basins Program. The aim of the program was to study the hydrological response of these 100 basins, which were chosen to be distinctive, but representative of the larger region surrounding them, and thus to be able to explain why and to what extent the hydrological response of the catchments differed. Success in this program would have enabled the data collected from these catchments to be used to solve water problems arising on the many other catchments where either no data existed, or where date could not be quickly or economically collected. In other words it was a far sighted plan which attempted to anticipate a whole range of problems the nation might face in the management of its many thousands of such catchments, to collect data on an efficient scale, and to perform analyses which would extend the understanding of scientists and engineers and enable them to solve these problems with a greatly imprOVed efficiency. The program was enthusiastically adopted by most parties and was to be jointly operated by the States and Commonwealth Authorities.
However, within a short period, the whole program ran into problems. One very severe problem was the imbalance between the commitment of the various parties to the data collection operation. The rainfall data was, in general, to be collected and processed by the Commonwealth Bureau of Meteorology. The streamflow data was to be collected by the various State authorities.
The States undertook their commitment with varying success, but the Bureau of Meteorology consistently failed to undertake its commitment to collect rainfall data. Despite repel\ted calls by the AWRC, the Bureau was never funded or manned at the appropriate level by the Commonwealth Government to enable it to meet its commitment.
Since the main objective of the program was.to study the relationship between rainfall and subsequent streamflow, the absence of adequate rainfall data meant the effective ruin of the whole program.
CSIRO spent many man years in attempting to set up a mathematical hydrological model of the catchment processes under their part of the program, but without sufficient coordinated rainfall and streamflow data the model could not be effectively directed or improved,
In total 6 million dollars were spent on the program over the period (including CSIRO component).
A review of the program is currently underway by the AWRC. These problems with the p.rogram have been noted and it is almost certain that the program will be severely curtailed, if not scrapped.
Mr JACOBI-I thank the House. The problems of management faced by this program are typical of the problems any national approach to water nianagement iIi Australia faces. Had an institute existed-I say this to the Minister for Home Affairs and -Environment (Mr Wilson) in all sincerity-adequate centralised management and representation could have been arranged. Better co-ordination of the involved organisations could have been provided and technical studies

Institute ofFreshwater Studies Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3139

undertaken to ensure that the national importance and benefit of the study was fully appreciated by all concerned. The AWRC still suffers from the lack of ability to have technical studies of a national venture undertaken. The AWRC secretariat is not staffed to the appropriate level, not adequately qualified in a sufficiently wide range of areas to undertake a whole range of investigations required to enable the AWRC to reach its policy decisions on an informed basis. I suggest that the proposed institute could fill this gap.
There is also a natural conservatism in the State authorities to use new technologies. Australian scientists have been amongst world leaders in the development of isotope usage in hydrological studies and pilot studies have shown the effective and cheap use of these techniques. The role of adapting new technical developments for use by water authorities is a task which is well catered for in the water industries of many developed countries. Again, Australia has no such national facility. The Institute could fulfil such a role.
The Legal Position
With the nature of existing and potential water resource problems, there should be no doubt that the Commonwealth has a clear obligation in the national interest to investigate the proper use and management of our inland water resources and to move towards a more rational position. The so called 'national implied powers' of the Commonwealth provide it with the power to establish a body which would investigate and make recommendations on the problems which bedevil our River Murray system. This power has been described by a number of justices, in particular in the recent Australian Assistance Plan case. Although the scope of this inherent power has yet to be exhaustively defined, a number of justices indicate that the power would be sufficient to extend the involvement of the Commonwealth in research activity, into management investigations particularly when it is appropriate that there must be planning and research at a national level. However, I stress forcibly that the creation of such a national body would by no means pre-empt the responsibility for management which the States undoubtedly have. The Institute could, in fact, create an opportunity to make use of the expertise available in the States and allow this to be extended in an appropriate manner. The operation of the Australian Institute of Freshwater Studies, properly constituted, could complement the work of the States.
The reasoning behind the need for an increased Commonwealth role was best summed up by Mr

Justice Mason in the AAP case, to which I have referred. He said:
The functions appropriate and adapted to a national Government will vary from time to time. As time unfolds, as circumstances and conditions alter, it will transpire that particular enterprises and activities will be undertaken, if they are to be undertaken at all, by the national Government.
With respect to the River Murray, this comment could be paraphrased as follows: Solutions to the problems of the River Murray will be found, if they are to be found at all, by the Federal Government.
Previous Proposals
In considering the role of the Federal Government it is opportune to review the important work of Senate committees which have examined water matters. The Senate Select Committee on Water Pollution found, amongst other things:
There are large gaps in the documentation of our water resources and there is no pragmatic program of research into the causes and consequences of water pollution, or into its economics.
The Committee also recommended that the Commonwealth should take urgent steps to establish a national water commission. Predictably, this body was objected to by States because of the threat to their bureaucratic empires. In 1978 the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources released a report which recommended a national approach to water resources and supported the establishment of an independent bureau of water resources to undertake all the Commonwealth's non-policy, co-ordination, technical and information activities. In response the Government stated: 'This recommendation would signify a considerable broadening of the Commonwealth's role in water resource matters, but the Government does not believe that such a step is justified at this time. This recommendation will be reviewed if warranted by changed circumstances at some later stage'. I suggest that a considerable broadening of the Commonwealth's role is urgently required and that circumstances relating to the river's management have indeed changedfor the worse.
In June 1979 the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment released a progress report which found:
. . . many people along the river are obviously frustrated by the apparent inability of anyone department, Commonwealth or State, to take responsibility for providing responses to views and grievances.
An Institute of Freshwater Studies that was available to the Commonwealth and States for research into specific matters affecting water management decisions, or that was able to initiate its own research into such questions, would clearly

3140 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Institute ofFreshwater Studies Bill

not conflict with the recommendation of these three committees and it would bring many advantages. Firstly, research by the Institute would view the river system as a whole. The evaluation of benefits and costs for proposed river works could be assessed by the Institute from a national viewpoint, rather than from a local or regional perspective.
Secondly, the Institute would be free of governmental interference so that it could bring impartiality and objectivity to the consideration of such matters. Whilst final decisions on water resource matters will lie with the States, at least the information on which those decisions are made would be the best available. As I have previously shown, much key information is presently not available at all. Thirdly, the Institute would examine the environmental and biological aspects of water quality. It has become inqeasing ~ell understood that salinity and other problems cannot be tackled effectively if they are divorced from changes to the river's ecology. The River Murray Commission has in recent years formed subcommittees to look at some of these problems but there is no evidence of any meaningful progress in these areas over the past five years. .In any case, the expertise available to the. States in this area is minimal. By contrast I would expect that the Institute of Freshwater Studies would .be staffed by prominent biologists, hydrologists, chemists, microbiologists and medical researchers, with support from economists and engineers.
Fourthly, the Institute could playa role in the more rapid introduction of improved technologies and practices which are so vital if many of the poor, present methods are to be avoided. Issues associated with the River Murray are the most vexed and most important questions facing us today in the water field. Howev.er, there are many other areas where the Institute could undertake useful research for Federal, State and local bodies. The recent and tragic death of a child in South Australia from amoebic meningoencephalitis, a water-borne disease, is a case in point. The South Australian Government decided after the death of this child that some research was needed and accordingly voted funds amounting to $150,000 for that purpose. However this is a national problem and research should have commenced beforehand. The need for such research was recognised several years ago.
Conclusions
Any proposal to establish a new statutory body at this time of unprecedented demands for Commonwealth funds is not a step to be taken lightly. However, there are several points in relation to

the cost of the proposed Institute which should be considered. Firstly, the value of the industries and communities at risk from water problems must run into billions of dollars. The cost of protecting these industries and communities is already growing rapidly. In this context the work of the proposed Institute could save taxpayers many millions of dollars by examining ways to improve the management of our threatened waterways.
Secondly, if the Institute were available for contract research it could earn substantial income both from government and industry. There is evidence that sections of industry would welcome the services of a top-rate water research body. The problems posed to water supply by certain mining operations are a case in point. A statutory body wOllld be welcomed in such situations, both for its impartiality and reputation, and also for the absence of comparable bodies in the private
sector.
Thirdly, there is the question of priorities. We already have an Australian Institute of Marint) SCience which is housed in a multi-million dollar modern complex near Townsville, and which was given $5.5m in 1980-81 to expand its research into marine biology. We will spend $24.5m on the Antarc.tic this year, including $1.2m specifically tobuild up marine research. In addition, a grant of $2.3m is made through the Australian Marine Science and Technologies Advisory Committee for research into marine science.- That is a total of $9m. By contrast, research into inland waters, and particularly into such a vital.economic asset as the Murrfly-Darling system, has been almost completefy neglected. Are our inland waters that much less important to us than those around our coast and in the Antarctic? (Extension of time granted).
Finally, I will briefly outline the mechanics of this Bill and the procedure to be followed in the establishment of the Australian Institute of Freshwater Studies. The procedure is similar to that used to set up the Australian Institute of Marine Science in 1970. Firstly, an interim council for the Institute will be appointed by the Minister for Science and Technology. The interim council will consist of five members, including two persons with appropriate qualifications. This body will make recommendations to the Minister concerning the functions and powers of the Institute, its constitution, the site of the seat of the Institute, how it should co-operate with Commonwealth and State authorities and other research institutions and, finally, the interim council will estimate the capital and recurrent costs of the Institute. The scope of the interim council's investigations is set out in section 7 (2) of the Bill.

Institute ofFreshwater Studies Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3141

After the recommendations of the interim council more fully involved in the provision of funds for

have been received by the Minister, the Institute rehabilitative work. I believe also that the

will be given such functions and powers as the proposed Institute should be set up.

Parliament then determines~

The twin questions of saline 'water tables in

As I said at the beginning of this speech, the many irrigation areas and rising levels of salinity

measures proposed in this Bill will not by themin the River Murray and some of its tributaries are

selves solve all the major water resource problems well comprehended. But, there has been a history

facing Australia. However, this Bill provides a of inaction at governmental level. The reasons for challenge to the national Parliament to assume its the inaction have been threefold: Firstly, a lack of

responsibilities and take the first steps to correct a comprehensive and co-ordinated approach; sec-

past failures. It is politicians who have failed to ondly, the failure to regard the Murray River sys-

manage properly our water resources, and tem as a nati.ltal living system and to manage it as

squabbles over power and empires have put at such~ and, thirdly, in-fighting and adherence by

risk our most precious resource. It is time that parochial and vested interests were swept aside and that effective, impartial and national approaches were taken to our water resources. As
the first step in that direction, I commend the Bill
to the House.

State authorities to the letter of agreements

reached by compromise, or the lowest common

denominator approach,' as, outlined by the

honourable member for Hawker.

.

The Murray River system has provided a source of development and wealth for three States

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the motion seconded?
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (2.47)-1 second the motion. I fully support my colleague, the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi), in putting forward his prqposition for the establishment of an Australian Institute of Freshwater Studies, and I congratulate him for the speech he has made and the arguments he has used. The case he has made is one that deliberately avoids party politics and wrangling and seeks a solution to one of Australia's most important problems. He has explained the reasons why the existing bodies are inadequate and has been honest in stating that the Institute will be a means whereby' objective knowledge will be put forward so that no single government will be able to take recourse to the arguments of States' rights as an excuse for not doing anything or acting irresponsibly, particularly with respect to the River Murray system. But, of course, an institute such as that proposed would not just be concerned with the River Murray system, although that system is our most important fresh water problem today.

and indeed the nation for a considerable part of

our history. This, together with its recreational

and conservation value, makes it a priceless

national asset and an important part of' our

national heritage. But it is also an extremely com-

plex and fragile natural resource and as such very

real limits exist as to how far it can be exploited.

Sadly, lack of adequate knowledge and careless

improper management have brought the Murray

to its knees. Unless substantial action is under-

taken now tIle quality of our most important

water resource will be destroyed, with costly

consequences' for futlHe generations ,of

Australians.

'

There are two separately identifiable, though hlterrelated, problems threatening the viability of agricultural areas along the Murray and its tributaries-rising watertables and associated salinisation, and high salinity levels in the river itself. Together, they are responsible for significant drops in yield and the degradation ofhuge tracts of farmland. To understand how this crisis situation has come about it is necessary to go back to when the land was first being utilised for cropping and grazing. The actions of the early settlers

My brief comments will refer to the Murray and their descendants had a profound effect on

River system from an agricultural resource point the management problems of today. Mistakes in

of view. I am not complacent or sanguine about land use and management-such as widespread

the future of Australia's greatest natural resource. clearing, disruption of natural-' drainage systems

It is my firm belief that the problems of the Murand introduction of exotic weeds-were made.

ray River system will not be solved until the five What could have been valuable renewable re-

governments concerned institute a single control sources were squandered in the quest for a quick

body for the system, with effective regulatory return. However, there is little point now in en-

powers to control water quality as well as quangaging in recriminations with our ancestors. Their

tity. I believe that in the interim the allocation of priorities cannot be evaluated properly now. They

additional-I mean net additional-irrigation were also acting with a defective body of infor-

licences should be made with great caution and mation on soils, water, vegetation and, most im-

that the Commonwealth Government should get portantly, how natural systems operate. We have

3142 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Institute ofFreshwater Studies Bill

learned a great deal in the last century about management of agricultural lands; unfortunately, the problems seems more to be our inability to implement what we have learned.
Two features of the natural environment in particular have caused substantial problems for irrigators. Firstly, the hydrological systems which evolved, whether surface or subsurface, under natural conditions largely did so in an arid environment; that is, they evolved to cope with relatively low inputs of water. Irrigation has resulted in massive increases in the amounts of water these drainage systems have to handle. One of th~ results is that in areas where subsurface flow characteristics have not been able to adjust, watertables have been forced to rise. When the watertable reaches the root zone waterlogging occurs and yields decrease. Often the watertable rises through soil containing high concentrates of salt. When this occurs the salt is mobilised in solution and carried to the root zone where it harms vegetation. Eventually this salt may enter the river, adding to salinity levels in the mainstream itself. The second feature is that much of the underlying sediment and groundwater, particularly along the lower reaches, is naturally very salty. This is because for millions of years the sea extended as far east as Swan Hill. This natural saltiness has been mobilised by land clearing, river structures and irrigation drainage. The resulting high levels of salinity in the river itself reduces crop yields and limits the choice of crops which can be grown by irrigation relying on river water.
When discussing water quality and drainage problems in relation to agricultural production along the Murray System it is helpful. to perceive the area in terms of two distinct zones with the dividing line running approximately through Swan Hill. To the. east is what is generally known as the Riverina Plains zone and to the west the Mal1ee zone. These zones can be differentiated not only in relation to geographical factors but also in that farmers in each face different salinity problems. The Riverina Plains zone produces mainly livestock, although other things are grown also.. Irrigation is used to grow pastures and supportmg fodder crops. Horticulture is important around Shepparton whilst rice is an important crop in the Deniliquin region. The production l~~els of those areas are very much threatened by nsmg watertables and associated movement of salt into the root zone. If the Shepparton region has a very wet winter, the problem with pear trees becomes crucial. Downstream in the Sunraysia and Riverland regions of the Mallee zone the predominant land use, horticulture, suffers from high salinity levels in the river water used for irrigation.

The important thing to realise is that the two problems are related with salinity levels in the Murray being affected by mobilisation of salt by rising watertables. The fact that the effects of irrigation in the Riverina Plains are felt by those many miles downstream has been the cause of long bitter arguments between the States. The effects of rising watertables and increasing salinity are not always physically noticeable to the passer by or even farmers themselves. Degradation occurs over a period and marginal decreases in yield often occur long before vegetation dies or salt appears at the surface. Further, salinity levels in irrigation water fluctuate markedly with changes in the volume of flow. Drought conditions can lead to much higher concentrations. Therefore, the situation is considerably worse than may be indicated by the extent of land that has become completely unproductive. In addition, production on some salt affected farms may have been maintained, but only by costly increases in labour and capital.
On a regional basis the seriousness of the problem is highly variable, dependent on land use and location. For instance only 1 per cent of the Deniliquin region is at present affected by shallow watertables and the underlying sediments appear to have a relatively low salt content. Yet, on the opposite banks of the river, in the Kerang region, many farms have been put out of production and on others farmers are struggling to make a living on properties badly affected by salt. Two-thirds of this region is underlain by a highly saline watertable within 2 metres of the surface. Barr Creek, which drains the region, adds about 150,000 tonnes of salt a year to the Murray. Obviously for the 3,500 people who live in the region a very real crisis exists.
Other regions have also had their social and economic well-being seriously dislocated. The prime fruit producing areas around Shepparton have symptoms of salinity in more than half of the region's famous pear trees. Unless something is done here the area of land affected by saline watertables is expected to increase threefold by the year 2000. If this is allowed to happen it could spell the end for this rich, intensively irrigated district presently supporting 70,000 people. The Wakool region has also been seriously affected, although here the problem is less widespread. However, the situation is expected to worsen in the next few years.
Downstream in the horticultural areas of Sunraysia and the South Australian Riverland irrigation farmers have to battle against lost markets, inadequate farm size and insufficient resources as well as salty irrigation water. The

Institute ofFreshwater Studies Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3143

threat of a high concentration of salt is greatest in years of reduced flow. Therefore during most years salinity levels are not high enough to affect crops directly. However, evidence suggests that when damage does occur it may remain evident for two to three years; further, if internal drainage is not good salty soils will develop. The towns and irrigation settlements along the arid lower reaches of the system are almost totally dependent on irrigated agriculture for their existence; there is very little else they can turn to.
Obviously the twin problems of rising watertables and salinisation pose serious threats to the continued socio-economic viability of irrigation dependent areas along the Murray system. Further, they pose a serious environmental threat and impose considerable costs, including health costs, on domestic users. A quick examination of relevant available material shows that there has , been no shortage of research carried out into the problem. Nor has this situation suddenly appeared. Rather, the seriousness of the problem has been realised by governments for at least the past 12 years. Indeed, water quality has been the source of infighting between the four governments directly concerned for just as long. If bitter words and so-called protection of sovereign rights could improve salinity levels the rivers waters would be crystal clear by now. I have already given the reasons why there has been inaction.
Managing a complex resource system like the Murray for each of the many differing and often conflicting possible uses is a daunting enough task, but when the management policies must satisfy four separate governments it becomes impossible. The fragmented approach that has existed to date has proven to be woefully inadequate. Bitter infighting has been going on between the States over the Murray since before Federation. Implementation of the River Murray Water Agreement in 1915 solved many of the problems regarding water quantity. This provided for the appointment of the River Murray Commission to give effect to the agreement and authorised the construction of works and the apportionment of water between the States. However, the Commission was given no responsibility for water quality. As a result, any attempts to deal with problems of salinity have been on a State by State basis. This has proven to be both costly and unsuccessful.
Steps were first undertaken to have water quality brought under the auspices of the River Murray Commission early in 1973. Amendments to the River Murray Water Agreement were finally decided on in 1975. As of yet the necessary legislation has not been formally implemented.

The worst of all this is not that it has taken eight years to decide on and implement amendments concerning water quality, but that the amendments will make little real difference to the situation. They will enable the River Murray Commission to monitor salinity levels, co-ordinate research, recommend standards, and advise the States on control measures with relation to water quality. In other words, all they'do is make the Commission an advisory body to the States. It still will not have effective powers directly to control salinity and its associated problems along the river. Further, and most importantly, the agreed upon changes to the agreement will only allow the River Murray Commission to become involved with quality in the main stream; they do not include tributaries. It is absolute nonsense that we do not involve tributaries. Obviously the success of these changes depends almost entirely on the extent to which the States are prepared to co-operate.
Almost every independent body that has had anything to do with the water quality problems of the Murray System has pointed out how formal and informal institutional constraints have effectively limited mitigation of the effects of shallow watertables and salinisation. Similarly, there is a general consensus that a comprehensive and coordinated approach is required to deal with the problems both in the short and long term. As pointed out by Maunsell and Partners in their Murray Valley salinity and drainage report:
It is often not physically possible or economically desirable to deal with these problems on a State by State basis.
The answer lies in control being empowered with a single body which is the sole source of administrative and regulatory power. Inarguably the Murray River system is a resource of national importance. As such it is up to the Federal Government to become more involved before it is too late and this important part of our national heritage is lost not only to the present generation but also to all future generations of Australians.
The second fundamental management issue that I see as being of central importance to the survival of the Murray is that to date there has been a failure to recognise the Murray system as a single renewable natural resource governed essentially by laws of nature. It is a geographic and ecological unit; therefore changes in any part of it will be felt throughout. Thus, having one body to manage soil conservation, another irrigation, another recreation, yet another conservation and then duplicating the whole arrangement every time the river croses State boundaries reflects a thorough disregard or ignorance of the interdependence and

3144 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Institute ofFreshwater Studies Bill

complexity of the Murray as a renewable resource.
The present situation of decreasing yields and loss of tracts of agricultural land is basically due to a failure to understand the ecological implications of wide-spread clearing and disruption of natural drainage systems. Surely we have learned enough from our mistakes to realise the importance of ecological guidelines to land use management. Our overall goal for the management of the Murray should be to utilise it in such a way that in the long term it remains a viable renewable resource capable of sustained output. Yet it is well recognised that the Murray wiII be able to provide sustained agricultural yields provided sound conservation practices are adopted.
A positive relationship exists between maintaining as much as possible, natural processes and sustained rural incomes, because once land and water start to degrade it becomes more and more costly to maintain production, and eventually it must decline. Many of the measures likely to result in a significant long term improvement in water quality are on farm and as such require farmer acceptance rather than large scale capital works. Here I could point to the impact of laser grading in helping farmers. Some examples include improved methods of water application, improved farm layout, changes in crop types and in some cases perhaps even land retirement.
Further, planners when attempting to formulate strategies for dealing with drainage and salinity should realise that these are only some of the problems facing farmers in the Murray Valley. Farmers particularly in the horticultural industries are simultaneously trying to cope with other major social and economic problems. Solutions to salinity and drainage problems need to be integrated where appropriate with other government policies and programs relating to agriculture. The situation for thousands of farmers and their families living along the Murray and for towns along the Murray is grave. This area, once commonly known as Australia's 'food basket', is steadily losing ground to the advance of rising watertables of salt. Effective action needs to be taken now if the viability of this national resource is to be maintained for future generations. In my few brief remarks I have tried to stress the agricultural aspects of the problems being faced by the

Murray and the whole Murray River system. I have stressed the fact that it is a living natural resource. What we need is some means whereby the States and the Commonwealth can get together with objective information and do something about the greatest natural resource that Australians possess. I fully back the BiII introduced by the honourable member for Hawker which calls for the establishment of an Institute of Fresh Water Studies. Once again 1 congratulate him. I am sure that most members of this House and people in the Riverland and irrigation areas of this country would thank the honourable member for the initiative he has taken.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is leave granted to proceed with the debate forthwith? There being no objection, leave is granted.
Mr GILES (Wakefield) (3.5)-1 was surprised that the seconder of the motion that the Bill be now read a second time, the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), spoke. 1 understood the agreement was that one member from each side would speak. I guess I will have to confine my remarks more than 1 wished to do. The honourable member for Werriwa did not say anything particularly new. On the other hand, the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi), produced a challenging document that deserves to be taken seriously by the House. Therefore, I will not comment on the remarks of the honourable member for Werriwa except to remind the House that the previous honourable member for Werriwa, the former Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, succeeded in delaying the construction of the Dartmouth Dam for two years. 1 do not wish to carryon that line or to get too political but 1make the comment that if the Hume Dam and the Dartmouth Dam had been filled a year or two ago the parlous position of South Australia today would be markedly improved. I will get on to the remarks made by the honourable member for Hawker. Tc help set the scene and save me some time. I seek leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard a chart showing percentages of current demands on the River Murray system in both an average year and a dry year. 1 have shown the chart to the honourable member for Hawker.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-

DEMANDS ON THE MURRAY SYSTEM (OL)

Average year

Dry year

Irrigation diversionsNSW
Victoria

%

%

1,700

46.2

1,600

43.5

% Increase

2,030 1,750

%
47.4 40.9

Institute ofFreshwater Studies Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3145

SA
Town water supplyNSW Victoria SA
Total diversion requirements Transmission and evaporation
losses (to SA border) Regulated flow to SA in addition
to diversions in SA
Total demand

Average year

%

%

380

10.3

52.9

3,680

100

Dry year

%

%

500

11.7

55.9

4,280

100

10 20

Static

10 20

110

2.0

140 Increase

220

3.3

250

3,520

4,530

25.6

1,780

Increase

26.1

2,000

19.5

1,360

Decrease

14.7

1,130

100

6,960

Increase

100

7,660

Mr GILES-I thank the honourable member for Werriwa and the House. Personally, I am quite relaxed about the Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill brought down by the honourable member for Hawker. I congratulate him on his initiative. I am probably forced by lack of time to comment critically as best I can on what he put forward. In doing so I acknowledge that he has done something that is badly needed at this time, that is to try to rethink the shibboleths of the past and try to cope with the problem in the essence which he has put down in this Bill this afternoon. As I see it, the problem is not so much in the research area as it is in the area of proper statistical analysis and management of the role of the River Murray Commission. Added to that, the problem relates to politics and the Constitution. I have given one small example. No doubt Opposition members can give others in return at a later time when the issue is more fully debated.
As a member representing a vast mileage of the River Murray in South Australia. I have had to deal constantly with the problems of the quality and flow of water to South Australia over a long period. From 1964 to 1970 we made quite a deal of progress in small ways. That must not be forgotten. Then along came the new shining star of the moment, Prime Minister Whitlam. I remember leading for the Opposition in a debate on a Bill. I was at the table where the honourable member for Werriwa now is. I was then the member for Angas. The honourable member for Maribyrnong, (Dr Cass) , the then Prime Minister and I had a great meeting of minds. I have in my file several speeches by the Prime Minister of that time saying what needed to be done and how he intended to do it. I will not weary the House by going over every aspect of those speeches. I think it is sufficient to say that at the end of three years as Prime Minister he must have been

wholesomely disenchanted with the system. He achieved very little. We will have achieved considerably more at the point when the New South Wales Government agrees-I hope it will not be too far off now-on the last sticking point, being whether it will provide statistics on industrial pollution. A Bill empowering the River Murray Commission much more fully will then be brought into this House. I think it is important to think back to those days. Although Prime Minister Whitlam was not able to achieve nearly as much as he wanted to, another member now in this House, an ex-Premier of South Australia, the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall), achieved more for South Australia. This highlights the question of whether this matter can be partially cured by the States or whether it must be wholly cured by the Commonwealth. Mr Steele Hall increased the water allocation from 1.254 million acre feet to 1.5 million acre feet. In modern parlance that is 1,850 gigalitres. It represented a 37 per cent increase in the disposable water available to South Australia.
Mr Lloyd-What is that in acre feet?
Mr GILES-I can do acre feet only in relation to gallons, not gigalitres. I noticed that the Parliamentary Library involved me in, I think, 13 speeches and repeated questions during the 1970s. Of course, many other members in this place and in another place have also taken a great interest in these matters. Over that period, the Commonwealth Government found there was very little it could do. Let us face it, that is the first lesson that this House has to understand. A senator of a political colour other than mine recently argued in the other place along the same lines as I intend to argue now. We can legislate in this House until we are blue in the face but unless we have agreement by all the parties to the River Murray Commission We may be left with nothing. Nothing can

3146 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Institute ofFreshwater Studies Bill

be considerably worse than what we hav~ now. know what we are talking about instead of giving

This argument, of course, can apply not only to a opinions.

Senate committee recommendation setting up a foundation to cover a broader base area but also, no doubt to an Australian institute of freshwater studies. It can apply to an advisory board on water resources with no teeth, which others are seeking. The word 'teeth' is terribly important. As soon as we give any of these bodies teeth, we run into a constitutional problem. Section 100 of the Constitution, which I do not think I have heard used in this House before, states:
The Commonwealth shall not, by any law or regulation of trade or commerce, abridge the right of a State or of the residents therein to the reasonable use of the waters of rivers for conservation or irrigation.

Let us look at some of the opinions that have been trotted around. I think they are of some interest. Even the honourable member for Hawker, who is most moderate in his views-and' others, particularly from the State area-is saying that over the last year salinity has soared in the River Murray system. Quite frankly such a statement, depending on where the figures are taken from, can be taken as a complete lot of nonsense. For example, I refer to the two years 1967 and 1968 in the dry period prior to this one. The quantity of water flowing across the border to South Australia is now considerably greater than it was

Mr West---'-No one is suggesting they do that.

in those two historically very dry years. Graphs made available by the River MurrayCommission

Mr GILES-When the High Court looks at show the salinity content at three points from

this problem, as it always will when any State Merbein upriver to Waikerie.

government objects to overriding federal legis-

lation, I imagine it will apply its mind to that secOne of the points a lot of people do not realise is

tion. Further, I imagine, without being a lawyer, that as we move towards achieving 500 parts per

",that it will direct its mind towards the overriding million top quality drinking water-l think the

powers. of the States unless such powers are present standard is about 800 electrical conduc-

spelled out in the Constitution. Honourable tivity units; taking into account that the safe members must remember that unless the whole drinking level is about 2,500 EC units-in this

tune of the High Court changes, which for all I year of drought the salinity level of the River

know it might, it must-up to now it has-bring Murray as it enters South Australia is lower than

down decisions in favour of the Constitution. The it has been in any dry year for quite a period. In Constitution, as I read it, gi~es the powers over, fact, due to the influence of Dartmouth Dam,

waters to the States. All we can do in this House is which is built in an area where water quality is

to try to adopt a ratIonal, national view and try to good, and due to the fact the Hume Weir-also

convince other State governments by argument, with fairly good quality water-is being drained

worthy reports and a pletliQra of other things.

during the 1980-81 season, the quality of the

Hhinkthere is a' great unanimity of view from oncl' side of'the House to the other on this matter. We mus~ impress on the States that our view is the correct one. I commep.t in passing that this is precisely the stage we are at now:, in-c9nsultation with the other partieS to the agreement in 'relation to, firstly, further powers for the River Murray

water, measured for salinity and not turbidity, has been line ball, up and down only a little bit from, the desired quality of excellence in the River Murray system. I have not heard that point of view put. Instead of that view we get glaring headlines 'Politicians sit and do nothing while River Murray dies'. What a lot of rot that is.

Commission which are being held up by one State Ml' Kerin-Why don't you support Peter'

and, secondly, the (uture role of the River Murray Arnold? Commission. Believe it' or not, another consult-

ants' report is to be brought down which will enMr GILES-I was not referring to the speech

able proper statistical surveys to be taken in any of the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr

circumstance. As I understand ,it, the way the Kerin). But if he goes on much longer, I will. The

Gov~rnment is currently thinking the next step is River Murray system is not dying. The system

terribly important. Once the study is completed, cannot be compared with the Colorado system

by a flick of the computer finger We will be able to which has dam upon dam until the total output at
say what will. happen' if 500 more irrigation lithe end is no larger than a trickle in a dry year and

cences are granted on the Darling. We will be able everything from that point up is completely

to say what will happen; if the New South Wales saline. For sure the mouth of the River Murray is

Government grants 100 more water licences on closed, but it is still a viable system and is not

Jri9utaries affecting the River Murray. In other over-managed. In terms of over-management

words, at that time. I think it is still probably 2t South Australia, the State that I represent, has a

years hence-we will be better empowered to real problem. What happens next?

Institute ofFJ:eshwater Studies Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3147

Mr Jacobi-If you get another two bad winters you will really know it.
Mr GILES-Oh, yes. But I am not debating that point at present. If there is a move on the part of the Water Resources Council or anyone else to build another dam to cope with even more irrigation in New South Wales and to cope with the appalling pull in mid-winter by the Victorian Government for power generation from the Snowy Mountains Scheme, what will South Australia do? Albury-Wodonga will harness more water from the River Murray system. Any further use of water will ultimately affect the downstream areas and the downstream irrigators, as the honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher) and the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) well know. This sets a very great problem for South Australia as to whether to advise that there should be another upstream storage. If there were it would cut back on the number of floods or freshes that come down which enter the billabongs clearing out the salt and taking the salinity through the main stream, so ensuring that future supplies of water are purer. J do not know the answer to this question but the problem must exercise the minds of those in the South Australian Government very much indeed. If any dam is built upstream in future we will badly need another honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) to negotiate an increase in the share of water from the system. Without that it might well be that South Australia would have to advise against the building of any further storage on the basis that the River Murray must not be too harnessed. , What we are seeing is a set of circumstances that have occurred in the third driest year in the last 15 years. Of course that sort of drought situation raises a great deal of emotion. If honourable members look at the number of questions I have asked over 17 years as a representative of the area involved they will find there is a great peak in the number of questions asked around the time of droughts. The same situation applies to the number of speeches made. The reason for this is that the community will not get excited unless it is suddenly posed with a problem.
I give full credit to the Sunraysia and Riverland Committee on Salanity. I give full credit to the Save the Murray group in South Australia. The membership of this group is headed by the retiring Senator Gordon Davidson and includes the erstwhile member for Hindmarsh. I commend Senator Jessop and the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment, which he chairs, the honourable member for MaBee, the honourable member for Murray and honourable

members on the Opposition side who have taken a

great deal of interest in the matter. The real pur-

pose of all these groups is to save the Murray in

the long term. People downstream, particularly in

Adelaide, have a lot of refuse put on them

whether it be in terms of nutrients, turbidity or

salinity. I give credit to those groups and to other

honourable members who are concerning them-

selves with this problem. On another occasion

when 1 have more time. I would like to deal more

fully with the implication of the graphs and new

statistics published by the River Murray

Commission.

'

'

I will finish on one point. I refer to South Australia's new water volume entitlement. In dry years the additional waters from the Darling River have no impact at all on the volume received. The entitlement exists without the microscopic volume of water supplied in dry years by the Darling.

Mr Lloyd-In fact Darling water is part of the problem.

Mr GILES-Exactly; I was just goiqg to men-
tion that. I thank the honourable member for
Murray for his comment. I do not believe ,this totally, but one can argue from that point that South Australia would be better off if New South Wales harnessed the Darling and if no water from the Darling entered South Australia. It is at the times that the water enters the Murray from the Darling that the situation is critical; and the critical time is in dry seasons. It does nothing but add pollution and difficulty, particularly from turbidity and salinity during dry years. Where it is still of course of grave importance to South Australia-this' a folk lore belief in my State-is in providing the freshet that comes down the Darling periodically. It saves our lives. It helps to flush in good years. I think that people should recognise that though the Darling and its tributaries are important, in dry seasons they are a positive disadvantage to irrigators and to the quality of water for much of 'South AustralIa's capital city and many of its towns. I will finish on this note. I am sorry that this is not a suitable occasion to go into a mathematical analysis of this problem. I congratulate the honourable member for Hawker for his attempt to bring before 'this House what he sees as a rational way of proceeding. I'am not quite so sure myself. The honourable member rattled off a lot of different subjects related to the salinity problem. I noted down quite a few more matters such as engineering, dams, channels, locks, hydro, zoology, biology, fish, ducks, water hyacinths, medicine which we have not really mentioned during this debate. That is a very important aspect.

3148 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Public Duty and Private Interest

Mr Barry Jones-Who is handling them now?
Mr GILES-If the honourable member would just put a cork in his mouth I will mention other topics of concern such as rural-mentioned by the honourable member for Werriwa-tourism, decentralisation, economics, environment and River Red Gums which particularly concern my friend, the honourable member for Murray. I ponder whether the honourable member for Hawker is not trying to bureaucratise an enormous series of interests whereby everything would be bogged down and a minimum of action could evolve. Certainly, the River Murray Water Resources Council at this stage would not go along with the idea expressed by the honourable member for Hawker.
Debate (on motion by Mr Lionel Bowen) adjourned.

ROYAL MILITARY COLLEGE: CADETS Suspension ofStanding Orders
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (3.25)-1 move:

That so !puch of the Standing Orders be suspended as

would prevent the Leader of the Opposition from making a

statement-

.

.

Mr N. A. Brown-I move:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Orderl The Minister is unable to move that motion until such time as the Leader of the Opposition has moved his motion.

Mr HAYDEN-The Minister is showing nervousness of amateurism. I move:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Leader of the Opposition from making a statement forthwith in relation to the unsatisfactory manner in which the Minister for Administrative Services sought this morning to dismiss allegations of serious infringements of civil law by Royal Military College, Duntroon, cadets as pranks.

Mr Deputy Speaker, it becomes necessary to move this procedural moticin-

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?

Mr FRY (Fraser) (3.26)-1 second the motion. I thought the Minister's attempt this morning to cover up the allegations that were made was a disgraceful exhibition.

Motion (by Mr Sinchdr) agreed to:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

Original question resolved in the negative.

PUBLIC DUTY AND PRIVATE INTEREST
Discussion of MaUer of Public Importance Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The failure of the Government to adopt a code of conduct for Ministers and for Members of Parliament despite the lapse of over three years since the establishment of the Committee of Inquiry into Public Duty and Private Interest.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (3.27)-For some years now this Parliament has been waiting for a code of conduct that will regulate the propriety of conduct of Ministers and members of this Parliament. It beggars belief-I have to recite this fact-that this matter has been under discussion for some six years, since the inception of the Gordan committee. In 1977 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced in a Press statement that he proposed to set up a committee. This committee became known as the Bowen Committee of Inquiry into Public Duty and Private Interest. I emphasise that it was in December 1977 that that announcement was made. It is significant that at the time the Prime Minister was having a number of difficulties with one of his Ministers because of allegations about profits being made from land speculation because the Minister held a position in public office. On that occasion the Prime Minister said that it was important that there be a whole new approach to a solution of the problem. He further said that he intended to appoint a commission to establish procedures whereby any breach of the high standards demanded of those in public office could be dealt with.
Next in this chronological table, in February 1978, the right honourable gentleman was saying: 'I have now announced the creation of a commission which will comprise Sir Nigel Bowen, Sir Cecil Looker and Sir Edward Cain. I have given them terms of reference.' Those terms of reference seemed to be rather weak in that reference was made to a statement of principles to be drawn upon concerning the question of private interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise. As 1 said, a report was commissioned in February 1978. It must startle the people of the nation to learn that the report was handed to the Government in July

Public Duty and Private Interest

4 June [981 REPRESENTATIVES 3149

1979, some two years ago. That adds weight to what I have said in support of this matter of public importance. There has been failure hy the Prime Minister, by the Cabinet and by the Government to do anything about adopting a code of conduct for members and Ministers of this Parliament and for a number of other people.
Let us confine discussion to the area in which we can certainly make our own solutions, namely, this Parliament. As the House knows, of late and in fact throughout the whole period since that report was presented, a number of allegations have been made as to whether certain conduct by members of parliament has been proper. Not the least of these allegations have been those concerning the Prime Minister in what became known as the Facom dispute. The question was raised as to whether there had been an undue influence by a tenderer to contact the Prime Minist~r to suggest that some patronage may be given. The House will recall the intensity of the debate and the fact that tender arrangements were, in fact, cancelled. Only in recent days has it been questioned whether it was proper for two members of the Parliament to accept trips overseas sponsored by a person who might be interested in satellite communications or related matters. I say without any fear of contradiction that the whole of Australia would agree that members of parliament should not accept gifts or patronage because to do so could affect their judgment. Is it not clearly indicated that in accepting gifts it would appear that they were beholden to some sector of the community or some person who expects to gain an advantage from a Government decision? Once the matter was raised in the Parliament, the two honourable gentlemen quite wisely decided not to avail themselves of the trip.
There are other matters from which patronage can be inferred. For example, it is known that amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act, which will be debated shortly were circulated to a number of select people in the community in recent weeks. That seems to indicate that an unfair advantage was given to certain people in the community. If one is interested in the share market or the stock market it could well be to one's advantage to know the intentions of the Government. Details of the proposed new two airline agreement also were made known to a certain select few. Obviously those with pecuniary interests would be interested in the profits or otherwise that would result from certain Government decisions. Such decisions may affect the share market and the value of the shares that people hold. All those things create the political climate I am discussing today.

Why is it that we have waited for so many years to get a code of conduct which is very simple to define? The interesting thing about the Prime Minister and his style is that when he is asked questions about this matter in the Parliament he seems to attribute the blame for not doing anything to somebody else, namely, the Parliament. This is a curious way of avoiding the fundamental issue. This is tantamount to what happened at the Federal Council of the Liberal Party last week. Whenever a motion on any contentious matter was moved by the Prime Minister's enemy, Sir Charles Court, the Prime Minister promptly seconded the motion. I can think of no better way to anaesthetise the whole matter than to have the Prime Minister second anything. Nothing will happen. It is a ploy that is adopted to avoid any criticism. I have no doubt that every time Sir Charles Court sneezes the Prime Minister will apologise for him. This seems to be a curious public stance. Applying that sort of posture to the problems we now face let us have a look at what happened when the right honourable gentleman was asked by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) what he was going to do about codes of conduct for members. The matter was raised in the Parliament on 26 May last. The Prime Minister said:
Quite plainly members' travel is a matter that members themselves must decide. I think that this instance and the publicity that has related to it have made it quite plain that the sooner this Parliament discusses in detail the Bowen report and applies it to the members of this Parliament the better it will be. That is under discussion at the moment with members of the Parliament. I draw attention to the fact that the Bowen report has been applied in relation to Ministers and the Commonwealth Public Service. Of course, commercially sponsored trips by Ministers would be outlawed under the Bowen report. But I emphasise again that members of Parliament are in a somewhat different position. I believe that they need to make their own jUdgments about these matters for themselves against the background of experience in the Parliament generally-
Within a matter of hours of making that statement, and again when he had been pressed by my leader about what he was going to do about the Bowen report, he said that we should get ahead and process the Bowen report in relation to members of this Parliament because only then would we have some adequate form of control. If we must get ahead with processing the report, who is stopping us? It is the Prime Minister who has done nothing about it. We have raised this matter in the Parliament time and time again. For example, I raised it on 22 April 1980. Statements have been made in the Parliament by Ministers that there will be discussions about the matter, that it is of considerable importance. Revelations have been made about the shareholdings of Ministers and their families and about the sponsorship

3150 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Public Duty and Private Interest

of trips. We want to have the matter finalised and dealt with.
That is the background, but I come now to the present situation. Effectively, nothing has been done, and the Opposition suggests today that some action be taken immediately. We think it could be taken by September this year, when the Parliament will be assembled in the Budget session. Before adverting to that, might I address my remarks to the background of a matter which caused some dissention and discussion, namely, what was known as the Webster case. Honourable members will recall that Senator Webster was deemed under the Constitution to have a pecuniar~ interest because he was a member of ll: propnetary company that had a beneficial interest in the supply of equipment to the Postal and Telecommunications Department, I think, and the matter was raised in the Parliament. The Constitution states that anybody who has a pecuniary interest can forfeit his right to be a member of the Parliament. The question arises: What is a pecuniary interest? It is significant that Sir Garfield Barwick decided that no pecuniary interest was involved in the case of Webster because, on the basis of an old English law, there was no suggestion of anybody beinginhibited by what Webster had done.
The real issue, the real intention, the real background of that law was that members were not to be intimidated by contractors who had contracts with the Crown. It was rather convoluted reasoning, I thought, because any of us who have had experience in either State parliaments or local government know that if a person dares to take part in a decision in that parliament or council on a matter in which he or his family has any interest he is ousted from office, fined, and dealt with on the basis that he has failed to declare his interest. Standing Order 196 says very much the same thing. It is incredible that the Chief Justice of Australia said that our real worry was that we might be inhibited in our discussions in the Parliament because of a contract in which we might have an interest. Surely the modern concept is that people outside would say that we were a bunch of crooks if we were members of this Parliament and did not disclose the fact that we had an interest in the benefit that would flow to us from a contract that was being entered into.
I took the trouble to look at the ancient law, and it is certainly ancient from the point of view of the basis on which the Chief Justice sought to establish his premise. The relevant questions raised by the Chief Justice were in respect of an ancient law that goes back to the eighteenth century or even earlier. If we look at what it was

about, despite the fact that it is in old English, it states quite clearly that any person who wishes to be a member of Parliament and is participating in a contract with the public-the Crown at that time-shall be incapable of being elected. That is the first premise to which I do not think the Chief Justice adverted. The second, and I think it is very clear, is that anybody who gets a benefit from such a contract shall be ousted from office. I fail to see how we could arrive at the reasoning that there was some suggestion in those cases that they were talking only about the freedom of the parliamentarian and not about his benefit.
For all those reasons, we are now in a stupid situation in Australia. We are the most backward of all the Western world countries in the regulation of pecuniary interests. We should have a register of the interests of members, and of'their spouses and their dependent children so far as it is within their knowledge. It can be done; it should be done. It is a pity that the Bowen committee did not recommend it because it would overcome a great deal of the problems. The register would disclose matters such as sponsored travel and the question of acting in a professional capacity and being a Minister at the same time. There would also need to be a number of prohibitions, all of which would be dealt with in what would be known as a code of conduct. We have a .twopronged attack-a register of our interests, disclosed annually, and a code of conduct stating that a member shall not accept remuneration from anybody, either in cash or in kind, other than from government sources. We have a duty of trust to the whole Australian nation.
It is a very simple matter which could well have been dealt with in one month from the point of view of the introduction of these sorts of actions in this Parliament. There are ilmple precedents for such action, whether in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, or anywhere else in the world. All those countries have this sort of concept, and it operates also in Victoria, New South Wales, and other areas. I make the point that we should have such a register, available to the public for inspection and containing updated information on what members are able to disclose about their assets and incomes and those of their spouses and dependent children. Because I would like a guarantee that something will be done, I therefore move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Deputy Leader'of the Opposition from moving: That this House calls upon the Government to introduce into the House before 24 September 1981, a code of conduct governing the conduct of members of parliament and Ministers of the Crown.

Public Duty and Private Interest

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3151

I make the point that I will not debate the matter. the sort of executive power which brings these

I simply ask the Parliament to carry the motion in sorts of issues into focus. There is just not the op-

the terms in which I have moved it.

portunity for a private member of parliament to

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Is the motion seconded?
Mr Hawke-Yes.

have his judgment swayed or for him to gain an improper pecuniary reward. However, it can occur sometimes, and for that reason I believe we ought to have a code of conduct. We ought to con-

Question resolvedin the negative.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

sider some of the matters that will of necessity not be covered in such a code. Much ado is made about the assets and income of a member of parliament. If his judgment is going to be swayed it is

Mr HYDE (Moore) (3.43)-1 speak in oppofar more likely to be swayed because of his debts

sition to the matter of public importance raised by and other liabilities. There is a much greater risk

the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr that a member of parliament, or anyone in society

Lionel Bowen). It contains two legs: Firstly, that will do something that might be in some way not

the Government should adopt a code of conduct moral because he is under pressure and not be-

for Ministers; and, secondly, that it should adopt a cause he can add to what he already has.

code of conduct for members. The Government

has adopted the code of conduct for Ministers recommended by the Bowen Committee of In-

Mr Lionel BowenI think you are right; it

quiry Concerning Public Duty and Private should include liabilities.

Interest. For the life of me, I do not see how the

Government can do again what it has already dime. I will therefore ignore the first leg of the argument put by the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith as being superfluous and meaningless and concentrate on the second leg, namely, that the Government should adopt a code of conduct for members of parliament.
The Government has the matter in hand and, as was stated on 21 May 1980, it will support action by both Houses of Parliament to put the Bowen recommendations into effect. The matter is currently in abeyance because the Minister concerned, the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner), is overseas attending the International Labour Conference. Since he is handling the matter, it cannot proceed through the Parliament before its rising for the winter recess. However, that is a temporary delay and one recognised by the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith as being necessary, 1 gather, from the terms of his motion to suspend Standing Orders. In September, or after the House reassembles for the Budget session, 1 am sure that the matter will come before us. 1 believe it ought to be attended to very much in the terms outlined by the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith in his matter of public importance; namely, that there be adopted a code of conduct for members of parliament. 1 believe there should be a code of conduct for members of parliament. 1 have held that view ever since 1 first came into contact with the issue back in 1975.

Mr HYDE-The honourable member says that liabilities should be included. To achieve the ideal effect, maybe they should. The difficulty occurs in defining liabilities. Some of them are known and some are not. Liabilities tend to come upon one unexpectedly. One cannot account for the unex-
pected, except byway of a code of conduct so that a member might have some understanding of how he should react if the event occurs. Certainly liabilities cannot be recorded in a register. The type of debts that would be recorded in a register are not the ones that we would be worried about. I
go further than that. What about contingent debts-a guarantee given to someone-or contin-
gent assets? What about those things that one might reasonably expect to inherit from an ageing parent? Are they to be included in a register? The Bowen Committee, in my judgment, quite rightly
rejected the concept of a register. It did so because it believed it would not help the situation. What is important is that members of parliament make adequate decisions when they are faced with a situation that has in all probability come upon them unexpectedly, hence the value of a code of conduct. It is not that the code of conduct will be valuable for punishing members who have done something that is not of high moral order; rather the code of conduct is there to forewarn them so that they do not do something that they may later regret. For that reason in particular I am all in favour of a code of conduct being adopted. I have

I believe it is reasonable to now consider what no doubt that the honourable member for

can and what cannot be expected to take place as Kingsford-Smith will see this Parliament adopt a

a result of the Bowen recommendations. Private code of conduct. I confidently expect that this will

members of parliament do not very often exercise happen in the Budget session.

3152 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Public Duty and Private Interest

There are two sides to this question and two session something very close to the Bowen rec-

sides to the Bowen Committee's recommenommendations will be adopted by this Parliament.

dations. Not only do the recommendations proTherefore, I think the matter of public import-

vide procedures that will protect the public ance which has been brought on for discussion

against members of parliament who may in some does nothing to advance us towards the end that

circumstances have had their judgment swayed,. the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith is

but also a code of conduct will to some extent proadvocating-an end that both sides share and an

tect members of parliament from the regrettable end that I believe every member of the House

practice of using parliamentary privilege as a liseeks to reach.

cence to slander. Since I have been a member of this Parliament there have been a number of c~es-in fact, too many cases-where pr.ivilege

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Orderl The discussion is concluded.

has been used, in a quite cavalier fashion, to play LANDS ACQUISITION (NORTHERN

loose with another man's or lady's reputation. To TERRITORY PASTORAL LEASES) BILL

demonstrate my even-handedness I might say that

1981

the first case which offended me concerned Miss Morosi. I believe things were said that ought not to have been said. There have been other

Bill presented by Mr Newman. and read. a first. time.

occasions since the Government changed hands

Second Reading

when Ministers-I think of Messrs Lynch and Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Adminis-

Sinclair-have had accusations made in this place about them that were unsupported and unsupportable. Because there was the protection of privilege honourable members were able to rise and make all sorts of imputations that would have been the subject of court action had they been

trative Services) (3.55)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of the Bill is to set aside any doubt as to the' Commonwealth's right to title and possession of the Mudginberri and Munmarlary pas-

made outside of this place.

toral leases in the Northern Territory. These

The Bowen recommendations, if adopted, will provide another vehicle by which a member can raise questipns about the integrity of a member of this Parliament. He will not be stopped from dqing so; he will be able to raise it on substantive mbtion. I am sure that the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith ."till concede that this rarely happens. The matter is normally raised by imputation. If a member presses on with raising a mat-

properties were acquired by compulsory process under the Lands Acquisition Act 1955 on 23 June 1978. The chief provisions of the Bill are:
(a) Clause 4 is designed to put beyond any legal doubt that the Mudginberri and Munmarlary leases are vested in the Commonwealth and that the Commonwealth is entitled to immediate possession of the lands;

tet by imputation there will still be a lot of difficulty in stopping him from doing so, but at least he will suffer the political odium of not a40pting the procedures laid down by the Parliament, these procedures having been recommended by Bowen.-He will have an alternative means by which his allegations and fears can be tested. If he does not accept that alternative procedure-that is, 'raise it with the ethics committee of the House-he will be seen to be the un-

(b) clause 10 preserves the right of the former lessees to claim compensation for interests in the land under the same terms as when land is acquired under the Lands AcquisitionAct 1955;
(c) clause 14 is intended to ensure that this Act does not affect the rights of the former lessees to contest the validity of the orig- ~nal acquisition in 1978;

charitable individual that he is.

(d) other. clauses are of a machinery nature

That is merely a: political sanction, but

and are generally self-explanatory.

nonetheless it is a sanction that I believe will help Leasehold interests in the Mudginberri and

to ensure that the forms of this House are not Munmarlai'y pastoral leases were. prior to 1978,

abused to treat lightly the characters of its vested in two companies. In 1977 the Government

members. To my mind that is as important a funcadopted the recommendation of the Fox Report

tion of these recommendations as the function of on the Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry

guiding members in their own conduct. Because I that the lands be included in the proposed

believe in both, I have encouraged the GovernKakadu National Park. At that time it was also

ment and have worked towards the adoption of recognised tha1 the lands could become the sub-

both. I am fully confident that in the Budget ject of Aboriginal land claims. Honourable

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3153

members will be aware that a claim is, in fact, currently under consideration by the Aboriginal Land Commissioner, Mr Justice Toohey, in relation to lands in the Alligator Rivers Stage II Region, which incorporates the Mudginberri and Munmarlary leases. The Commonwealth offered in early 1978 to acquire the leases but it was not possible to reach agreement on the amount of compensation. The leases were compulsorily acquired on 23 June 1978. However, the companies holding the leases have contested the validity of that acquisition and further attempts to reach a voluntary settlement have so far failed. So long as these two leases are held, or appear to be held, by the companies, the Government is inhibited in giving effect to policies which relate to future activities in the Alligator Rivers Region.
The former lessees have instituted proceedings in the supreme court in the Northern Territory to challenge the validity of the Commonwealth's acquisition of the leases. The Bill now before honourable members would give the Commonwealth title and right to immediate occupation of the leases, but at the same time ensure that the rights of the former lessees to continue to contest the validity of the original acquisition is in no way affected. The Bill also provides for any compensation to persons who had interests in the acquired land to be paid on just terms. Honourable members will appreciate that the determination of validity of the original acquisition as well as negotiations on compensation could be very protracted issues. It is the view of the Government that these matters should not prejudice or delay the determination of the Aboriginal land claim in the Alligator Rivers Region which is required in order that Government policies relating to establishment of the Kakadu National Park and mineral development can be implemented. The Government has therefore decided that it is appropriate that legislation be passed to ensure the Commonwealth's right to title and immediate possession of the Mudginberri and Munmarlary pastoral leases. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Willis) adjourned.
STATES (TAX SHARING AND HEALTH GRANTS) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 28 May, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Employment and Youth Affairs)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your

indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill and the Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Bill 1981 as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the
debate.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles

Jones)-Is it the wish of the House to have a gen-

eral debate covering these two measures? There;

being no objection, I will allow that course to be,

followed.

)

Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (4.1) - The Bil)

now before the House are important Bills. TY

States (Tax Sharing and particularly important. It

Health Grants) formally does a

cBoi~lles

of things. It brings about a change in the met d

of allocating funds to the States for general v-

enue purposes and does the same thing for hj th

purposes. In each case a considerable change in-

volved, not only in the real level of fundin,/but

also in the future form of that funding. So ~la~ is

being implemented by this legislation hi, SIg-

X nificance, not only for the next financi year,
1981-82, but also fo:- years beyond that. I egard

to tax sharing, the main points are: Firl y, the base of the formula by which such gra~/are de-

termined has been changed from person income

tax receipts to total Commonwealth ta'receipts;

secondly, a transitional year provisio,~~as been

introduced, applying to 1981-82 for ,hlCh year

the grant will be determined by increarg the current year grant by 9 per cent; and th~f1ly, ther~ is

a retention of the current mean~' allocatmg

funds to local government-that i,s" y allocating to local government 2 per cent of p, sonal income

tax revenue.

d

In regard to the health grants, tl-'re is an ending

of specific purpose payments to ~ie States for the

Community Health Program ani for the School

Dental Program. For New SouJWales, Victoria,

Queensland, Western Australi!!lmd the Northern

Territory there is for hospital cost

sahnareinngd.inTgryo~/espfeocuifricSptaatyems eanntds

the Northern Territory are.eparated from the

other two as their hospitalcost sharing agreements with the common~hlth end on 30 June

this year, whereas the reements for South

Australia and Tasmania c! tinue until the end of

June 1985. The paymenf for these programs in

these four States and thf'Northern Territory will

be made in one health lant which will be a general revenue grant b1'L earmarked for health.

South Australia and Tj6mania, for which hospital cost sharing agreemxs will e~d in 1985, wi1~con

tinue to be funded der then agreements m re-

spect of that hospi~1 cost sharing money. They

3154 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

will be funded from a special health grant for the Community Health Program and School Dental Program. A further factor which stems from this legislation is that the States will be forced to implement some very considerable increases indeed in the charges which they impose in public hospitals, both for in-patient services and for outpatient services.
That is what the Bills do in a formal sense. Practically, however, the legislation gives effect to measures ,which have created an unprecedented storm of protest from the States, both in respect of the effect that these measures will have on the States and in, respect of the method of their implementation. It is no exaggeration to say that by ~hese Bills the Government is asking the Parliament to give legislative approval to the most shameful episode in intergovernmental relations in our history in which the Commonwealth has indulged in deceptive, dictatorial and grossly offensive methods to implement its policy of di~inishing the financial viability of the States. The, Opposition is disgusted by both the Governmenfs policies as outlined in the main Bill and by the appalling process by which the Government has sought to have them implemented. Accordingly, "we completely oppose the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill. We do not oppose: the Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Bill as this does no more than retain the present system of determining the allocation of tax funds to local government.
I will be confining my remarks to tax sharing arrangements. The honourable member for Bonython (Or Blewett), the Opposition spokesman on health, who will be the next Opposition member to follow me in this debate, will deal in more detail with health matters. Before examining more closely what is in the legislation, the circumstances of its determination and the effect it will have, I wish to remind the House of the background to the events which led to the drafting of this legislation now before the House. Tax sharing was brought in by the Fraser Government as a result of so-called new federalism which was proposed by the now Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) when he was in opposition in 1975. The key element was the right of the States to a share of personal income tax receipts of the Federal Government.
I make it clear that, of course, there has always been tax sharing in a sense. This arrangement was formally to allocate general revenue funds to the States as a percentage of personal income tax receipts. This was to replace the formula previously employed by the Labor Government, which make

general revenue grants to the States which they could spend on anything. The Labor Government's formula involved movements in average weekly earnings, movements in population and'a betterment factor of 3 per cent. Another element of the tax sharing proposal was that a guarantee would be given that for' four years the States would receive no less under the tax sharing formula than they would have received under the Labor Government's formula.
Those were the main elements of the so-called new federalism. Of course, great claims were made by the Prime Minister-as the Leader of the Opposition, as he was in 1975, and subsequently as Prime Minister-about the importance of this so-called new federalism. In 1975 the present Prime Minister said:
It is the greatest advance in Federal-State relations since Federation.
That is not a minor claim. In 1976 the Treasurer (Mr Howard) waxed very enthusiastiC about new federalism in a speech in this House on 28 April, when he said:
The truth is that the revenue sharing arrangements, the new federalism arrangements, unveiled by the Opposition, as it then was towards the end of last year, are certainly the most dramatic and the most significant development in government relations since Federation.
He was echoing what the Prime Minister had said. He went on:
When implemented these proposals will end for all time the begging bowl of the Premiers Conference.
In the light of recent events, of course, that rings rather hollow. He stated further:
They will end for all time the wrangling that has gone on between Federal and State governments over the years.
Those were the claims made by the Treasurer. I am sure he rather regrets having made them in the light of subsequent events.
The developments in tax sharing after it was implemented were along these lines: Over the first four years the States were forced to rely on the guarantee that they would getno less, by way of general revenue grants, than they would have under the Labor Government's formula. So without that guarantee they would have got less, and this shows what a great reform it was. It' was, in fact, the Labor Government's ,policy that was being implemented rather th,an the Fraser Government's policy. A further development was that other forms of payment. did not increase as fast as general revenue payments. Indeed, some categories fell markedly in real terms. I ask the House to take note of the following figures. Between 1975-76 and 1980-81 in real terms general revenue grants increased by 19.4 per cent,specific purpose recurrent grants increased by 12+ per

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3155

cent, general purpose capital payments declined by 38.6 per cent, and specific purpose capital payments declined by 54 per cent. So on the capital side there was an enormous fall in real terms in payments to the States. Overall there was a 6 per cent fall in real terms in total payments to the States. In the five full financial years of the Fraser Government the States have received 6 per cent less in real terms than they received in the last year of the Labor Government.
When one adds to that the fact that there has been a 6 per cent rise in the population we see that the payment by the Commonwealth Government to the States in 1980-81 is, in fact, 12 per cent less in real terms per head of population than it was in the last year of the Labor Government. This is a very substantial fall indeed especially as Commonwealth payments to the States account for 70 per cent of total funds available to the States. A 12 per cent fall in 70 per cent of total funds is a very substantial fall indeed.
In 1980-81-the current financial year-the Fraser Government ended the four-year guarantee that the States would get no less in the way of general revenue grants than they would have obtained under the Labor Government's formula and gave a guarantee for that one year, which of course was an election year. This guarantee, which was given in June last year, was to the effect that the States would get no less in real terms in 1980-81 than they had received in the previous year. Of course, this was much less than the Labor formula would have given the States.
For 1981-82 the States were concerned at what was likely to happen. They were concerned because of the substantial overall decline in real funds over the previous five years. It was not clear to them what, if any, guarantee would apply in 1981-82, particularly if the Commonwealth and the Treasurer were talking of the possibility of introducing a broad-based indirect tax and making some offsetting cuts in personal income tax. This greatly concerned the States as their tax sharing formula was based on personal income tax. Any significant decline in personal income tax as a result of the introduction of a broad-based indirect tax would have had obvious implications for the payments to them under the current formula; and they were very concerned about that.
In February this year the States made a combined written submission to the Federal Government seeking various reforms of the tax sharing arrangements. The key elements of that submission by the States were that they were very concerned about the unsatisfactory current situation. It had been satisfactory in the past because

of the Labor Government's formula guarantee but that had expired after four years. They were concerned about the base for determination of the States tax sharing grant and said that that should be either personal income tax or total tax depending on what happened to Federal Government tax policy in relation to the broad-based indirect tax. They said that a guarantee should exist which was the same as the Labor Government's formula but with a betterment factor of only 1.8 per cent, which of course had been the betterment factor earlier in the Labor Government's period of office. The States said also that there should be much more consultation between the Federal and State governments in regard to all these matters. As I said, the States made that submission in written form to the Commonwealth in February this year. Clearly, they were very unhappy but were trying to be constructive.
The next development was the Premiers Conference which was held exactly one month ago on 4 May this year. At that time the State Pr.emiers met the Prime Minister and the Treasur1:r in a Conference which was undoubtedly the greatest setback to the federal system in our history. The Federal Government did various things at that Conference. Firstly, it imposed its proposals on the Premiers, with some minor alterations, in a way which made a mockery of its obligation to consult the Premiers. The Treasurer told the Premiers that the Government had decided to change the base for calculation of tax sharing grants to a total tax-that is, from personal income tax to total tax-and to give only an 8 per cent rise in tax sharing grants in 1981-82. This involved breaking away from the fixed percentage formula of personal income tax of 39.87 per cent of the previous year's revenue as laid down in the States (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act.
Later at that Premiers Conference on 4 May the Commonwealth Government agreed to raise the 8 per cent increase in the grant for 1981-82 to 9 per cent. The States were still very angry that there had been no real consultation especially in regard to the tax base. I will just quote the words of the Premier of New South Wales, Mr Wran, in respect of the discussion that day, he said:
It was characterised by arrogance and domination in the sense that everything was on a take it or leave it basis. And I don't know frankly, of any Premier there who accepted what was offered or what was finally thrust upon them. For my part I rejected the concept of total tax sharing and the percentage which was offered and it's quite laughable for Mr Fraser or for Mr Howard to talk about negotiating.

3156 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

So there was a lack of real consultation which greatly annoyed the States because of the legal requirement of the Commonwealth to consult, particularly in relation to the base for the establishment of the tax sharing formula. Section 13, sub-section (1) of the States (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act states:

The Government of the Commonwealth shall, before' 30

June view

1to98d1~tceornmsiunlitnwg iwthhtehteheGroavneyrncmhaenngtseoifs

the States desirable

with a in the

provisions of this Act and submitting to the Parliament legis.

lation to give effect to any changes that the Government of

the Commonwealth considers to be desirable as a result of the

consultation.

There is a clear requiremerit to consult with the States. As I read the dictionary, the word 'consult' means to take counselor to seek advice. That being the meaning of the word 'consult', it is highly questionable whether the Commonwealth Government, in fact, abided by the Act by properly consulting the States. Even though technically it may have done so by holding the Conference in the first place and simply studying the States' submission, it certainly did not discuss the matter with the States before determining its view as to whether any change in tax sharing provisions was desirable. So much then for co-operative federalism, which was what new federalism was supposed to be all about. The Commonwealth clearly did not consult with the States in any normal meaning of that term before determining its view, and it sought to impose that view on the States.

The second thing that happened at the Premiers Conference was that the Commonwealth deceived the States. The Commonwealth told the States, at first, that in all the economic circumstances, it could not give more than an 8 per cent rise in the general revenue grant for 1981-82. After much protesting from the States it raised that figure to 9 per cent, again saying that it could give no more. Then, in a quite extraordinary episode which I am sure is well in the minds of all honourable members of parliament and most of the public the Prime Minister and tho Treasurer deliberately briefed selected journalists to the effect that they would have been prepared to give another one per cent in the general revenue grant to the States for 1981-82, which would have been about another $70m. The States were therefore clearly deceived by the Federal Government, which misrepresented its real position to the States. Clearly the Treasurer and the Prime Minister had Cabinet approval to go to a 10 per cent rise, but they did not do so. ! quote from an ~nter view with the Premier of Queensland, Mr BJelkePetersen, on AM on 7 May in regard to this matter. He said:

But I do believe that this is mosf disgusting and despicable. That the Federal Treasurer and Prime Minister have in effect, deceived the Premiers, they informed us that they'd given us all that they could possibly give us. We had a whole day and half a night arg1;lmen.t about, it and t~ be ~~ld. this, to h~ve this admission at thiS pomt of time, I thmk It s Just unbelievable almost.
The admission he was talking about was the admission by the Prime Minister and the Treasurer that there was another one per cent to be had. Clearly, Mr Bjelke-Petersen felt as though he had been deceived. I am sure he was speaking on behalf of every Premier. They all felt they had been totally deceived by what the Commonwealth had said to them. It will be argued by the Government that it had a range of increases that it could give under its Cabinet approval and that it is appropriate in the negotiating situation for the Commonwealth to be flexible. That presumes that a Premiers Conference ought to be about negotiating with a view to giving the States as little as possible, which is clearly the way the Commonwealth entered this Conference, rather than in the spirit of co-operative federalism, trying to assess the real needs of the States and to balance those needs against the Commonwealth's own constraints. There is no evidence that the Commonwealth concerned itself at all with the States' needs; it just sought to give them as little as possible. It went in there to give them as little as it possibly could and if it could get away with less than 10 per cent certainly it was happy to do so regardless of the impact on the States. In so doing it. told the States things that were not true-that It could not responsibly give more than it finally gave; that is, 9 per cent. That was not its real position at all. The States were undoubtedly deceived and instead of co-operative federalism we now have highly distrustful and resentful federalism.
The third thing that happened at that Premiers Conference was that the Prime Minister and the Treasurer humiliated and grossly offended the Premiers. They did this by leaking to the journalists the one per cent, which I have already mentioned. This humiliated the Premiers because they were made to look like fools who did not get as much out, of the Commonwealth as they could have had they been more competent. To compound the felony, after a couple of .days ~f prevarication as to whether or not the Pnme Mmlster and the Treasurer actually leaked this, they finally admitted that they had dorie so, but they chose to defend that decision in this Parliament rather than apologise for their actions. Thus, in Parliament on 8 May, the Prime Minister said:
It would have been grossly offensive to the Premiers not to go into a conference with a negotiating position.

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3157

I have dealt with this nonsense of negotiations being what Premiers Conferences are all about, but the point is that nothing could have been more offensive to the Premiers than what the Prime Minister and the Treasurer did. They publicly humiliated the Premiers and made them look fools. The Prime Minister also said there was nothing wrong with making Cabinet decisions public, as though this was some normal announcement of a Cabinet decision which had to be made public. It was nothing of the kind. It was not a public announcement; it was leaked to journalists. It was not a decision that had to be made public; indeed, it was a decision that, in all the circumstances, should never have been made public. Why did they do it? The Treasurer said that they did it so they would not appear to have been backing down on their own rhetoric about the need to cut government expenditure by giving the States an extra one per cent. This could have been avoided simply by being honest with the States in the first place, by telling the States how much they were really prepared to provide them with. They were not prepared to do that. Instead, they totally misrepresented their position and deceived the States, which therefore led to this appalling situation. I note also that the Prime Minister and the Treasurer apparently made some apology within their own party room. They have made no apology to the Parliament or to the public at large and I believe this debate is a convenient time for the Treasurer and the Prime Minister to make that public apology.
The overall effect of what has been done has been to deal a grievous blow to the federal system in this country by making a complete mockery of new federalism. How hollow-or laughable, now-is the Prime Minister's 1975 claim that it represented the greatest advance in Federal-State relations since Federation. The situation now is that the State Premiers are intensely bitter at what happened and, more important than their wounded pride, is their strong distrust and lack of confidence in this Government. 1 draw attention in thrlt respect particularly to a statement in a letter by Sir Charles Court to the Prime Minister on 8 May, in which he said:
I must make it clear that if the Commonwealth were to give effect to your proposals, contrary to your earlier assurances and despite the protests of the States, we could no longer feel that we could conclude any agreements with your government with confidence that they would be honoured.
That is a very tough statement indeed. It is very important in this debate, because the proposals about which Sir Charles was talking are the proposals now before this Parliament. The proposals in this legislation are those which Sir Charles said, if implemented by this Government, would cause

him to have no confidence or trust in the Fraser Government. We are being asked to vote on that legislation and honourable members on the other side of the House should bear that fact in mind when casting their votes following this debate. The fact is that the Western Australian Government,. a Liberal government, now clearly has no confidence or trust in this Government. That is an incredible situation. Sir Charles made another pertinent comment when he said that we had reached the absolute nadir of federation. I think that properly describes the situation that has been reached. Clearly, federalism is a chaos. The Commonwealth is riding completely roughshod over the States. The Commonwealth's behaviour has been arrogant, deceptive, dictatorial and grossly offensive to the States. The States are bitterly resentful at their maltreatment. 'Maltreatment' is a word which has particular poignance in the present situation. Without confidence or trust in the Federal Government our new federalism is completely exposed as a hoax and a fraud.
I turn to the financial impact of the Premiers Conference decisions being imposed on the States. Firstly, there is a substantial cutback for 1981-82 in the real level of general revenue funds to the States. As I have mentioned, there is a 9 per cent rise. That is clearly less than the rate of inflation. The consumer price index rose during the last 12 months by 9.5 per cent. However, a more relevant inflation rate is the implicit deflator of government consumption expenditure because most of this money is spent on recurrent expenditures, consumption expenditures, by the States and the inflation rate, as published by the Commonwealth Government in the National Accounts for government consumption expenditure, is 13.3 per cent over the last 12 months. That is by far the most relevant figure.
Mr Howard-That includes defence.
Mr WILLIS-The Treasurer says that includes defence. That is a point he made in a previous debate. It is totally irrelevant. He said there had been a 7 per cent increase in real growth of defence expenditures and that had something to do with this figure. It has nothing whatever to do with it. We are talking about the Government's own calculation of the price index which applies to government expenditures. It has nothing to do with real increases; it is the Government's own calculation of the inflation rate which is properly applied to government consumption expenditures and which is published in the National Accounts. So, on top of the 13.3 per cent increase, which I
say is the appropriate figure, there has been a 1+
per cent increase in population, so the States needed 14+ per cent to stay at the same real level

3158 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

per head of population as last year. In fact, the States got 9 per cent, or $375m less than was required. As a percentage of income tax, which is the previous way it was calculated, the 1981-82 grant will fall from 39.87 per cent of personal income tax in the previous year to 38.32 per cent, which is a loss of some $260m. Again, that is what honourable members are being asked to vote for today.
The second element which comes from the Premiers Conference is that this cutback will continue into future years. It is not just a cutback for 1981-82, but it is built into all future years for as long as the new formula lasts. This is because for 1982-83 we take the 1981-82 grant asa percentage of the previous year's total tax then apply that to the 1981-82 total tax receipts. This percentage, which will be about 20 per cent, will then be applied in future years. Thus, the 1981-82 cutback is reflected in reduced funding for all future years while this legislation remains on the books.
The House should note also that the use of 1981-82 as a transition year was just a device to reduce payments. There is no real need for a transition year. If we want to move from an income tax base to a total tax base we can simply take the 1980-81 grant as a percentage of the previous year's total tax and apply that percentage to the 1980-81 total tax receipts to obtain the grant for 1981-82. But the Government has not done that. It has introduced this transition year as a means of reducing the amount not only for that year but also for all future years.
Thirdly, there has been an abolition of any meaningful guarantee. There is to be no future guarantee along the lines of the Labor Government's formula, nor even any guarantee that the real level of the grant will not decline. The only guarantee is that there will be no fall in the money amount of grants in any year below the level in the previous year. At a time of substantial inflation that, of course, is a totally useless guarantee.
Fourthly, the Government will be able to reduce grants to the States in future below the level given by the formula by declaring an increase in any Commonwealth tax to be a special surcharge and to be excluded from the total tax sharing base. This leaves the States in a totally precarious position because the Treasurer can increase some tax and so say: '1 declare this to be some special surcharge'. As a result it is not included in the total tax base and therefore he does not have to share one cent of it with the States. The States having no guarantee now, apart from the useless one about no reduction in the money amount, are therefore left in a precarious position. From now

on the Commonwealth can quite clearly manipulate the system to give the States what it likes. If it so wishes it can force the States to share in any tax reductions and deny them any benefit from any tax increases.
A further point I wish to make relates to the falsity of the Government's arguments for the cutback. The Government has sought to justify its harsh treatment of the States by the measures incorporated in this legislation by stating, as the Treasurer did in his opening address to the Premiers Conference, that there had been a 3 per cent real per capita increase in the States' recurrent expenditure on goods and services between 1975-76 and 1980-8l. The Treasurer said that there had been a rapid improvement in the levels of service provided by the States in recent years. It is true that there has been an increase in the real level of recurrent expenditure per head of some 3 per cent by the States over that period. But that is because the States' recurrent funding has been increased mainly because of the application of the Labor Government formula as a guarantee underlying general revenue payments to the States over most of that period. But that is not total spending by States on services. State services are also affected by capital expenditures and, as I mentioned previously, they have fallen disastrously. They have fallen by some 5.7 per cent in real terms per head over that period. This aITects services in such important areas as education, public housing, roads, transport, aged persons, accommodation and so on. Many State services are badly affected by cutbacks in capital works or capital expenditures.
Total State expenditure has increased by only one per cent per annum in real terms per capita over 1975-76 to 1980-8l. One per cent per annum has been the increase in total State expenditure, and that one per cent is exactly the same as the rate of growth in the Commonwealth Government's expenditures. All attempts by the Government to portray itself as the collector of revenue and the States as the big spenders is absolute nonsense. The fact is that the States' expenditure has increased at the same rate in real terms per head over the last five years as the Commonwealth's expenditure. It is absurd to talk in terms of the States being the big spenders as against the Commonwealth and the need for the States to be cut back to bear their share of the burden. They have borne their share. They have increased their expenditure no faster than has the Commonwealth over this period. There is no doubt that the Premiers Conference was disastrous for Australia. in the context of federation.

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3159

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Before I call the honourable member for Curtin I remind the House that this is the honourable member's maiden speech in this House. I ask honourable members to extend to him the usual courtesies.
Mr ROCHER (Curtin) (4.30)-As is the custom on such occasions, I seek the indulgence of the House to make some brief acknowledgements. I am acutely aware of the stature and achievement of the man who gave his name to my electorate. They speak for themselves, along with the ac'- colades of historians who have recorded them far more eloquently than I could ever hope to, It may be sufficient to say that John Curtin was a respected leader of his party and Government. While Prime Minister he was charged with conducting the affairs of his country in the most dire period of its history. He did so with skill and determination and, towards the end especially with courage. John Curtin was a truly great Australian.
The first member for Curtin, elected in 1949 is also a great Australian. However, probably because he is still alive his contributions have yet to be fully recorded. Sir Paul Hasluck was a journalist who lamented in his first autobiography called Knocking About the passing of an age where the journalist's primary task was reporting events factually without interpretation. After distinguished public service, he was elected to this Parliament where'his abilities and experience were soon put to good use in the Menzies Ministry. His retirement from Parliament was followed by service to his country as Governor-General of Australia where he further distinguished himself in that high office. I understand he is maintaining his writing and scholarly pursuits in retirement and I sincerely hope he will continue to enjoy the fruits of his public service for many years to come.
Sir Paul's successor and my immediate predecessor was the Honourable Vic Garland. His achievements in representing the electorate are fresh in the minds of most honourable members. It was his good fortune to be elected as a young man, to serve with distinction in both opposition and government, to become a respected Minister and eventually to leave this place still a comparatively young man. Whilst his experience and undoubted ability will be missed by honourable members on this side of the House, they will be invaluable in the task ahead of him. I wish him and his 'wife and family well, both for his term as High Commissioner in London and thereafter.
It remains for me to thank, however inadequately, the members of the Curtin division of the Liberal Party for their expressions of confidence

in me, which took many forms both before and since my election. The same may be said generally about Liberals throughout Western Australia and all those with whom I was privileged to associat~ during my term as a senator for Westen Australia. I acknowledge also the support of voters in the by-election of 21 February who accorded me the great privilege of representing them in this Federal Parliament. To you,Mr Deputy Speaker, to your fellow deputies and in particular to Mr Speaker, I extend my thanks f<?r the courtesies and considerations that have already been extended to me. I hope that they continue and that I may earn them. The same may be said for the staff of the House of Representatives.
The following comments are relevant to the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill which is being discussed in this cognate debate. As the economic strength of Australia becomes even, more dependent on activity in Western Australia and Queensland, the benefits will be more and more apparent in those areas of Australia where there are heavy concentrations of manufacturing industry. In particular, the States of Victoria and New South Wales will derive economic benefits from increased production of manufactured goods following rising orders generated from expanding resource industries. Because of its unique contribution to the development of the Australian nation, as well as geographical factors and at times a fierce confidence in the individual and collective abilities of Western Australians, my State is well equipped to continue to playa significant role in advancing the interests arid well-being of all Australians.
In the context of this debate on the legislation before us, it is important to remind the House of some facts and figures. All States except Queensland have enjoyed benefits superior to those bestowed on Western Australia arising out of Commonwealth Government assistance to industry. Of those, the States with the greatest concentration of population have enjoyed the greatest advantage. Assistance to Victorian industry in 1977-78 amounted to $1,871m, $15m more than was involved in the entire consolidated revenue fund for Western Australia in 1980-81. By comparison, Western Australian industry in 1977-78 was subsidised by $284m. If, as has been arg,ued elsewhere as being equitable for tax sharing purposes, all subsidy of industry had been distribuied on a per capita basis, the Western Australian economy would have benefited by a furth~r $ 133. 3m. Victoria would have received $561.2tl less.

3160 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

The figures I have cited and the ones I will proceed to cite are taken from a study based on the material compiled by the Industries Assistance Commission, it being the principal adviser to the Commonwealth on policies affecting industry. It 910uld be noted that the greater part of subsidisition of industry took the form of tariff protection. Estimates of the totals for each State in 1977-78 are: Victoria $1,871m, as I have already mentioned; New South Wales, $1,759m; South Australia, $444m; Queensland, $400m; Western Australia, $284m and Tasmania, $113m. Expressing those figures on a per capita basis: Victoria received $492 per head of population; New South Wales, $353; South Australia, $346; Tasmania, $274; Western Australia, $235, and Queensland, .$186. One of the effects of legislation on tariffs and quotas is a deficit in trade between the States and Western Australia oUl,400m.
If the more populous States have benefited to the extent I have just outlined, it is equally evident that the more sparsely populated States have been disadvantaged. The system of economic subsidy has been enduringly to the benefit of the more populous States of Victoria and New South Wales, as I have already mentioned. It has made inevitable the concentration of popUlation and industry in those States. It has given them a stronger base for Commonwealth, State and local government taxes and charges. It has afforded economies of scale in the provision of services, uncomplicated by the need to service a small population scattered over a huge area. It has made it difficult for manufacturers to operate close to small domestic markets, in competition with subsidised industries in those States with big mark,ets in their own back yards.
If ever we must adopt a per capita basis to determine the competing claims of the States for shares of tax. revenues-there is some good argument for doing so-account must be taken of other factors such as those just canvassed, if economic justice is to be seen to be done. It cannot be left to the Commonwealth Grants Commission to provide the remedy for the ills of protectionism and its effects on State finances and economies. Clearly! if tax sharing and financial arrangements with the States cannot allow for the insidious, invisible impositions of the tariff, steps should be taken to offset the costs of tariff protection. The obvious answer, and one which I personally advocat~-is to cut and phase out the cause of the problem,which is to be found in tariff policy and legislaton itself.
[t is simply not good business to disregard the pst and potential contribution of Western Australia to the wealth creating process. However

these remarks may seem to smack of parochialism, real wealth enables the provision of help for those demonstrably in need throughout the country. The State which produced $3,854m of export income in 1979-80, 2004 per cent of the national total incidentally, cannot be doing too much that is wrong. What is more, its achievements and initiatives do not benefit Western Australians alone. For example, about one half of Australians engaged in work on the North West Shelf gas project are employed in other States. That number is currently 2,000 out of an estimated 4,000.
The purchasing power of a population of 1.5 million people is important to Australian manufacturing industry. The development of vast resources is also important. Resources development itself, often undertaken in remote areas, requires the provision of services and the creation of assets which have come, rightly or wrongly, to be expected of State governments. Services of which I speak involve schooling, domestic power, transport, health care and other basic needs. Assets include roads, ports, industrial power stations, aerodromes and the like. Traditionally, these are financed out of State general revenues, tax sharing entitlements- -such as those we are discussing today-Loan Council funds and, latterly, special borrowing rights. All these sources of funds are substantially or entirely directly controlled or influenced by the Commonwealth Government. Given the potential returns to all the people of Australia in the form of employment, company and personal taxation and royalties, it would be short sighted not to invest now in public services and assets essential to expanding exploitation of natural resources. The lesson of the past decade, when our primary industries enabled Australia's economy to weather the international recession, should not be forgotten.
It is in the light of these realities that I address my remarks today. The reduction of all Commonwealth expenditures remains a priority of the Fraser Government, and rightly so. The containment of inflation, management of the money supply, elimination of Budget deficits and reduction of taxation, all depend on the ability of government to tackle its expenditure. It is to be acknowledged, of course, that one of the most difficult tasks is to establish spending priorities within overall economic strategy. If these tax sharing arrangements, in combination with Loan Council deliberations and Grants Commission findings, lead to a situation whereby clearly beneficial developments cannot proceed for want of public services and assets, there should be the flexibility to undertake a review whenever those

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3161

circumstances become apparent. In that regard, it Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (4.48)-1 con-

should be acknowledged that all wisdom does not gratulate the honourable member for Curtin (Mr

reside in Canberra. The need for a truly consultaRocher) on his maiden speech. To begin with, I

tive process with the States already exists. One thought that it was rather ironic that he should

should be developed without delay and I am hearchoose for the occasion to speak on a Bill to which

tened by announcements as recent as last weekthe man to whom he owes so much, the Premier of

end that indicate that improvement in that proWestern Australia, is so implacably opposed. But

cess is underway.

as the honourable member continued I began to

It is essential also that the disciplines the States think it was perhaps appropriate.

are being asked to exercise are reflected in the I wish to concentrate primarily on Part III of

coming Federal Budget. Commonwealth expendithe States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill.

ture is rarely wealth-creating, whereas some State These are the clauses relating to the health grant

spending on capital works is. Excluding defence provisions which is the first and integral step in

expenditure-I do so if only because there is no the reactionary health package foreshadowed in

comparable item in State Budgets-the limit of 9 the statement of 29 April by the Minister for

per cent on the increase of tax shares to be disHealth (Mr MacKellar). The Bill provides a

tributed to the States, should logically be the health grant to the States of New South Wales,

maximum growth in Commonwealth expenditure Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia to

in 1981-82. If it is not, our stance may be fairly replace the funds under the hospital cost sharing

questioned. We may well be asked: 'Why the agreement plus the specific purpose grants for

difference?' I hope the question will not arise and community health, women's refuges and school

that we will accept our own medicine in the same dental programs. These funds will be replaced by

dosage determined for the States. In these tax a single block grant untied to any of these services.

sharing arrangements the Government reaffirms The Bill provides the method for calculating

its commitment ,to budgetary restraint. I think I have already indicated that I wholeheartedly agree with that. It does so against the background of rapid expansion of the relative lIize of the pub-

these grants for these States for 1981-82 and 1982-83 and generally for further years. For 1981-82 the calculation has three components. The first one is a base, the second is an allowance

lic sector that first occurred in the mid 1970s, and for inflation and the third is a Commonwealth

which expansion has not since been reduced. Reclawback of 60 per cent of posited additional revductions in public sector growth must now take enlJes raised by the States in the health sector. I

place to allow for expansion in the private sector, and I acknowledge the stated intentions of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in that regard. Further inroads' by the public sector into the already stretched capital market involve the risk of forgo-

will examine each of these parts. Firstly, there is a base calculated on equivalent funds to those for 1980-81. This seems a fairly inadequate base, given that every State for 1980-81 has a hospital shortfall. In a sense by using that base the hospi-

ing tremendous development opportunities which tals begin behind scratch. For example, New

are central to the States' and the nation's econSouth Wales has a shortfall of about $14m to

omic interests.

$15m, Victoria has a shortfall of between $17m

Insofar as the legislation meets the desirable objective of budgetary restraint, it is welcome. Future decisions arising out of Loan Council deliberations, and Commonwealth grants commission findings, may well determine whether income earning developments-at present on the drawing board-may proceed. As I have already said, in the area of Commonwealth expenditure, the same disciplines asked of the States should logically be reflected in the August Budget. Until these last mentioned matters are decided and announced, the total public sector scene for 1981-82 remains clouded. However, the course has been set and it behoves us of the Government parties to continue to observe policies that reflect concern for all Australians, while ensuring we retain the economic capacity to meet those needs-not just

and $20m. All the States have a shortfall. Thus there are problems with the base to start with. Secondly, the allowance for inflation is 10 per cent; which seems on mounting evidence to be a rather conservative basis for inflationary expectations in the corning year. Finally, from this base and this allowance for inflation is subtracted a sum which is 60 per cent of the Commonwealth's assessment of the capacity of each State and the Northern Territory to raise additional hospital revenue. The basis for this additional hospital revenue is, first of all, charges of $80 a day for shared ward accommodation, $110 a day for private ward accommodation and $15 a day for, in the words Of the Treasurer (Mr Howard), 'an outpatient's occasion of service'. I would like the Treasurer to clarify what those words mean.

next year but throughout the 1980s and beyond.

Mr Howard-Those are my advisers' words.

3162 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

Dr BLEWETT-Those are words the Minister uttered in the House.
Mr Howard-Well, I took my advisers' words.
Dr BLEWETT-I have no doubt that the Treasurer did. I would like to know what the Treasurer, or whoever he got the words from, means by an out-patient occasion of service. Does it mean that a single visit to a hospital out-patient department whatever the number of services would attract a charge of $15? Or does it mean that if on a single visit one has, say, three services delivered a $15 charge will be made for each service? I think it is important to clarify that point. There is no clear evidence provided by the Commonwealth as to the basis of the calculations for the additional revenue raising capacity of the States in the health sector. Certainly they provide figures for increased hospital charges and the return from an anticipated insurance cover and for charges for out-patient and compensable charges. But no evidence has been presented either to this House or to the States as to the basis of those calculations-what kinds of assumptions and expectations underlie the various calculations which relate to the additional hospital revenue that the Commonwealth is claiming the States can raise.
On the other hand, for the States of Tasmania and South Australia, which were wise enough under Labor governments to sign a 10-year cost sharing agreement with the Commonwealth, hospital funding and a health grant covering community health, women's refuges and the school dental program will at least remain distinct. That is, hospital funding will continue under the co.st sharing arrangement and a single health grant WIll cover community health, women's refuges and the school dental program. At least in those two States there will be a distinction. Of course the Minister for Health made it quite clear that despite the hospital cost sharing agreements hospital funds for Tasmania and South Australia will be squeezed in exactly the same way as funds for other States..
Overall the States and the Northern Territory will receive some $253m less. That figure is correct as long as I am up with all the latest changes. We have had the Queensland change, an adjustment for Victoria and there may be others in the pipeline at the moment. As far as I can calculate, some $253m less will be received' by the States than they would have received had the existing arrangements continued. That represents an overall cut in Commonwealth funding of about 16 per cent. Of course,the States are expected to recoup the money by the increased hospital in-patient and out-patient charges and by the application of

a rigorous means test to all their public health services.
I think, first of all, it is ir;.jortant to recognise the centrality of this measure to the whole reactionary health package of the fifth Fraser health scheme. While the Government is abdicating all responsibility for public hospitals in this country and is washing its hands of the very real problems in the hospital sector, it aims by these provisions to compel the States to raise charges for in-patient and out-patient services in their public hospitals, to the levels I have already specified, and to impose a strict means test so as to widen the scope of those compelled to meet the charges. Of coursethis relates to the whole package-the purpose of these changes is to compel Australians back into fiat rate contributions to private health insurance funds.
I say just in passing-I will deal with this matter at much greater length at another stage-the only significant difference between a near" compulsory private health insurance system and an income related health levy is that the fiat rate contributions of the private insurance system are inequitable and regressive and advantage the better off as against the less well off. On the other hand, an income related health levy is fairer an~ more equitable in that it places the heavieI: burdens on the broader shoulders. For all practical purposes both are taxes, bu~ in terms ?fe9~ity and fairness and, as well, effiCIency and sImpltcIty, the health levy is clearlypreferable. But no doubt we will argue that proposition for the next two years. There is no doubt about the purposes of these changes. This is the chief weapon in this Government's armoury to force Australians into the private tax system of health insurance.
How does the Treasurer defend this abdication of Federal responsibility for. the hospitals of this country? Given the unfortunate compl).ny which the Treasurer keeps, I have frequently admired the fact that, unlike the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), he does participate in debates. Unlike so many of his colleagues, including the Minister for Health, he does respond to the arguments of his opponents, usually in logical and lucid ways. However, I fear that when the Treasurer gets into the health area he takes on some of the characteristics of his colleague, the Minister for Health, that is, double-talk, evasions and vacuous cliches. Look at the major arguments he advanced for the health grant proposals. He stated:
The new health grants arrangements reflect the Govern-. ment's consideration of the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals, -discussions with State Health Ministers and the outcome of the

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3163

Review of Commonwealth Functions. This Bill, in short, refiects detailed consideration of the wide range of views that has been expressed on these matters.
The only possibly perfectly correct statement there is that it may represent the view of the razor gang. I would not put anything beyond that lot. It may reflect their view. It is certainly not the result of discussions with State Health Ministers. I quote from the joint statement of the State Health Ministers on 8 May. They stated:
We observe that we have never been consulted in the real sense of the word and at no time prior to its recent decision has the Commonwealth indicated any clear intention to the States.
There is no evidence of real discussions with State Ministers. The Jamison Commission opposed the proposals embodied in this Bill. It recommended against the proposal to absorb hospital funds into general revenue funds. The Commission was supported by nearly every major health care organisation in this country. Even the Australian Medical Association, before it was bought off with the goodies in the fifth Fraser health scheme, opposed absorption of hospital funds into the general revenue grants to the States. The health care organisations all have very good reasons for opposing absorption.
The Jamison Commission believes, and most of those health organisations believe, there should remain a distinct national provision, a participation by national governments in setting national priorities for hospitals across this country. The Jamison report specifically argued, despite what the Treasure~ implies and despite what the Minister for Health has constantly implied, that it was necessary that the Commonwealth retain this contribution to hospital priorities in order to maintain a rough equality of hospital services across this country. Again, to divide the system of health funding from any responsibi\ities for hospitals is a recipe for inefficiency. If the Federal Government just passes the whole responsibility of public hospitals back to the States but continues to control the national insurance system then that division of responsibility is a recipe for inefficiency. I fear, as do many others, that there would be a decline in the resources allocated to health as a long run result of these proposals because of many other powerful pressures on State Budgets. For all these reasons, the groups that I have talked about, including the Jamison Commission, opposed what is now being done in this Bill.
Let me take a second major argument advanced by the Treasurer. He stated:
The Government sees this change as a move towards ending divided control over the provision of health care services in ! the 'St~tes and the Northern Territory and thus eliminating

potential costs and inefficiencies that can be involved in such duplication.
That is mostly, I think, gobbledegook. At the very same time that the Government was giving away a role in relation to public hospitals it was increasing its support for private hospitals and it was accepting responsibility for total funding of nurs~ ing home benefits. As a result of these shifts and changes a whole host of problems of duplication, overlap, and lack of integration either remain or are made worse. For instance, there will be an increasing problem in relation to the proper provision of nursing home beds. There are two chief sources of new nursing home beds. One is a conversion of surplus acute-patient beds in public hospitals and the other is the provision of new private nursing home beds. Nursing homes remain very much in the Commonwealth sphere; the public hospital sphere has been given back to the, States. Indeed, I can see active efforts by the States as they try to evade some of the financial difficulties they are now encountering by converting excess acute beds to beds for nursing home type patients. Instead of that kind of competition what we want in this matter is effective cooperation. These health decisions have made that effective co-operation between States and Federal Government more difficult. Again, every report has talked about the need to rationalise acute bed provision across the whole hospital sectorpublic and private. This has been rendered more difficult by taking the Commonwealth out of the area of determining priorities in the public hospital field while adding to its funding responsibilities in relation to the private sector.
Then there are the Department of Veterans' Affairs hospitals which are hospitals run by the Commonwealth Government but which are increasingly playing a bigger role in general community health provision. Co-operation between Veterans' Affairs hospitals and State public hospitals will be made more difficult by the Commonwealth's abdication of any responsibility for public hospitals. Again the possibility of building ~ national policy of support services for the fraIl aged has been rendered more difficult by giving community health care back to the States but by retaining home care services mainly as a federal responsibility.
These decisions are no answer to most of the problems we have in this field. They create new forms of duplication, new forms of overlap, new forms of competition. This system does not end divided control; it simply complicates it.
Despite the repeated utterances of the Health Minister, now echoed by the Treasurer in the quote from his speech I have previously given, the

3164 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

divided responsibility between the Commonwealth and the States is not the major factor in any inefficiencies in the public hospital sector. There is not very much hard evidence about specific inefficiencies in that sector. The evidence we have suggests that the problems lie in the impact on the costs of hospitals of fee for service procedures, the lack of positive incentives for efficiency, the lack of cost control and utilisation reviews and the inadequacy of budget reviews in hospitals. Certainly there is a need for better budgeting procedures. But none of these issues are tackled by the proposals outlined in the Minister's statement. They have been put into the too-hard basket and shoved back to the States. The Commonwealth Government virtually wipes its hands of all these problems. This is a totally negative contribution to the problems of hospital efficiency.
The only other contribution the Bill provides is the cutback in State funds. Again that is pretty negative. The cutbacks do not relate to efficiency. No effort has been made to penalise the more expensive or less efficient State hospital systems. There has been no effort to base funding on any per capita basis. The per capita health grants to the States range from $68 in Queensland to $168 in the Northern Territory and $118 in Western Australia. I am not saying that we will ever get perfect per capita allocation of grants, or that such would be desirable. But no effort was made in these arrangements to tackle that issue. One and only one criterion was behind the calculation and that was, the more developed the public sector in the public hospital the greater the cutback. Thus, the three States which received the largest cuts in their allocations-Queensland, Tasmania and the Northern Territory-were the three that had most fully developed the public sectors in their public hospitals. All three had 80 per cent or over of hospital or public patients in their public hospitals. Such a cutback plus the increased charges and means tests may reduce the health burden to the Commonwealth Government but it would not reduce the health burden to the community as a whole and it would be counterproductive in terms of efficiency. The last comment on this illogic is the kind of Bjelke-Petersen provident fund giving Queensland a $16m a cushion-to use the Treasurer's words. It is quite ironical that this money has been provided to Queensland to help it defeat the very objective which lies behind this set of health grant proposals. Finally, I quote again from the Treasurer-another major part of his argument, I suppose. He said that it was intended:

. . . to restrain the growth of public sector expenditure so as to make room for productive growth in the private sector without giving rise to inflationary pressures that could only damage the economic prospects for Australia.
In the short run that is quite untrue, at least in relation to the cost to the Commonwealth Government of the total health package. I refer to the whole health package because the Treasurer tells us that 'these proposals must be considered in the context of the overall revision of health care arrangements'. In 1981-82 expenditure in the Commonwealth health sector will be greater by about $400m as a result of the total impact of these changes on the Commonwealth public sector. That is because the $600m rebate and the $120m assumption of nursing home benefit by the Commonwealth funding far outweigh the gains on the hospital front. There are a few minor balancing items but the above three items are the major factors.
In the long run, although the expenditure figures will be hidden by absorption in general revenue grants to the States, the total effect of this package of health care changes will lead to an escalation in health care expenditure in the public sector; that is, taking the Commonwealth and States together. I think there is nothing in this package to prevent the whole community's total health expenditure passing $IO,OOOm in 1982-83. In essence the source of the problem is that the underwriting of private fee for service medicine and the private hospital system by a massive expansion of the private health insurance system is a recipe which will lead to an acceleration of health costs. It will certainly give rise to inflationary pressures, despite what the Treasurer has said. Health insurance contributions must rise this year as a result of increased bed charges for inpatients in public hospitals, as a result of increased payments for expensive medical procedures formerly performed in public hospitals by salaried staff, as a result of the rise in benefit refunds from 75 per cent to 85 per cent of the scheduled fee, as a result of a $25m reduction in the Commonwealth's subsidy to the reinsurance pool, and as a result of the rise in medical fees expected at the end of the year. All of those will push up the contribution rates for health insurance. There will be an offsetting factor in the assumption by the Commonwealth Government of all nursing home benefits. However, the General Manager of the Hospital Benefits Association has already suggested a possible rise of 47 per cent in the combined medical and hospital basic contribution rate. His expectations are that the rise will be around 47 per cent. The impact on the consumer price index of an increase of this order, or even one of a somewhat lesser magnitude, would be

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3165

around one per cent. Clearly, we cannot accept the Treasurer's anticipation that these proposals will not give rise to inflationary pressures.
Finally, let me simply congratulate the Treasurer that in all his arguments he never advanced the cliche that somehow these proposals will improve health care in this country. At least he had the honesty never to mention that any of these proposals was likely to improve the health care delivered to ordinary Australians in this
country.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (5.7)-1 wish to speak to the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill now before the House, particularly as it relates to the implications for my electorate, the Northern Territory. As a member of the majority party in the Northern Territory Legislative Assembly which began the negotiation of the financial agreement between the Commonwealth and the Northern Territory governments in 1977,1 have a personal interest in and knowledge of the events leading up to the special provisions now incorporated in this financial Bill, specifically in respect of the Northern Territory. Initially, 24 local and State government type functions were transferred from the Commonwealth to the Northern Territory on 1 January 1977. The next important step was the 1977 Brisbane meeting between the Commonwealth and Territory Ministers. As I remember it, the Commonwealth party comprised Ministers Adermann, Carrick, Ellicott, Robinson and Viner. The Territory was represented by the then majority l(;ader, Dr Goff
Letts, and myself as the Deputy Leader with responsibilities for finance.
At that initial meeting it was established that one of the fundamental views and principles so far as the Commonwealth was concerned was that the special circumstances and the particular difficulties of the Northern Territory would be fully recognised and provided for in the funding arrangements and in establishing a sound financial basis for self-government in the Northern Territory. After many months of detailed negotiations and ministerial meetings, a Memorandum of Underst~nding became the formal document which was signed by Prime Minister Fraser and Northern Territory Chief Minister Everingham in June 1978. The agreement came into effect on Self-Government Day, 1 July 1978, and, inter alia, established a fiscus in the Northern Territory. Honourable members will recognise the importance of the agreement. It was fundamental to the Territory Government's agreeing to accept the Commonwealth's offer to move to self government. At the time of the early negotiations
in 1977 many Territorians were understandably

apprehensive about the likely cost to them in runnink a self-governing territory, given its smalll'evenue base and the prospect that at any time the Commonwealth may withdraw its financial support or fail to adhere to its agreement. Thus, the Memorandum of Understanding and the prospects of a sound financial future which we believe were set down in the Memorandum were critical to the whole success of the Northern Territory move into self-government.
Some of the key provisions in this important document, the Memorandum of Understanding, so far as it concerns this Bill, are set out in fine detail in paragraphs 1, 7, 8, 15, 19, 22 and 23. Honourable members will note in those details that particular reference is made to a formula for the calculation of the Territory's general revenue assistance grant. This formula sets out the Northern Territory's entitlement each year as the percentage increase in personal income tax collections multiplied by the percentage increase in the Northern Territory population. Under the new State tax reimbursement arrangements the words 'total tax collections' now apply in lieu of the previous reference to 'personal income tax col1ections'. I understand that the Territory has agreed to amend the corresponding reference in the Memorandum of Understanding so that 'total tax collections' is now to be read in place of 'net personal income tax collections'.
This amendment would leave unchanged the reference in the formula and in the other parts of the Memorandum to the population of the Northern Territory as an additional factor in the entitlement calculations. It will be noted that the reasons for this population factor in the funding arrangements which led to self-government were, 1 believe, in recognition of the tremendous backlog in the provision of adequate services in the Territory and the near impossibility facing the Territory Government in providing a reasonable standard of services to a rapidly growing population in the absence of the depth of infrastructure support that exists in the now-established States of our Commonwealth. In particular, given the very low revenue capacity of the Northern Territory and the very high percentage of its inhabitants who have little capacity to contribute towards State-type taxes, there was little prospect for the Territory being able within the foreseeable future to cope with a growing population and the realities of neglect by successive Federal governments. For that reason, the popUlation factor under the Memorandum of Understanding Was a fundamental provision which formed the basis for self-government of the Territory.

3166 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

The proposal now before the House recognises and maintains this principle and ensures the integrity of the arrangements. The specific clauses relating to the Northern Territory continue the recognition of this Government's commitment to the development of the Territory and its special disabilities of isolation. As part of the Government's wise tax sharing and economic management policies, the Territory, like the States, has had to accept a share of the Australia-wide financial constraints. Perhaps I should suggest that the Territory should have the same revenue-raising powers as the States to cushion the effect of the restraints. It may be time that the Territory Government be given the power to levy normal mining royalties on uranium.
I turn now to the provisions of the Bill dealing with health grants. I support the general intent of the legislation before us because it will give the States and Territories greater influence over the operation of their health services. It will reduce the spiralling costs of health services throughout Australia, as well as requiring the users of the services to contribute. It will enable more attention to be given to those essential health services which lie outside hospitals. However, there are areas of Australia where this global approach has not acknowledged significant difficulties, and of course I refer to the Northern Territory. The Northern Territory has been assessed by the Commonwealth to have the same proportion of disadvantaged hospital users as are found elsewhere in Australia. With some 50 per cent of Northern Territory hospital beds occupied by Aboriginal people, that is clearly not the case. The Northern Territory welcomed the Commonwealth's announcement that its assessment of the States' revenue-raising capacity would be reviewed later in the J981-82 financial year. This will provide the opportunity to have the Northern Territory's particular disability recognised and quantified for general revenue purposes. Similarly, clause 19 of the Bill will ensure a review of relativities by the Grants Commission.
Whilst we all recognise the need for major changes in the operation of health services throughout the nation, I do not believe it was the intention of the architects of these changes to disadvantage Aboriginal people; nor do I believe it was the intention to force the States to restrict services to Aboriginal people. The recent statement by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) is certainly consistent with affording special recognition to Aboriginal health needs. The Northern Territory has a specific and quantifiable disability in this regard and, whilst supporting the overall intent of the new legislation, I point out to

honourable members that it is vital that the Northern Territory have this disability acknowledged. The Northern Territory has a case for topping-up of the funding level proposed under the new arrangement. This case does not dispute the decision to introduce charges, not does it dispute the proposed level of the charges. What is questioned is the statistics upon which the total potential revenue attributed to the Territory by the Commonwealth is based. The overriding factor affecting revenue raising for both inpatient and outpatient services in the Northern Territory is the high number of disadvantaged persons as a percentage of patient bed days and occasions of services.
Over the past J 5 years the Aboriginal population has represented a decreasing proportion of the total population of the Northern Territoryfrom 36 per cent in 1965 to 22 per cent 'in 1980. However, the number of Aboriginal in-patients has gradually increased as a proportion of total inpatients over the past four years, as is evideri<:ed by the following statistics: In 1976-77 the figure was 28.8 per cent; in 1977-78, 29.5 per cent; in 1978-79, 31.8 per cent and in 1979-80, 34.7 per cent. The trend in the first six months of 1980-81 shows that the percentage for this year will be approximately that of 1979-80. Whilst representing only 22 per cent of the total population and 35 per cent of total in-patients, the significant factor in relation to potential revenue calculations is the percentage of total bed days taken up by Aboriginal people. The average length of stay in hospital by Aboriginal patients is 10.1 days as compared with 5.4 days for the remainder of patients.
The proportion of occupied bed days relating to Aboriginal patients has increased steadily O,ver the past four years. Again I will give statistics: In 1976-77 the figure was 40.3 per cent; in 1977-78, 46.1 per cent; in 1978-79, 48.2 per cent and in 1979-80, 48.5 per cent. The trend in the first six months of \980-81 indicates that the percentage for this year will be approximately 49 per cent-a further increase over previous years. It is anticipated that the percentage for 1981-82 will be in the vicinity of 50 per cent. From these figures it follows that 50 per cent of potential revenue for in-patients applies to Aboriginal people and, therefore, cannot be collected.
No statistics are available on the percentages of bed days occupied by pensioners and other disadvantaged persons. However, factors to be considered are the high transient populationparticularly during the dry season-the majority of whom fall into the disadvantaged or bad debtor category, and the fact that a disproportionate number of patients resulting from accidents,

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3167

brawls and a lack of hygiene and prevtmtative health measures come from the lower socio~ economic groups, the majority of whose members are disadvantaged. It is estimated that pensioners and disadvantaged persons lltiiisc 20 per cent of in-patient bed days in the Northern Territory. From the figures which I have just cited it follows that 70 per cent of in-patient bed days are not chargeable, which in turn means that any revenue calculation must be based on only 30 per cent of total bed days.
Within the suggested Commonwealth funding figure of $28m, it has been proposed that the Northern Territory should be able, by the introduction of charges on 50 per cent of services-the Commonwealth estimate--to raise $11 m. It is proposed to increase in-patient fees from $80 to $110 a day. That would raise $8m. It is also proposed to raise the charges for out-patients to $15. Based on charging for 50 per cent of total occasions of service, that would account for $3m, making a total of $llm. Compare these figures with the Northern Territory's own estimate for the same proposals; firstly, on the Commone wealth's assumption of 50 per cent of patients being chargeable and, secondly, on the Territory's estimate based on 30 per cent being chargeable. On the Northern Territory's estimate this would raise a total of only $5m. That would constitute a shortfall of $6m between the two estimates.
It is the policy of the Northern Territory Department of Health to discourage patients from using out-patient services and to channel them to private medical facilities. The results of this policy has been a marked increase in the number of private medical practitioners in the Territory over the past few years and a gradual decline, despite the population growth, in the number of outpatient occasions of service. As medically insured patients tend to use private medical practitioners, it follows that the percentage of treatments of disadvantaged patients as a proportion of the existing number of total occasions of service would be at least that which applies to in-patient services, if not greater. Therefore, the chargeable proportion of out-patient services is less than 30 per cent.
The estimates regarding cost sharing arrangements for 1981-82 are calculated on the following basis: Hospital cost-sharing arrangements, $27.13m; community health services, $588,000 and school dental services, $563,000. That makes a total of$28.281m. This compares with the Commonwealth estimate for the same activities for 1980-81 of $25m, plus a 10 per cent allowance for inflation of $3m, giving a total of $28m. On the basis of those calculations the Northern Territory

would have a shortfall of $281,000 on its requirements. From these figures it is evident that, on the basis of the Commonwealth's assumption, the $11m represents a $2.lm overestimation of the potential revenue, whilst on the basis of Northern Territory statistics the overestimation is
in the order of $6.3m. r am pleased to note that
the provisions as announced by the Minister will apply and that a review will take place later this year. As I have outlined, that is most important for the Northern Territory. In all other respects I believe the legislation which is before the House has recognised the requirements and the needs of the Northern Territory. I commend the Bills.
Mr UREN (Reid) (S.22)-The States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill and the Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Bill are being debated cognately. My colleague the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett), as the Labor spokesman on health, dealt with the hea Ith grants legislation. As the Labor spokesman on urban affairs and local government matters I intend to concentrate on the local government personal income tax sharing legislation. At the outset I wish to say that Labor supports an active and adequately funded role for local government as an equal partner in the three-tier system of government. It was a Federal Labor government between 1972 and 1975 which originally was responsible for the breakthrough in giving direct finance to local government, which it had been seeking for many years. This Bill continues that principle and provides the machinery to allow local government a 2 per cent share of net personal income tax collections through general revetHle assistance. That is a provision that is supported on this side of the House as a necessary step towards encouraging a more active role for local government. In our view the amount of money which is being made available to local government is not sufficient. I believe national government has to go further.
Let me set out Labor's policy in relation to local government where it differs from that of the Government. Firstly, we would guarantee that the real level of funds made available-which provide the purchasing power of local government-would not fall below that of the previous year. In other words, we would guarantee that the 2 per cent share for the previous year would be paid in subsequent years. Secondly, Labor believes that 30 per cent of general revenue assistance should be distributed on a per capita basis and 70 per cent on the basis of need as assessed by the Commonwealth Grants Commission. Such a method of distributing payments to local government would take a proper account of the

3168 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

principle of equalisation with due regard to the differences in the cost disability of regions as a result of population structure, area, geography and topography. Of course, in our regions and our country they vary greatly. It is a great task which faces local government. I speak from personal experience of the years between 1972 and 1975 when I had direct contact with local government.
A Labor government will provide an additional program of special block grants to areas of need. Some regions which are associated with resources development are experiencing specific needs in relation to the problems of coping with expanding industrial activity and population growth. One of the great failings of this Government is that it has not been prepared to look at that situation. As a central government, it has put all its eggs into one basket-resource development. That has been the major thrust of its economic policy. It has thrown enormous responsibilities on to the States and local government.
Some areas affected by this policy are the Gladstone area, the Hunter Valley, the Lithgow area, the Latrobe Valley and the Portland area. There has been accelerated growth in these areas. On Tuesday I spoke about the housing problems that exist in Gladstone. At least one-quarter of the people in that area are are living in caravans. One can see the other social problems resulting from a lack of infrastructure. The Federal Government has not taken on the role of ensuring that the resource development companies pay their fair share in assisting local government. It has a pass the buck mentality.

problems. They can be solved only by the Australian Government, State governments and local government working together. These problems often do not have a local origin. They are problems that flow from the broad decisions made by the corporate sector relating to the location, nature and scale of their investment. They also flow from decisions made by the Australian Government in relation to economic management. Consequently, these problems require the co-operation of and intervention by governments at all levels with an active participation of regional communities.
The thrust of this Government's approach to inter-governmental relations, and especially relations between the Federal, and local levels of government, merely relates to a flow of money. The former Department of Urban and Regional Development had built up a strong relationship between the Australian Government, State governments and local government. We worked in a spirit of co-operation to solve many of the problems. This Government has washed its hands. It has withdrawn from the arena. It has handed over responsibility to the States and local government by saying: 'Here is the money. You can solve the problems'. Many of these problems have been caused by decisions made here in the national capital or in other countries by overseas corporate bodies. But it is the people in the local communities who have to take the brunt of those decisions.

Other regions are also facing problems associated with the contraction of manufacturing activities because the Government has placed all its eggs into the resource development basket. The enormous increases in exports as a result of the mineral resource development have affected manufacturing industries in many regional areas. Ballarat, Bendigo and Geelong certainly feel the squeeze by this Government. The closure of rail services, post offices, banks and public sector activities are other problems associated with this contraction.
In order for the Government to retain its viability it should assess the needs and the potential of those regions and intervene to establish viable and durable employment-generating activities. While these locally felt problems require local responses they also require national responses. I say to the Treasurer (Mr Howard), who is sitting at the table, that the sad situation is that the Government has withdrawn from trying to solve these

The reduction in specific purpose payments has meant a reduction in the amount of contact between the bureaucrats at different levels of government. I have stressed that often. The national government has cut itself off from essential contact with the people by not assisting in the design and implementation of programs to meet the real needs of the people. To give honourable members some idea of the Government's withdrawal, particularly in relation to specific purpose grants, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table headed 'Commonwealth Payments to the States for Local Government 1975-76 to 1979-80', which has been taken from the Budget Papers.
Leave granted.
The table 1'ead as follows-

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3169

COMMONWEALTH PAYMENTS TO THE STATES FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT 1975-76 to 1979-80

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

General purpose assistance Direct payments Roads Other payments
Total (excluding roads) Total (including roads)
Total (excluding roads) Total (including roads)

(A) Current prices ($m)

79.9

140.0

106.5

13.4

75.3

87.0

81.8

34.7

268.2

188.1

343.5

275.1

(B) 1979-80 prices ($m)

371.9 476.4

233.3 341.3

165.3 14.2
116.9 20.6 200.1 317.0
230.3 364.8

179.4 17.4
124.2 11.5
208.3 332.5
225.9 360,6

221.7 16.6
134.0 10.4
248.7 382.7
248.7 382.7

TOTAL INDIVIDUAL TAX REVENUE COLLECTIONS BY COMMONWEALTH ($m)

1974-75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

7,714

9,219

11,054

12,129

12,804

TOTAL PAYMENTS TO STATES FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AS PROPORTION OF TOTAL INDIVIDUAL INCOME TAX REVENUE
COLLECTIONS BY COMMONWEALTH OF PREVIOUS YEAR

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

%

%

%

%

%

(i ncluding roads)

4.5

2.9

2.9

2.7

2.9

(excluding roads)

3.5

2.0

1.8

1.7

1.9

(excluding roads & Red

Scheme)

2.2

2.0

1.8

1.7

1.9

GENERAL PURPOSE PAYMENTS TO THE STATES FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AS PROPORTION OF TOTAL
COMMONWEALTH INDIVIDUAL INCOME TAX REVENUE OF PREVIOUS YEAR

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

%

%

%

%

%

1.0

1.52

1.49

1,47

1.73

Mr UREN-I thank the House. Because of the
slowness in information coming through from the Government I have only given the figures up to 1979-80. The figures for 1980-81 are not available at this stage. If one looks at the table one will note that in 1975-76 the amount of money allocated to
the States for local government by the Labor Government including the amount allocated for roads was 4.5 per cent of total income tax revenue. Excluding the percentage allocated for roads, the figure was 3.5 per cent. Excluding the
percentage allocated for roads and the percentage allocated for the Regional Employment Development scheme the figure was 2.2 per cent. The percentage to be allocated this year will be, at best, 2 per cent, plus a small percentage for specific purpose grants. That figure is minute. So, as a percentage of income tax collectons in the
previous year, it is still below the percentage that the Labor Government made available to local

government in 1975-76. Because the national Government has withdrawn from its responsibilities, the onus is being placed more and more on the States and local government and the burden on local government is becoming greater.
With the withdrawal of the Federal Government from its responsibilities and expenditures on social services and the provision of social amenities, local government authorities are forced into a position of either allowing the rundown of those services or increasing rates in order to continue the services. Under the Federal Government the social needs in the majority of regions have grown larger and become more neglected. Local government bodies are called on to meet emergency housing needs, to provide children's services, to care for aged persons, to provide community information services and so on. At the same time, in a number of regions, local government authorities

3170 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

are having to pay a higher proportion of their outlays for the provision of infrastructure associated with resource projects or expanded commercial activity. So their funds are squeezed at both ends. In recent years we have seen a large increase in the borrowing programs of the Federal Government and the semi-government authorities. These borrowings on the domestic capital market have been in competition with larger authorities and corporations seeking funds.
The high levels of foreign capital inflow in recent times in the context of a restrictive monetary policy on the part of this Government have created conditions in the domestic capital market which have disadvantaged the smaller borrowers, whether they be home buyers, small businessmen, small farmers or small local government authorities. They have all experienced less security in gaining access to finance and they have all had to pay higher interest rates. These are the realities facing local government authorities throughout our nation. But they are realities that this Government either cannot see or chooses to neglect. The situation is that semi-government authorities are paying interest rates of 13.4 per cent to 13.9 per cent for their money. There is every indication that that rate will rise still further. That enormous problem is being thrown on to locai'gov~rnment. In the long term people have to pay for it in the form of increased rates.
The other sad thing about which I am concerned is that this Government-a government of market forces--allows the market to determine :vhat :vill develop without any planning. That in Itself IS of great concern to me. In a recent statement by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) on popUlation trends we find a great challenge to local government and to the States. Population growth is controlled basically by the national Government and not by those people at a lower level. If we look at that statement we see that 35 per cent of the 14.6 million people living in this country are under the age of 20 years. Imagine the profound implications for future planning. In addition, by the turn of the century there will be a 66 per cent-or two thirds-increase in the aged popUlation and the net annual intake of immigrants will be between 80,000 and 90,000. Just imagine the social mix and the great problems that will create at the grass roots level of local government. That is another problem which this Government is transferring to local government. By the turn of the century the population will be between 18.4 million and 19.6 million.
The previous time we looked at this situation was in the mid-1970s when we dealt with the

Borrie report. It was then said that Australia would have a population of between 16.5 million and 17.3 million by the year 2000. The projection has increased to between 18.4 million and 19.6 million. That will have immense implications for the infrastructure needed in the States and particularly by local government. At the very least Australia is faced with the need to duplicate the provision of the urban infrastructure of the past 10 years into the next decade. We will have to face also the problems of a changing popUlation mix on the basis of age, sex and country of origin. We also have to consider the growing problem of dislocation caused by the changing distribution of population. There are structural changes in population in this country, particularly, as I have said, in those new resource development areas. How can Australia cope with these emerging problems when the Government is dismantling the machinery for handling these problems, when the Government is restricting the provision of information and is cutting back ruthlessly on essential social expenditures? So I say clearly that even though we support the 2 per cent increase to local government in this Bill it is not enough. There has to be greater interrelationship between State and local governments and between the private sector and community groups if we are to overcome the difficult, social problems that are growing at an alarming rate at the grass roots level of local government. I criticise this Government's inactivity in that area. We want to see more interrelationship.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (5.39)-1 enter this debate briefly. I understand we have an agreement to finish the debate in about eight or nine minutes' time. I want to add some remarks on local government. There is a degree of bipartisanship to these grants to local government. There is a recognition on both sides of the House of the nature of local government; that it is grass roots; that it is sensitive to basic community needs; and that the people who have to carry out the tasks of local government are subject to strong electoral pressures as those pressures are very close to home. Yet what happens in local government is so sensitive to what happens at State and Federal government levels. The percentage of grants going to local government has risen from 1.25 per cent in 1976 to 1.75 per cent in 1979 and to 2 per cent in 1980. Local government has conducted a very active campaign to get this level of grants.
However, having reached this stage we have to ask the question: What is the basis for the increase of 2 per cent? What recent assessments of needs and tasks imposed on local government have been

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3171

made to assess the appropriate level? Has the 2 per cent been looked at relevant to the abolition of other special purpose programs which were utilised by local government? After all, this is a cognate debate which includes the matter of health grants to States. These changes will affect some of the tasks that are now carried out by local government. Many of these tasks are of the welfare type. Little accountability is built into any of these measures; so we are not sure how effective they are in the cost sense. However, I have a subjective view that most of these programs in local government areas would be cost effective. People at the local grass roots level have a feel for what is going on, which reduces reaction time bureaucracy and administrative costs.
When I talked to those people involved in local government in my area the general feeling was that there has been a real decrease in funding to local government which has put it in an insecure situation. There was a feeling of resentment that cutbacks in programs and the whole question of the level of funding had been made without any consultation with local government representatives. Obviously the Federal Government takes the attitude that local government is a State function. In fairness, in many ways it is. As local government bodies play such an important part in the nature of national development and the quality of life for ordinary people, surely some degree of consultation is possible between representatives of Federal government, State government and local government. Local government delivers services to people. In the present circumstances some councils will have to increase rates substantially to provide those services. Others may seek to maintain increases in municipal rates with the increases in inflation rates. This would be possible only through an internal manipulation of finance and services.
One of the problems that bedevils local government-at least in Victoria-is, naturally, the periodic valuations of property by the State Valuer-General which must lead to marked rate increases. Different municipalities have different needs. Some are stable, with maintenance posing the main problem. Others are still growing at a rate which requires a greater demand for services. I know that the various State Grants Commissions, in making their allocations to municipalities, have taken all these sorts of criteria into consideration. Those who are slicing up the cake have no say in the size of the cake that is baked.
I remind honourable members of the vast backlog in the provision of facilities such as sewerage, roads, recreation facilities and so on that had accumulated by the early 1970s. Surely there is a

national responsibility to see that that backlog never reaches the same sort of dimensions again. Even a simple matter like waste disposal can produce a marked drain on the finances of local government bodies. Yet rationalisation of these services is more than just a matter for a particular municipality. Land fills are the most common method. A suitable disused quarry hole can cost from $500,000 to $lm. There is some cost recovery in the long term from ratepayers and other municipalities using it but in the short term the financial effect on a local government body can be severe. Federal and State governments have pushed more and more welfare functions on to local government. I illustrate this by citing some figures that refer to the City of Preston. Since the financial year 1976-77 the welfare budget of that municipality has increased by 310 per cent. The actual expenditure figures are as follows: 1976-77, $310,000; 1977-78, $393,000; 1978-79, $577,000; 1979-80, $676,000; and now, in 1980, $838,000.
Just as there has been an increase in expenditure of 310 per cent, the portion of expenditure obtained from State and Federal government sources has pecreased, the expenditure for which the council itself is responsible having increased. The result is that quite apart from rate increases due to inflation another quantum of rate increases has had to be applied to maintain these services. Many of the services are highly labour intensive. For example, 20 per cent of the wages for maternal and child services have to be met by the local government authorities. Changes in the classification of roads, which this Government has implemented, have meant a 7.9 per cent drop in Commonwealth funding for local roads. This has slowed their development. One of the other municipalities covered by my electorate, the shire of Whittlesea, has a southern developing residential area and a substantial northern rural area. Population growth means demand for welfare services and rural areas mean expenditure is constantly required for roads and so on. All this income tax share means to those municipalities is that they have an amount to cover increased expenditure due to inflation, so keeping rate expenditure increases at a level of about 11 per cent to 12 per cent. A councillor for the Shire of Diamond Valley suggested to me that a program under threat because of these changes, as well as the changes in health funding to the States, was the dental scheme for pre-school children and other children. The Treasurer (Mr Howard), in his second reading speech, said:
Firstly, the States should assume their full constitutional responsibility for the provision of health services . . . .

3172 REPRESENTATIVES. 4 June 1981

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

However section 51 (xxiiiA.) of the Constitution reads:
" The provision of . . .' medical and dentalservices.
So, who has responsibility for these things? This Government also h3$ a responsibility. I have to finish my remarks. One could say much more about the needs of local government. I want to emphasise the lack of consultation with local government at Federal and State level. There shoul!! be co-operation to look at the tasles imposed on local government to see on what the figure of 2 per cent is based. This Government should recognise sufficiently the needs of that level of government iil the carrying out of so many functions that affect the ordinary individual.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (5.49)-in reply-~n the time available I will not be able to reply in great detail but I would like to thank honourable members who have participated in this debate on what are some very imporbint measures. I shall deal with the remarks of the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis). I think it is fair to say that the provision being made under the tax sharing arrangements for the States in 1981-82 does not reflect the very strong rate of r~ growth which has occurr over the. last four or five' years. Indeed, one of the principal' reasons for the decisions taken by the Goyernment wa,s the very rapid real increases in general revenue payments. that have accrued to the States since 1976. They include real increases of 7.8 per cent, 7.5 per cent, 3 per cent, 3.6 per cent and 0.3 per cent in the five years that the Fraser Government has been in qffice. One has to look at that trend and at the decisions affecting the overall payments to the States in the light of the relatively high base of paymentS to the States, which the present Government inherited; the revel1ue raising caPllcity of the States themselves, as evidenced by the taxation reductions that many of them have been able to provide, and also the very significant increases in levels of expenditure which Were acknowledged by the honourable member for Gellibrand.
-1 would like to say one or two words about the issue of consultation,b~cause it has arisen in this debate and also in the exchanges between the Commonwealth and some of the States. The fact is that the need to reach a ne:w arrangement was acknowledged at the Premiers Conference in the middle of last year. It was a decision of the States, and of the States alone, that they would meet separately from the Commonwealth and together put a submission on what they thought the new arrangements should be. At the time that decision was taken-of course, it was their perfect right to

take it-the Commonwealth indicated, and repeated that indication on several occasions, that it would be better if the States and the Territory did not meet separately but rather involved the Commonwealth in all meetings on the subject. In the course of the remarks of the honourable member for Gellibrand he quoted some comments attributed to the New South Wales Premier following the Premiers Conference on 4 May. One of those quotes referred to a statement by Mr Wran in which he purportedly rejected the concept of total tax sharing. That rejection by Mr Wran-+-I recall the remark very well-sits rather oddly with the States' written submission to the Commonwealth, to which Mr Wran was the first signatory. In part, that submission read:
. . . there are arguments to be made out for the adoption of total Commonwealth taxation collections as the revenue base. One of the advantages of such a scheme would be that the States would be 'insulated' from the effects of shifts in emphasis between personal income tax and other Commonwealth taxes.
Whilst I am not denying for a moment that the amount to be received by the States would have been more had the previous arrangement been continued, equally one has to bear in mind that the States themselves had argued on many occasions for the need to have total taxation as the revenue base, and had in fact criticised the vulnerability of reliance on personal income tax.
Mr Willis-That was not their submission. Mr HOWARD-The honourable member for Gellibrand points out that their actual submission argued for an arrangement based upon personal income tax; but to suggest that the States have never in the past argued in favour of total taxation as a method and to suggest that there is something inherently unfair about total taxation as a base, I think is to misunderstand much of the debate that
Pas gone on between the Commonwealth and the
States over the past few years. Very briefly, in the minute I understand I have
left, I congratulate the honourable member for Curtin (Mr Rocher) on his maiden speech in this
HoUse. The honourable member raised a: number
of proper matters relating to the distribution of the economic cake in this country among the various States. I point out that, in the context of payments to the State of Western Australia, in 1980-81 Commonwealth payments to the six States averaged $1,047.13m. The grand total in respect of the State of Western Australia is $l,277.02m. So on a per capita basis the total volume of payments-and this in part is a consequence of the greater needs of the more sparsely populated States-I believe reflects the proper

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3173

and appropriate treatment of the needs of Western Australia. I understand that a division will be called for at the conclusion of the debate. In those circumstances I regret that under the arrangement agreed to I cannot continue my remarks any furtHer.

Question put:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Hon. Charles Jones)

Ayes

63

Noes

44

Majority

19

'PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir. William Nixon,P.J. Viner,R.I. Killen,D.J.

'Campbell, G. Keating, P. J. Scott,J.L.
frec:. R-V-
Theophanous, A. C.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Message from the Administrator recommending appropriation announced.

Third Reading

Leave granted. for third reading to be moved forthwith,

Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time,

AYES
Ad~rmann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowao,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) H?dgman, W. M.
NOES
Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R.V. Fry,K.L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Howard, Jl W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Millar,P.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. PorterI J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A, A. Tambling, G, E, J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.
Jacobi,R, Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Los (TeUer) lones, Barry Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerio,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Los Mildren, J, B. Miiton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J, G. Scholes, G, G. D. Theophanous, A. C. Uren.T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young, M. J.

LOCAL GOVERNMENT (PERSONAL INCOME TAX SHARING) AMENDMENT
BILL 1981 Seco~d Reading Consideration resumed from 28 May, on motion by Mr Ho,!~rd:
That the Bill be now reali a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time, Sitting suspended from 6.5 to 8 p.m.
COMMONWEALTH FUNCTIONS (STATUTES REVIEW) BILL 198.1
Second Reading Debate resumed from 27 May, on motion by MrViner:
The the Bill be now read a'second time.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill and the Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Bill as they are associated measures. The separate questions will, of course, by put on each of the Bills at the col)- elusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (8.0)-The Bills now before the House give effect to those decisions of the so-called razor gang which require legislative action and some associated measures.

3174 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

They also give effect to some contradictory measures. The razor gang's decisions represent part of the Government parties desperate attempt to portray themselves as small government parties. They are highly embarrassed that despite all their small government rhetoric the public sector is bigger now than it ever was when the Australian Labor Party was in office. Associated with the Government parties' desire to be seen as small government parties is their desire to be seen as low tax parties. Taxes, as a proportion of gross domestic product, are higher now than they have ever been before in our history. Thus, with regard to both expenditure and taxation the Government is having great trouble in getting its performance in line with its rhetoric. An important measure in the Bills now before the House will ensure that the tax level will increase even further in future years.
The details of the Bills are complex. I refer firstly to the Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Bill, which can be broken up into three categories. Firstly, it relates to cutbacks in tax concessions for industry, the main ones of which are in the investment allowance and the special depreciation rates. Both reductions are of a fairly small order. The second category relates to the introduction of a health insurance rebate, which is not opposed by the Opposition. Neither are the reductions in various tax concessions for industry opposed by the Opposition. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) has said that the health insurance rebate will be of great benefit to families in Australia. But this will depend on the rise of health insurance rates following the large increase in public hospital charges. That rise could be very high. The House will recall that prior to the suspension of the sitting the Opposition spokesman on health, the honourable member for Bonythan (Dr Blewett), informed the House that one senior official of a major health insurance organisation in Australia had estimated that its rates would Increase by 47 per cent as a result of the decisions of this Government to change the form of health funding. Thus, the health insurance rebate must be seen in the light of such possible increases. We should also consider why a tax concession has been given rather than a subsidy. The Government is abolishing or reducing subsidies in the hospital and medical area. It is reducing the subsidy for medical services over $20 and the subsidy for hospital care, thus making health costs and, therefore, health insurance more expensive. That in turn will put up the inflation rate. It is ironic that the rationale for such action is to reduce inflation, that is to reduce the Government's deficit. The Government is cutting back on health funding to reduce the deficit in various ways

which it says will be anti-inflationary. In fact, that very process increases health insurance costs and feeds into the consumer price index. Therefore, it increases inflation and has the opposite effect to that which is intended. It is another of many examples that there have been during the Fraser Government's period of office of a policy of fighting inflation by increasing prices.
By making health insurance more expensive before tax it is more likely that lower income earners will take a punt and not take out health insurance even though an subsidies for medical services are being removed and free public hospital treatment in shared wards is also being ended. Such people would be taking an enormous risk. They could face mammoth bills if they became really ill, but they may still take the risk because there are so many pressures on small incomes and so many other expenses that must be met. Many members of parliament, living on relatively high incomes, have probably forgotton what a struggle people on relatively low incomes have to make ends meet. When there arc such pressures, some of which cannot be avoided and others which can be put off in the hope that the expenditure will not be necessary, it is the second type of expenditure that is likely to be posponed. In that situation it is quite likely that people on low incomes will take a risk, in particular because of the high cost of health insurance. That risk could be terribly damaging for them if they became ill. This is so despite the fact that very low income earners will be able to receive free hospital and medical care.
There is, of course, a provision in the change in the health funding system for those on low incomes to get free care in the future.The income limits for a single person are $96 a week and for a married couple $160 a week with $20 for each additional child. A couple with two children could have a family income of $200 a week and receive free cover. But with an income of just over $200 people face very large costs in taking out health insurance and, therefore, are likely to be frightened otT from taking it out. One must ask the Government: Why do it in this way? Why provide tax concessions to people for health insurance which come after they have made the initial expenditure rather than a subsidy which would reduce the initial cost and, therefore, make it far less likely that the lower income people would take a risk and not take out health insurance? Clearly, the Government's intention is that most people, should take out health insurance, but the very way in which it has gone about encouraging this will ensure that quite a few people do not. The reason it has gone about it in this way is that it

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3175

much prefers tax concessions to subsidies. Subincrease taxpayers' incomes go up. They move up

sidies show up as increases in government eApen.. the tax scale and move into higher tax brackets- -

diture and the public sector whereas tax conthat is, the proportion of their income paid in tax

cessions do not. They can be seen as reduced taxes automatically increases unless the tax schedule is

and that suits the Government's ideology. It does similarly adjusted to the movement in income. So

not help' at all to bring about a better health syswe have what was described by the Prime Minis-

tem or to improve the national standard of living. ter as the secret tax of inflation. If there is full tax

The third sector of the Income Tax (Assess-
ment and Rates) Amendment Bill deals with tax indexation. This is a very important aspect. The Government proposes to abandon tax indexation after the next financial year. That, of course, is completely opposite to the Government parties' rhetoric on being low tax parties. There are various points to make in this regard. Firstly, the Government has attempted to sneak in the abolition of tax indexation along with the change in health funding and the introduction of the tax rebate for health insurance, At the same time as the

indexation there is automatic protection against that. Thus to remove tax indexation is to remove the protection to taxpayers from such automatic tax rises. This is so even if, as has been the case, it were not fully implemented. Of course, we have never had full tax indexation. In 1976-77 we had 92 per cent tax indexation; in the next year it was 79 per cent; then 35 per cent; then nothing in
1979-80; and 39 per cent in the current financial year. The average indexation over that period is 49 per cent or about half. Although for two of those years it was supposedly full tax indexation.

Treasurer announced the introduction of the The fact that we have had only half tax indexa-

health insurance rebate he took advantage of the tion and even less recently means that the secret

opportunity to announce a totally unrelated detax to inflation has been operating throughout the

cision, that is, the decision to abandon tax indexaFraser Government's period of office. To the

tion. The reasons for the Government wanting to extent that it has operated it has provided some

sneak this measure through are obvious. The protection. After the indexation is completely re-

Government parties are embarrassed by this moved the secret tax of inflation will be in full op-

action. It is totally opposite to their rhetoric about eration. So in these circumstances the Govern-

being low tax parties. It goes completely against ment has clearly tried to minimise its

the great claim made for it in earlier years by the embarrassment by announcing the demise of full

Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and various indexation at the same time as it introduced the

others. The Government has claimed many times, health insurance rebate. Thus insofar as its re-

especially when in Opposition and in the early moval was noticed this could be offset by the

years of its period in government, that tax indexahealth insurance rebate. In other words, the

tion is essential to do such things as to make the Government is saying: 'We are taking something

Government more honest with taxpayers' money away from you, but at the same time we are giving

and to end the secret tax of inflation. I am sure something to you'. This is simply not valid for two

those phrases are familiar to all honourable reasons. Firstly, as I mentioned, the rebate is not

members. Having put tax indexation so highly, it even a full compensation for the higher health

is embarrassing to the Government now to be insurance charges which will certainly

abandoning it; the more so because it goes totally eventuate-up to 47 per cent, according to one

against current attempts to portray itself as the person who should know. It is not a compensation

low tax party.

for the abolition of tax indexation. The increase in

Mr MeVeigh-Will there be tax indexation for 1981-82?
Mr WILLIS-Tax indexation is an automatic protection, if fully implemented, against automatic tax rises because of inflation. I will explain that situation to the Minister who would not know anything about the subject if he studied it for the next 10 years.
Mr MeVeigh-Answer the question.

tax resulting from the abolition of tax indexation will soon far outweigh the benefit of the health rebate even if one totally ignores the increase in health insurance charges.
The further point to make in this regard is that the impact of only 49 per cent application of tax indexation in the past five years has been substantial. For example, four taxpayers out of five taxpayers-that is, the bottom 80 per cent-are now paying a higher percentage of their income in

Mr WILLIS-Would the Minister please shut tax than in 1975-76. The top 20 per cent are pay-

up. As I said, tax indexation gives automatic proing less of their income in income tax because of a

tection against the automatic tax rise of inflation discretionary change to the tax system in 1977

if it is fully implemented because, with inflation which gave large tax cuts to high income earners

and a progressive income tax system, as incomes but which was of little benefit to the majority of

3176 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

taxpayers on lower incomes. The bottom 80 per cent of taxpayers are paying more of their income in tax now than they did in 1975. With total abolition of tax indexation in the future and with only 38 per cent tax indexation to 1981-82, that proportion of income paid in tax will rise even further.
The Government will say, of course, that it will be able to make discretionary changes at Budget time. Why abandon tax indexation in the first place if it intends to make fully compensating discretionary changes? It simply does not add up. The abolition of tax indexation also has implications for wages policy. If there is no tax indexation the real take-home pay of wage and salary earners is reduced by the bigger automatic tax bite. That can fuel wage claims to compensate for that reduction in real take-home pay. That in turn has obvious implications for inflation. That is a very important argument for tax indexation and one which the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) recognised in 1975 when, as Opposition spokesman on industrial relations, he said that tax indexation was essential as a support for wage indexation. That statement was made in the days when the Liberal and National Country parties pretended they supported wage indexation as well as tax indexation. Of course, commitment to wage indexation went by the board many years ago, almost as soon as it started, and tax indexation has hung on much longer before going the way of most of this Government's promises.
In regard to the abolition of tax indexation, I note no real reasons have been given by the Treasurer for such an abolition. We are getting used to having no reasons given for government action as promised by the Treasurer at the second reading stage of the debate. It is unusual to get such reasons. One would think when a very important decision like this is made-a fundamental promise of the Fraser Government in past years was to adopt a system which it claimed was terribly important to the people of Australia-that reasons to abandon such a system would be given. No reason was given in the second reading speech. The subject took up four paragraphs. If indexation were so important in the past why has it been

abandoned now? In a speech on 29 April when the Treasurer announced the decision that tax indexation would be abandoned he mentioned that tax indexation could be said to place an inhibition on government Budget flexibility. This is clearly nonsense. There is nothing to stop the Government from making discretionary tax changes when a system of tax indexation operates. That is quite possible to do. It simply means that in addition to that discretionary change there would have to be tax indexation changes to the Schedule as well, certainly if the full amount of flexibility in regard to discretionary changes remains. It is absurd to say it does not.
In total, I say that the abolition of tax indexation has been a shabby exercise indeed. The implementation of half indexation for 1981-82 is also proposed in the legislation. Of course, this will be the final occasion since the indexation will be removed from the legislation at the same time as it is being implemented for this last year. What is supposedly half indexation becomes 38 per cent indexation for this year by a process of obtaining a 9.9 per cent increase in the consumer price index for the 12 months to March 1981 against the 12 months to March 1980. By taking away 2.3 per cent for government-induced price increasesthat is, from increased oil prices and health insurance costs, which means the Government is responsible for about a quarter of the inflation rate directly, on its own admission-and then halving the 7.6 per cent which remains as part of the process of what is supposedly half tax indexation we are left with a figure of 3.8 per cent. The effect of less than half tax indexation is to bring about a situation in which the tax paid by wage and salary earners and other income earners will increase in 1981-82. We are not seeing a situation of tax cuts but a situation in which the proportion of the income paid in tax will increase. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard two tables which show the impact on taxpayers of a lack of full indexation in 1981-82.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

TAX INCREASES DUE TO LACK OF FULL TAX INDEXATION-TAXPAYER WITHOUT DEPENDANTS

Income ($p.a.) 1980-81 6,000

1981-82 6,720

Tax ($p.a.) 1980-81
627

1981-82 808

Proportion of income paid in tax (%)
1980-81

1981-82

Increase
Proportion of income paid in tax (%)

lOA

12.0

15A

Money tax (%) ($ p.w.) 28.9 3A8

8,000

8,960

1,267

1,525

15.8

17.0

7.6 20,4 4.96

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3177

Income ($ p.a.) 1980-81

1981-82

Tax ($ p.a.) 1980-81

1981-82

Increase

Proportion of

income paid

Proportion

in tax (%)

of income

paid in

1980-81

1981-82

tax (%)

Money tax (%) ($p.w.)

10,000

11,200

1,907

2,242

19.1

20.0

12,000

13,440

2,547

2,958

21.2

22.0

14,500 (AWE)

16,240

3,347

3,854

23.1

23.7

15,000

16,800

3,507

4,034

23.4

24.0

20,000

22,400

5,493

6,456

27.5

28.8

2S,000

28,000

7,793

9,032

31.2

32.3

SO,OOO

56,000

21,467

24,742

42.9

44.2

= AWE Average Weekly Earnings.
Asspmes a 12 per cent increase in incomes in 1981-82.

4.7 17.6 6.44 3.8 16.1 7.90 2.6 15.1 9.75 2.5 15.0 10.13 4.7 17.5 18.S2 3.S 15.9 23.83 3.0 IS.2 62.98

TAX INCREASES DUE TO LACK OF FULL TAX INDEXATION-TAXPAYER WITH DEPENDENT SPOUSE

Income ($ p.a.) 1980-81 6,000 8,000 10,000 12,000 14,500 (AWE) 15,000 20,000 2S,000 50,000

1981-82 6,720 8,960 11,200 13,440 16,240 16,800
22,400 28,000 56,000

Tax ($ p.a.)
1980-81
..
467 1,107 1,747 2,S47 2,707 4,693 6,993 20,667

1981-82 ' 695 1,412 2,128 3,024 3,204 5,626 8,202
23,912

Increase

Proportion of

income paid

Proportion

in tax (%)

of income

paid in

1980-81

1981-82

tax (%)

..

..

..

5.8

7.8

34.5

11.1

12.6

13.5

14.6

IS.8

8.2

17.6

18.6

5.6

18.0

19.0

5.6

23.5

2S.1

6.8

28.0

29.3

4.6

41.3

42.7

3.4

Money tax (%) ($ p.w.)
..
48.8 4.38 27.6 5.87 21.8 7.33 18.7 9.17 18.4 9.56 19.9 17.94 17.3 23.25 15.7 62.40

a AWE = Average Weekly Earnings.
Assumes 12 per cent increase in incomes in 1981-82.
Mr WILLIS-I thank the House. Because of time constraints I will not go into the details of the tables. They show clearly that at all income levels there is an increase in the proportion of income paid in tax and an increase in the amount of money tax which far exceeds the assumed rate of increase of income which for the purposes of the table is 12 per cent. It is clear that only partial tax indexation is not full protection against the secret tax of inflation, but at least it is some protection. When it is abolished entirely automatic rises in tax will far exceed increases in income. When the Treasurer in his second reading speech announced the partial implementation of tax indexation for 1981-82 he released some tables showing the impact on taxpayers and showed tax cuts at various levels. Of course, these tax cuts were only the money tax cuts which will occur from 1 July. They disguise the real impact of what has occurred which, because there is not a sufficient money tax cut from 1 July, means that in 1981-82 there will be an increase in the proportion of income paid in tax by all taxpayers in that year.
The second Bill which is before us is the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

1981. This Bill is a very unusual Bill which incorporates a wide range of legislative changes, most of those being changes announced by the Prime Minister in presenting the report of the Review of Commonwealth Functions setting the matters which require legislative action and which are not tax measures. The Review of Commonwealth Functions was carried out by the Cabinet committee known as the razor gang. The review announced 350 decisions regarding government expenditure cutbacks, some of which are farsically minor and some of which are very important indeed.
It is not possible in the time available to deal with these measures in any detail, so one can only pick out a few which are of note and look at the motives of the Government in making those cutbacks in expenditure. There are various categories of decision-the transfers to the private sector, such as the sale of the Belconnen Mall here in Canberra or the sale of the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation; deregulation of various spheres of activity by such action as the winding up of the Prices Justification Tribunal or reducing the activities of the Trade Practices Commission;

3178 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes ReView) Bill

reduction of assistance to industry by cutbacks in the Export Expansion Grants Scheme; and transferrence of various functions to the States-this is, in fact, a euphemism for doing much less about various programs and leaving the States to take up those programs if they so wish-such as the abolition of the Urban Public Transport Assistance Program. The original report by the Prime Minister also contained a long list of internal cutbacks in the operations of the Commonwealth but those do not require legislative action; nor, of course, do any other decisions announced in the report as these can be implemented by Executive direction.
The attitude of the Opposition to this Bill is that we oppose it, although we are not implacably opposed to some of its individual provisions; for instance, the abolition of the receiver of rabbit scalps in the Australian Capital Territory is not one which disturbs us greatly particularly as we understand that no such rabbit scalps have been received for many years. However, there are many provisions of much greater importance than that. We oppose the Bill because we believe it is based on a political and economic philosophy which is ill-conceived, ill-fated and which will cause increased hardship and divisiveness in our society as the role of government is diminished. Let me make it absolutely clear that we are not opposed to measures designed to improve the efficiency of the public sector. Indeed, we positively want it to be as efficient as possible and to abolish waste in government departments and instrumentalities.
As I have mentioned on a previous occasion the Labor Party, in government and in opposition, has made quite clear its devotion to increasing the efficiency of the public sector. But we cannot support the Bill before us now because, with minor exceptions, this Bill is not about improving the efficiency of the public sector so much as it is about diminishing and dismemberingthe public sector. Such action is based on several completely false assumptions. One such assumption is that the freedom of the individual is increased by the diminution of government. Thus, the Prime Minister in particular is fond of uttering such inanities. To hear him speak, to read his speeches, one would think that freedom is maximised in a country like Chile, for instance, because it had implemented the monetarist dogma of Milton Friedman and slashed its level of government expenditure. The fact that the country is run by a military dictatorship apparently does not matter because the important thing is to cut back on government expenditure, which maximises the freedom of the individual.

It is clearly a totally simplistic and absurd proposition to argue that freedom is a product of reduced government activity because there is less regulation of our daily lives and we have more of our own economy to spend. In a society increasingly marked by monopoly and oligopoly, as all Western economies are, we need government interference in the market-place in order to produce freedom for those without economic power. The credo of non-interference is the credo of the rich and the powerful. Those people are quite happy to say: 'Don't interfere; everything is great for us'. If we are considering the freedom of people to spend their own money, what of the freedom of those without much money, those who need welfare services or other public services in order to be able to live a decent life? Insofar as freedom to live a decent life depends on having an adequate income, we must consider the freedom not only of those with money and paying taxes but also those without it. Clearly the latter will not be free if the government does not intervene to ensure that they have an adequate income both in cash and in kind through various public services.
So we totally repudiate the nonsense line that diminution of government in Australia is necessary to make us more free. That would have the possibility of truth only if we had an extremely large public sector. But we simply do not have such a large public sector; in fact, we have one of the smallest public sectors in the whole of the Western world-far below those of the advanced European countries, even well below that of the United States of America. The only advanced country with a smaller public sector than ours is Japan. But there is a tradition of lifetime employment by many large enterprises in that country with workers in sickness and old age being provided for by the company and with many services normally provided by governments in other countries being provided by the company during the working lives of the Japanese people. So Japan is a clear exception. If anyone were to compare us with any other advanced country he would see that om public sector is quite small. To argue that our public sector must be reduced to increase freedom in Australia simply defies credibility.
A second point to make in this regard is the fact that our public sector is small is also relevant to the argument that big government in Australia is crowding out private enterprise and not giving it room to grow. It is clear that our public sector has far more room to grow than that of many other Western countries because we have a much smaller public sector. Yet the Government argues that the public sector is crowding out the private sector both physically and financially. When the

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3179

Government says the public sector is physically crowding out the private sector it means that it is taking over the physical resources-labour and capital-which are not then available to private enterprise to utilise. But it is difficult to believe that that can be so when there is' still quite a high level of unemployment. There is much unused capacity in Australia. We have had a very large increase in private investment in the past year. Why is there such a large increase in private investment in Australia if the investors are scared that there are not the physical resources available with which to utilise that investment money?
Quite clearly, it just does not make sense to argue that there has been physical crowding out by having a large government sector in Australia in the past, nor can the argument be sensibly made out in respect of financial crowding out by which is meant that the Government by having a large public sector borrowing requirement forces the interest rates up by competing with private investors for the available capital. The fact is, however, that the public sector borrowing requirement has fallen substantially as a percentage of gross domestic product over the past couple of years. It peaked in 1978-79 at 5.6 per cent; it is now down to 3.5 per cent. That means that there has been a significant reduction and that the argument about financial crowding out has far less relevance now than it might have had a couple of years ago. The government need to borrow has fallen relative to total money value of output of the nation. The financial crowding out argument, therefore, is clearlydiminished in weight. There are other reasons for the interest rate rises which are occurring at the present time, and they have a great deal to do with this Government's monetary policy rather than with the size of the Government's public sector borrowing requirement.
A further assumption underlying this legislation is that a reduction in the public sector is necessary in order to provide room for real tax cuts. This again is simply not valid. The Government can, as an alternative, increase the tax burden on those who have a clear capacity to pay, such as resource companies which should have applied to them a resource rent tax which this Government continually refrains from introducing despite enormous profits in some areas. We could take much stronger action against tax avoidance. We could cut out unnecessary tax concessions for business.
!VIr Howard-Come on. Mr WILLIS-Well, the Minister has not hit that one on the head. I will deal with that one tomorrow.

Mr HowardI am waiting with bated breath.
Mr WILLIS --1 bet the Minister is.
Mr Howard-I am. I am really waiting with bated breath,
Mr WILLIS-That is terrific. The Minister will be enlightened tomorrow. We certainly argue that the Government should cut out unnecessary tax concessions to business. The Government can also create more'room for tax cuts if it can generate more economic growth. In that regard, until recently growth in Australia has been abysmally low under this Government. What has happened is that the Government has increased taxes to provide the revenue that extremely low growth rates by comparison with other Western countries have denied the Government. Faster growth, if maintained, will allow tax cuts to occur without the slashing of important government expenditures. In any case, how ironic is it that one of the Bills before the House, the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill is justified at least partly on the ground that it makes room for tax cuts, whilst at the same time the other Bill, byabolishing tax indexation, increases taxes.
It is also assumed that the private sector by its very nature is more efficient than the public sector. No proof is provided for that. The sell-off of such bodies as the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation is based on that kind of assumption. There is absolutely no reason to believe that that Corporation will be run more efficiently by private enterprise than it has been by the Government. No one in the Government has attempted to show that that would be the case. I look forward with interest to someone proving in this debate that the Corporation will be run more efficiently by private enterprise. There are other points to be made, but time is against me. I foreshadow an amendment to the motion for the second reading of the Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Bill in the following terms:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing the second reading of this Bill, the House notes that:
(a) because a tax indexation factor of only 3.8% has been applied, all taxpayers whose incomes in 1981-82 will be more than 3.8% above their 1980-81 incomes and whose circumstances do not otherwise alter, will be paying a higher proportion of that income in income tax in 1981-82 than in 1980-81;
(b) such an increase in the burden of income tax continues the pattern of an increasing income tax burden during the Fraser Government's term of office; and
(c) such developments are in stark contrast to the Government's continual attempts to portray itself as a low tax party,
and accordingly deplores the Government's action in abolishing tax indexation altogether for future years, which indicates

3180 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

its clear intention to make full use of the secret tax of inflation'.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Question put:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

61

Noes

44

Majority

17

AYES
Adermann,A. E. Anthony,J.D.
Baumc,M,E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W.
Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Biown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A.
Gadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Carlton,J.J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Howard, J. W. Hunt,R.J.D.
Hyde,J.M.
Jarman,A, W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R.C.
Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R.
MacKenzie, A.. J.
McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher,A.C. Ruddock,P.M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J.
Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Fry,K.L. Hawke,R.J.L. Holding, A. C. Howc,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Innes, U.E.
Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Los Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morrison, VI. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. UreD, T. Wallis,L.G.
West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M. J.

PAIRS
Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Nixon,D.J. Viner, R.1. Killen, P. J.

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J. Scott,J.L. Klugman, R. E. Duffy, M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

In Committee
Clauses I to 89-by leave-taken together.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (8.40)-1 think that it is a condemnation of the Parliament that these clauses are before the Committee tonight. It is a condemnation of the lack of a system of government and the lack of consideration of the democratic rights and obligations of the people of the Australian Capital Territory that these clauses include matters, none of which are Commonwealth functions anywhere else in Australia except in the Territory in which this Parliament House stands, This is a Territory where no democratic rights at all exist for citizens, those which did exist having been taken away over the last three years.
Mr Donald Cameron-That is not true. They chose not to have self-government, and you know it.
Mr SCHOLES-If the honourable member's electorate had its democratic rights taken away and if he were not here it would be a big advantage. In this case the people of the Territory have chosen very good representatives. Unfortunately, they are not allowed to govern their own Territory, nor are they allowed to have a say in matters which would normally be dealt with by State governments and local government bodies. At the time of the retirement in frustration of the former Minister for Post and Telecommunications, Mr Staley, proposals were in hand to give a measure of self-government and responsibility to the citizens of the Australian Capital Territory. If I may say so, for the information of honourable members opposite, democracy is not something which one chooses or does not choose. An obligation rests on all of us not only to support democracy but also to be a part of it. I do not believe that in a society which claims to be democratic the citizens should accept dictatorship be-. cause they think it might be a little cheaper. I doubt whether it is cheaper. I think that they have found out now just how hollow the se1fgovernment referendum was.
Let us look at what the citizens of the Australian Capital Territory are losing. If this Bill were to apply to any other area in Australia the Government would have to go through the processes of consultation with local government

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3181

and State governments and have State governments approve these clauses of the Bill. It is a tyrannical Bill, a Bill which the locally elected representatives who have no authority in government in this Territory have not even been allowed to express a firm opinion upon. This is a Territory where ordinances are made at the whim of the Government, where the financial arrangements for the allocation of funds within the Territory are denied. Even details of the raising of funds are denied to the elected members of the House of Assembly. J have a document here, which J will mention later in the evening, in which the Assembly refers to what it thinks are the funds raised from taxes collected in this Territory and the available funds. Members of the Assembly are not privy to the information because this Government has decided to impose on this Territory a completely totalitarian regime. The elected representatives of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly have no democratic rights. They have no right of a say in the distribution of the taxation which is collected in this area and in the manner in which matters affecting their day to day lives are decided.
Mr Cadman-That was their decision.
Mr SCHOLES-it was not the decision of the people at all, and the honourable member knows it. They were threatened with massive tax increases if they denied the Government's wish that they forgo self-government. Greed is not an excuse for the denial of democracy, nor is convenience, which is the excuse the Government chooses to use.
In dealing with major legislation, the national Parliament is discussing the waters rates in Canberra. Are the water rates of other electorates discussed in this Parliament? Of course not! Locally elected bodies and State governments deal with those functions elsewhere. Agents and architects controls-State functions and functions which are properly the responsibility of the people in the area-are dealt with in this Bill.
The disposal of the Canberra Commercial Development Authority in itself is worthy of a full scale debate by those people who are affected by it. But what we have here? The elected representatives in this Parliament, if the Government has its way, will not even be allowed to speak in a debate on a measure which proposes that a major commercial development be sold off by the Government. A capital gain of something like $20m will be pocketed by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) on behalf of his friends. It will not be distributed back to the taxpayers of this Territory, from where it was derived. The big donors to the

Liberal Party will get access to that commercial development. They will be allowed to run it and the tenants in that area will be pushed out by ever increasing rents imposed on a what-you-can-get basis. Honourable members opposite may yell but they do not believe in democracy. One Western Australian member opposite has been talking about democracy. His colleagues have just wiped out the right of the people of Western Australia to elect their own government. A couple of years ago they selectively tried to deny people in an electorate the right to enrol. Honourable members opposite should not talk about democracy. They do not know what the word means. They believe that Hitler was a communist left winger. The Canberra Commercial Development Authority runs a highly successful operation.
Mr Bourchier-What about what the Public Accounts Committee said?
Mr SCHOLES-I know that the honourable member for Bendigo is good on anything that is not in Bendigo. He is running right away from Bendigo because he does not have enough guts to stand up to his own Government. He has no guts at alL He goes back to Bendigo and tells his electorate how crook the Government is but he comes here and votes for it. On a total investment by this Government of $1m to the end of April this financial year the Canberra Development Commercial Authority had an after tax profit of $619,000. That is a return of 60 per cent in less than a full year. In five years it has created a capital asset which will go into the Department of the Treasury and which the people of Canberra will get no benefit from--
Mr Bourchier-Who built it?
Mr SCHOLES-The trust built it.
M.. Bourchier-Out of the taxpayers' money.
Mr SCHOLES-It was not built out of the taxpayers' money. It has been returned to the Treasury.
Mr Cadman-On whose guarantee?
Mr SCHOLES-The honourable member is winding down. He has no argument left. It is a successful venture which has been returning to its community facilities which will not now be provided. These clauses of the Bill are a demonstration of the stupidity of continuing a situation whereby a section of the Australian community is denied democratic rights. It has an elected Assembly which is supposedly responsible for the maintenance and the consideration of living and social conditIons in this area without a backup of any

3182 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

description. The Department of the Capital Terthat Mall want the Government to sell them that

ritory belongs to the Minister for the Capital Terbuilding. My understanding is that they will get it.

ritory (Mr Hodgman). The elected members of When the Labor Party gets around to repossessing

the Assembly are denied any administrative funcit, as is its style, I will bet it can get it off those

tions. These elected members are paid more than people. I will listen to anybody who can say in this

any local councillor in this country, with the place that that building will be sold to anybody

exception of those serving on the Brisbane City but those tenants. I talked to the tenants and

Council. Members of the Assembly have no showed an interest in them. I come from the other

decision-making power at all. They do not even side of Australia, but somebody had to look after

have a right to be consulted or have their determithem. The people they have elected to this place

nations considered. They are elected by the prefer the situation as it exists at the moment. If

people of Canberra, who at the time of the electhey had their way they would repossess all the

tion know that a single person in this Parliament houses and rent them back to their occupants. Let

has the right to veto any decision that is made in us get something straight. The elected representa-

that Assembly and to initiate decisions, as we saw tives from the Australian Capital Territory on the

recently at 2 o'clock in the morning, without any Opposition benches do not talk on behalf of the

consideration at all being given to the people of poor residents of Canberra. At the first oppor-

this city.

tunity they had to do something for them and give

The Government would do this Parliament a service if it gave democratic rights to the people of Canberra and took this type of legislation out of the Parliament. We oppose all these clauses. We

them a bit of identity they did nothing. It is small businesssmen who create local government. I know what makes local government as I was in it for 16 years.

oppose the desecration for ideological reasons, not Mrs Kelly-Are you going to support us on the for sound administrative or financial reasons, of a deregulation of shopping hours?

great deal of the build-up of the social fabric that Mr TUCKEY-No. I am not. I do not think it

has taken place in this area over the last 50 years. is necessary. I was a small shopkeeper, too. I know

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)- The honourable member's time has expired.

all about regulation. I know all about nasty little men who come around and tell me what I will do about selling a can of beans to somebody who is

Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (8.50)-1 am hungry. I have seen that sort of regulation. I have

pleased that the Australian Labor Party has sudbeen part of it. I never wanted it when I was in

denly discovered the tenants of the Belconnen that sort of business. I do not think many people

Mall. It is a pity it did not discover them about six want it now. I do not think the buying public want

months ago. At that time those people went to the it either. There is plenty of room for small busi-

newly elected member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) ness people in Canberra. When there is a heap of

and asked her to help them to get justice against them they will ask for local government. They

their landlord, the Commonwealth Government. will be the people who will make a contribution to

They told her the reasons why they wanted ownlocal government. The honourable member for

ership of the Mall. One reason was that they were Canberra should not laugh. She has never been in

being killed by the rents which they had to pay. If local government and would not know how it

they increased their turnover their rent went up. worked.

There was no possibility of their giving their customers, the people of Canberra, a fair deal. They went to her and asked her whether she thought the Government would sell it to them. She told them that it was not a good idea but that it would be a great idea if the Woden Plaza were sold because those nasty free enterprise individuals owned the Woden Plaza.

Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (8.56)-Instead of speaking in an emotional fashion, as did the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey), I will outline my reasons for opposing these clauses. There is the obvious one. The honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) has outlined the reasons for our opposition to the takeover of the Belconnen Mall and the Canberra Retail Mar-

Those people had a bit of faith. They had just kets. The point I raise is that honourable members

elected a golden girl. Some of the people who ap-, who have come here from all over Australia have

proached her happened to run small businesses, a right to sit here in this Parliament and make de-

but they were not to be considered. Do not say cisions that affect the Australian Capital Terri-

that this did not happen because it did. We know tory. I know the legislation as it stands today gives

that it happened in her office. The Labor Party them that right. I believe members of this Parlia-

has now decided that it can give a bit of thought to ment should, in fact, be spending their time debat-

the tenants of the Belconnen Mall. The tenants of ing national issues. They should not be spending

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3183

their time discussing issues that are involved in can put its philosophies into action, and it sure is

this legislation.

doing it here. It is not prepared to listen to the

Let us look at specific issues. For example, let us look at Division 13 which relates to rabbit destruction. Do honourable members know what we are debating here tonight? We are debating a Bill which will, in fact, abolish the position of Re-

advice of any of the residents of the Australian Capital Territory, or the advice of the elected representatives of the House of Assembly because the Government .knows it would be opposed and defeated.

ceiver of Scalps in the Australian Capital Territory. That is what we are debating in this Parliament tonight Have honourable members been elected to debate whether the Australian Capital

There has been some discussion from my colleagues in the Opposition about shopping hours. This again illustrates many of the points that I have been making. The Lynch razor gang rec-

Territory should have a Receiver of Scalps, or a ommendations were made without consulting the

lake superintendent, or anapprover of licences or community. There is outright opposition to the

a receiver of money for sewerage and rates? That deregulation of shopping hours by the Australian is what honourable members are debating tonight. Association of Independent Businesses, outright I believe the Federal Parliament should not spend opposition from the Shop, Distributive and Allied

its time debating issues that have a specific referEmployees Association and no strong demand by

ence to the Australian Capital Territory.

the consumers. I know because for five years I was

We are debating these issues tonight because a member of the Legislative Assembly in this Ter-

the Government knows that it cannot amend the ritory. During that time several investigations

Ordinance by the normal processes because it were conducted into the issue of deregulation of

does not have the time. It will lose control of the shopping hours. On all those occasions deregula-

Senate and, as a result, it has to race this Bill tion was decided against. Yet the Lynch com-

through Parliament. The Government cannot go mittee in its wisdom-I do not know from where

through the procedure of consulting the Ausit received that wisdom-decided in a few words

tralian Capital Territory House of Assembly or of to deregulate shopping hours without any con-

consulting the community in order to amend the sideration for the effect that that would have on

Ordinance. It cannot let it lie in both houses of the economy of Canberra and on the small Parliament for 15 days because it knows that it businesses in Canberra. So what we are seeing is

would be defeated on this issue and that disallowgovernment decisions being made in relation to

ance would be agreed to by the Senate. Therefore, the Australian Capital Territory, not because they

it is not prepared to let the democratic processes will save money or because they will rationalise

take their course. Instead, we have this ludicrous functions, but because the Government can dem-

situation tonight when, at the same time as we are onstrate its great commitment in transferring

debating the razor gang cuts and income tax legiseverything to the private sector regardless of

lation, we are debating whether the Australian whether the private sector wants it and regardless

Capital Territory should have a Receiver of of whether it will be beneficial to the private sec-

Scalps. How ludicrous can the Parliament be tor in Canberra.

when we have that situation?

The other points which have been made in re-

This highlights another point that I want to lation to deregulation illustrate exactly the point I

make tonight. The abolition of the positions of am trying to make. This Government has decided

lake superintendent and receiver of moneys for also to deregulate, along with shopping hours, ar-

rates and sewerage shows just how ludicrous the chitects, agents and surveyors. Who wanted this

recommendations of the Lynch committee are. It deregulation? I do not understand from where the

is the titles of these positions that are being Government got that advice. As far as I can work

abolished, not the functions. The positions are it out the surveyors have already formally notified

being abolished so that it will look better on the Minister for the Australian Capital Territory

paper, but the functions are not being abolished. (Mr Hodgman) that that was not what they

Is not that a ludicrous situation? How petty it is to wanted. Because the Federal Government has

be spending this amount of time not only debating control of the Australian Capital Territory it sud-

an issue that should be related specifically to the denly decides to wipe out regulation in these areas

Australian Capital Territory and, therefore, not because the people of Canberra want it, not

amended by ordinance but also debating an issue because the interest groups want it, but because

which will have very little practical effect. This ilthe Federal Government in its wisdom decides

lustrates that the Government is using the Austhat it wants it. At the same time it is not prepared

tralian Capital Territory to demonstrate its philto discuss the matter with the Australian Capital

osophy. This is the only area in Australia where it Territory House of Assembly or the community.

3184 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

It wants to race through this change in an Act of Parliament.
So what we see tonight is the government of Canberra being run by honourable members from Western Australia, Tasmania, South Australia and New South Wales but not by the people of Canberra. The people of Canbera have not had the opportunity to voice their objection to this move. We have not gone through the normal channels of communication with the people. We have not opted for the ordinances and all the procedures that that entails. Instead, these matters which specifically affect the Australian Capital Territory are now put in a Bill which will become an Act of Parliament.
Mr GROOM (Braddon) (9.3)--1 think I can dispose of the question asked by the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly). She asked why the Parliament is debating these issues when they relate to the Australian Capital Territory. There are two major reasons for that. Firstly, there was a referendum, and the result of that referendum clearly indicated that the people of the Australian Capital Territory wanted this Parliament and the people we represent in this Parliament to remain responsible for the overall conduct of the Australian Capital Territory. Secondly-this is the obvious historical pointthe Australian Capital Territory happens to be the national capital. It was established initially as the seat of government of this country. Therefore, all of the people we represent, including the people who happen to live on the north-west coast of Tasmania, have an interest in the Australian Capital Territory. I hope that they will continue to have an interest in the Australian Capital Territory. The reason the people who live in the Australian Capital Territory want the whole of Australia to remain responsible is so that those people who live in places such as the electorate which I represent will pay taxes to help support the Australian Capital Territory. The people who live in Canberra cannot have it both ways. They cannot receive the benefits that come from this Parliament being responsible for Canberra and have the total independence that some people, such as the honourable member for Canberra, want to have.
I want to speak generally to this piece of legislation. I relate my comments to the title and the purpose of the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill. This Bill seeks to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions. I indicate briefly that I support the spirit and the purpose of this important legislation. That is not to
say that I agree with everything that is proposed in this Bill. Obviously there would be some parts

of the Bill with which I might disagree. I might have done things in a slightly different way had I
been responsible for preparing the legislation and making these decisions. Overall, I believe it is a
sensible package and that is why I support it.

It represents a genuine attempt by the Govern-
ment to reduce the size of federal bureaucracy. I believe the majority of people in Australia realise
at this point in our history that government is too
big, that bureaucracy is too big-especially the bureaucracy attached to the Federal Government
and to this Parliament-and that it is costly. As a result people are paying too much tax, and that is
taking away incentive. So we have this general
feeling that people in the community want to get the size of government down and that they want to get their taxes down. They want to pay less tax
and have a little more in their pockets. Individuals can usually spend money more wisely than
governments can spend it.

Of course, this Bill involves a very fundamental

difference between the people who sit on this side

of this Parliament and those who sit on the other

side. If we look at the history of the Liberal Party,

in 1944 Robert Menzies, as he then was, was

concerned-as was the community-about the

threat of centralised government in Canberra.

The then Labor Government proposed a refer-

endum to give the government in Canberra a

whole range of additional powers. The Liberal

Party wants to distribute, the power of govern-

ment around Australia fairly among the Com-

monwealth and the States. That is a fundamental

purpose of the Liberal Party. On the other hand,

the Labor Party believes in a very strong central

government in Canberra. It wants to reduce the

power and the influence of the State governments.

Therefore, I can understand why people on tp.e

opposite side of the House tend to get upset when

we are debating this kind of issue.

.

The Bill results from the examination of Com-
monwealth functions undertaken by a committee of the Cabinet under the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch), which is
sometimes known as the razor gang. I believe that
exercise had two major purposes: Firstly, to transfer functions from the government sector to the
private sector and, secondly, to transfer fupctions
from the Commonwealth to the States. If I have time to do so, I will comment briefly on the second
purpose of that exercise. I want to dismiss one point that was made by the honourable member
for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) earlier when he said
that this legislation showed concern only for those people who have money. He said that there was a
need to protect the less fortunate people in the
community with a larger public sector.

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3185

I want to make it clear that I do not support the notion that we should reduce the size of everyone of our programs and cut cloth for the sake of cutting cloth. We must maintain the important programs we have as a Commonwealth Government, especially those programs that assist the people in genuine need in the community. Of course, we recognise that there are people in genuine need who must be supported by the overall population, and that is why we have the programs we do. We recognise that people such as the handicapped, especially in the International Year of Disabled Persons-I refer to orphans, Aboriginal communities and the aged-must be protected.
Honourable members interjecting-Mr GROOM-I ask honourable members opposite to wait for just a moment. If we can do away with the wasteful areas of Government expenditure and the useless programs we will have more money available for those people in genuine need. One of the reasons I support the measures contained in this Bill is that they will give the Commonwealth Government a greater capacity to help those people in the community in genuine need. I believe we will see as an end result greater assistance provided for those sections of the community that need help from the government. Also, as a result of these decisions we will find that the Government will have a greater capacity to reduce the tax burden borne by taxpayers around Australia. This legislation gives the Government the chance to do both of those things. I certainly hope that the Government very soon will consider family allowances or increasing the rebate for dependent wives. Also I hope it will consider reducing the size of the income tax bill paid by the taxpayers of Australia. I ask the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman)- who is at the table and who I know has great understanding of these matters-the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and his colleagues to look very carefully at the issues of family allowances and personal income tax. I believe there will be, as. a result of this legislation, an opportunity to do something positive in those fields. I hope that we do not wait for two or three years to do those things; I hope we do them very soon. The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)- Order! I remind the honourable member that he is straying from the content of clauses 1 to 89. I invite him to get back to them. Mr GROOM-As I said, Mr Chairman, I was directing my comments to the title and purpose of

the Bill, which is contained in clause 1. It is concerned with functions. I believe it is very relevant to consider the end result of the legislation. It gives me an opportunity to talk generally. At the moment Commonwealth-State relations are a problem in this country. I believe it is important for the Commonwealth to get out of those areas in which it should not be involved and to let the States conduct the business that they should conduct under our constitutional system of government. Since Federation in 1901 the size of the Commonwealth Government has continued to grow. We are now seeing, probably for the first time, a change in direction which gives us the chance to reduce the size of the Commonwealth Government. It is important that we get out of the areas of government we are involved in but should not be involved in. Our involvement interferes with the proper functions of the States and creates friction between the Commonwealth and the States. That is very debilitating for government in this country.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Question put:

That clauses 1 to 89 be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Dr H. A. Jenkins)

Ayes

62

Noes

. 44

Majority

18

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. BurrIM.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Carlton,J.J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Howard, J. W. Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B.
Lusher, $. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Millar,P.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. Mce. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
White,P.N.D. Wilson,I.B.C.

3186 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C.
Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John
Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E.
Child.J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling. E. E. Dawkins. J. S. Everingham. D. N. Free.R. V. Fry.K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys. B. C. (Teller) Hurford. C. J.

Innes, U.E. Jacobi, R.
Johnson. Les (Teller) Jones, Barry
Jonesl Charles
Kelly,R.I. Kent,L.
Kerin,J.C. McLeay, Leo
McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. TheophanollS. A. C. Uren, T.
Wallis.L.G. WesI,S.l. Wi11is,R. Young, M. J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Viner,R. I. NixoD, D.J. Killen, P.J.

Campbell,G. Kealing, P. J.
Scott,J.L. Klugman,R.E. Duffy, M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Clauses agreed to.

Clause 90 (Trading hours).

Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (9.l9)-The Opposition is giving the Government the opportunity of assisting small business. Tonight, Government members can come across to join us to vote against the decision to deregulate shopping hours in the Australian Capital Territory. The Opposition is voting against that for the benefit of small business in Canberra, and we would welcome anyone from the other side of the chamber, especially the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman), who would like to join us in this vote. The decision to deregulate shopping hours was taken by the Lynch razor gang without consultation with the Canberra small business community, without consultation with the Canberra consumers and without consultation with the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly; and on the recommendation only of-who knows? Maybe this decision was taken just at the whim of the razor gang. Recently the National Capital Development Commission conducted a very detailed survey of retailing. That survey gave the clear indication that there was no consumer demand for deregulation of shopping hours. On 27 February the Australian Association of Independent Businesses Ltd wrote to the Minister for the Capital Territory opposing any move to deregulate shopping hours. Since that time. I have had representation from very many small shopkeepers in Canberra opposing deregulation, especially from small family traders who are in

the big shopping complexes run mainly by Lend Lease Corporation Ltd. Those small shops and their family owners will not have a choice about opening times because of the leases under which they operate. The opening times for those shopping complexes are set by the managers Lend Lease. That does not give small family businesses a fair go.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The Committee will come to order. The level of conversation is so high that it is almost impossible to hear the honourable member for Canberra. I suggest that it would assist the Committee if honourable members were quiet.
Mrs KELLY-I think the problem tonight is that Government members are not prepared to listen to sense. They are not prepared really to put up a fight and support the small business people of Australia. I am speaking on behalf of them tpnight. Many honourable members have already been lobbied by the Australian Association of Independent Businesses, which has outlined its clear objections. So this decision is taken without any concern for the Canberra consumers, without any concern for small business and without any consultation at a time when there is already an oversupply of retail space and there is low consumer confidence in the Australian Capital Territory. This decision will not help business in Canberra and it will work to the detriment of the Australian Capital Territory economy.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (9.22)-1 assure the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) and members of the Opposition that, contrary to what they say, the recommendations of the Lynch committee are going to make Canberra, not break it. The second thing 1 want to say is that if they want to get a fair assessment of the reaction of the people of Canberra to the recommendations in the Lynch committee report they should go out and talk to them. The people of Canberra are laughing their heads off at the statements of certain Labor members of the House of Assembly in relation to the Belconnen Mall. The fact of the matter is that the small traders of Belconnen Mall, as my colleague the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey) will confirm, are determined to exercise their rights, if they can to become the owners and not the tenants. I would like to see the Labor Parly in three years time try ripping the Belconnen Mall away from 170 small businessmen.
Mr Bourchier-They won't be in. They won't have a chance.

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3187

MrHODGMAN-As my colleague the accept your rebuke and I will keep the contents of

honourable member for Bendigo says, Labor will my remarks directly----

not be in power in three years. It will not be in power in 10 years. This is the first time that I have had the opportunity in the chamber to reply to the honourable member for Canberra. Whilst the honourable member usually talks sense, J suggest tonight that she made a number of statements which are less than factual and less than fair.
I want to make four basic points in relation to clause 90. Firstly, as the honourable member for Canberra is well aware, the date of implementation of this decision is a date to be fixed by proclamation. What does that mean? It means a date

Mr Scholes-I raise a point of order. This is the first debate in the Parliament on the Australian Capital Territory since I became shadow Minister. The Minister's dictatorial statements are made outside the Parliament, not in it.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-There is no point of order.
Mr HODGMAN-I remind the honourable member that we have questions without notice in this place. The honourable member has not asked a single question without notice.

fixed by the Executive Council on the advice of Mr Scholes--I will take another point of order,

the Minister. It is the wish of the Government you hloody great log.

that this and all other recommendations will be implemented properly. Accordingly, the date is to

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order!

be fixed by proclamation. The second propos;tion, MI' Scholes-I have had two questions this

of which the honourable member is also well year.

aware, is that the Department of the Capital Territory from the day this decision was announced has engaged in consultations with employers, employees, large retailers, small businesses, trade unions and even members of parliament. The

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable members will resume their seats.
Mr Scholes-I have had three questions this year and if you fix that up I will ask you questions.

third matter, of which the honourable member is The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The

well aware, is that deputations are coming into my honourable member for Corio will resume his

office, including deputations introduced by the seat.

honourable member as recently as today, to discuss the rational implementation of the decision. These are matters which demonstrate the concern of the Government that the decision will be implemented but that all community interests and all community wishes will be fully considered and taken into account. That is a bit more attention than is being given by some Labor members of the

Mr Scholes-But until you do I won't; so don't be so bloody stupid.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! I warn the honourable member for Corio. I suggest that the Committee would be helped if talk across the table ceased. The Minister should address the Chair and be heard in silence.

House of Assembly.

Mr HODGMAN-Mr Deputy Chairman, I

The honourable member for Canberra has proposed-and I on behalf of the Government respond-that the introduction of the deregulation of trading hours be subject to monitoring, by a consultative committee, to ensure that if there are areas of hardship, if there are areas of concern, the Government is aware of them.
Mr Scholes-You would not be game to tackle Lend Lease.

accept your ruling. When one has worked 17 hours a day for seven months trying to make the national capital achieve its rightful destiny one does not appreciate people on the other side of the chamber trying to take a political point when they have not even asked a single question without notice. What the Labor Party totally fails to understand is that private enterprise exists in the Australian Capital Territory and wants to develop. Private enterprise wants to go ahead. Pri-

Mr HODGMAN-It is all right for you. You vate enterprise does not wish to see Canberra a

made your first speech on the Australian Capital bureaucratic socialist monolith on the backs of

Territory tonight. You were appointed shadow the taxpayers of Australia for the next 100 years.

Minister for the Capital Territory back in November.

Mr Barry Jones-Well give them self-government.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN---Order! I invite the Minister to address the Chair.

Mr HODGMAN-The honourable member for Lalor has obviously not heard anything that

Mr HODGMAN-It is a charm to hear the has been said in this place in the last seven

honourable member's voice in the Parliament minutes. The ignorance of certain members of the

talking about Canberra. Mr Deputy Chairman, I Labor Party is absolutely appalling.

3188 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

Mr Scholes-That is offensive to all members of the Labor Party. I ask that it be withdrawn.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member for Corio finds the remark offensive. I suggest that the Minister withdraw it.

Mr HODGMAN-Yes, I withdraw it. I will say that the total lack of appreciation of the facts by certain members of the Labor Party who pretend they are interested in Canberra is absolutely appalling. The honourable member for Lalor ta~ks about self-government. Self-government has been offered by this Minister over and over again. But what do we get from the House of Assembly? We get nothing.

The Labor Party is totally out of touch because it has not bothered to talk to the people of Canberra. Deregulation by legislation does not prevent the private sector, employers, employees, landlords and tenants from getting together to work out market arrangements which are in the overall interests of the community. This is the sort of way private enterprise should work, not with government wielding a big stick over it. Since the decision to deregulate has been announced, with the exception of the deputations to which I have referred, the number of letters which have reached my office protesting about the decision is fewer than ten. The Labor Party ought to go into the market place, talk to the people in Canberra and get its facts straight before it comes into this chamber misrepresenting the position of the Government and the position of the people who have the honour to live in the national capital.

Mr Scholes-Mr Chairman, I wish to make a personal explanation.

Mr Bourchier-I move that the question \;>e

put.

.

Mr Scholes-That has to be out of order. The honourable member cannot put the question while another member is making a personal explanation which is a separate right under the StandingOrders.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)-I remind the honourable member for Corio that I believed that he had risen to address the clause.

Mr Scholes-I rose to make a personal explanation.

Mr Bourchier-You did not say so.

MI' Scholes-I did say so.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. I did not hear the honourable member say that he wished to make a personal explanation. I suggest that the honourable member for Bendigo withdraw his motion.

Mr Bourchier-I accept that, but the honour~ able member for Corio did not need to try to make out that I did not know what he was talking about. Mr Deputy Chairman, you did not know what he was talking about.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-Does the honourable member for Corio wish to make a personal explanation?

Mr Scholes-Yes.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. The honourable member for Bendigo has agreed to defer the action he was taking so that the honourable member for Corio can make his personal
explanation.

Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-The Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) said two things which are quite offensive to me. Firstly, he said that I have had the opportunities to ask questions of him in this Parliament and that I have not asked them. I have had three opportunities to ask questions in six months. That is hardly a great many opportunities.

Mr Sainsbury-It is in the Hansard.

Mr SCHOLES-That is a fact. The Minister

has made, to my knowledge, 200 statements on

Canberra during that period, none of them in the

Parliament. This has given no member an oppor-

tunity to speak in this chamber, the place where

decisions are made in the Australian Capital Ter-

ritory. If I have not spoken on Canberra in the

Parliament it is because the Minister has chosen

to use the media, which he does very well, to avoid

his responsibilities to the Parliament that makes

the decisions on the Australian Capital Territory.

Members of the Opposition cannot make state-

ments in the Parliament in response to statements

made in the media:. It is not in the Standing

Orders.

.

Mr COHEN (Robertson) (9.33)-Mr Chairman-

Motion (by Mr Bourchier) agreed to:

That the question be now put.

Question put:

That clause 90 be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Dr H. A. Jenkins)

Ayes . . . Noes . . .

. 62 . 44

Majority

. 18

Adermenn, A. E. Anthony, J. D.

AYES

Howard,J. W. Hunt,R.J.D.

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3189

AYES
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Carlton,J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Hyde,J.M.
Jarman, A. W. Iull,D. F. Katter, R. C. Lioyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Millar,P.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, I. R.
Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling,G.E.I. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross, M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller)

Hurford,lC. J.
Innes, V.E.
Jacobi,R. Iohnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C.
McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morrison, W. L. Mo.untford, I. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Theophanous, A. C. Ureo, T. Wallis,L.G. West,S. J. Willis,R. Young, M. J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Nixon,P.I.
Viner,R.I.

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J. Scott, S. L. Klugman, R. E.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Clause agreed to.

C1~uses 91 to 106-by leave-taken together.

Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.38)-IIi line with the Opposition's belief that the functions described in these clauses are State and local government functions which should be dealt with by the people of Canberra and the elected representatives of those peoples the Opposition maintain its opposition to the clauses but will not divide on them because of the pressure of time.

Clauses agreed to.

Clauses 107 to 113-by leave-taken together. Mr CHAPMAN (Kingston) (9.40)-1 have pleasure in supporting these clauses which relate to the Australian Postal Commission. They give effect to a very important part of the report of the Review of Commonwealth Functions which was presented to this chamber recently. These clauses abolish the Australia Post Courier Service. The abolition of the Australia Post Courier Service is an important reaffirmation of the basic philosophy of the Liberal Party. It is based on the precept that the people ought to be free to choose how they live, work, vote and spend their disposable income. Obviously, a result of this belief is the fact that the Liberal Party must be consistent in supporting and aiding as much as possible an economy where freedom of choice is the norm. That receives application in these clauses. The reductions in and rationalisation of Government spending given effect by this legislation positively demonstrate that small, less interventionist government is the foundation stone of the Liberal-National Country parties. The Federal Government will continue to implement policies that acknowledge that philosophy. 1 welcome the assurance that the Committee under the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Philip Lynch) will continue its review of Commonwealth functions. I hope that the current initiatives are just the beginning. Much more remains to be done to achieve a more market oriented economy and a freer society in Australia. It is important that the philosophical basis of these decisions should be fully understood not only by Liberals but also by those in the community whom the Liberals represent and on whose behalf the elected government bases its decisions and policies. Suffice to say that a single thread must run through any successful government-a preeminent idea or concept which unites, but does not totally bind, that party and unites it with the people it has been elected to govern. For the Liberal Party that thread, of course, is its philosophy of liberalism. That is the concept which unites the party. But the party is not irrevocably bound by a doctrine which forces it to make decisions which are not in accord with the welfare of the people it is governing. It is a basic thread and fl basic philosophy upon which all the decisions of the Government are based. It is on that basis that this particular decision to abolish the Australia Post Courier Service is based.
It is not appropriate that a government should fulfil all the demands and wants of a community. People should have those demands fulfilled in the market-place, either by combining voluntarily as

3190 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

a group or working on an individual basis. Over and above that it is the role of government to fulfil those needs which people are unable to fulfil for themselves. The Australia Post Courier Service does not come within the ambit of that proposition. Therefore, I support these clauses which will abolish the Service's activities.
Clauses agreed to.
Clauses 114 to 121 (Part IV)-by leavetaken together.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (9,43)-The Opposition is opposed to Part IV of the Bill comprising clauses 114 to 121. Part IV relates to the Government's decision with respect to the change of status of the Australian Wool Testing Authority and the necessary changes to the Wool Industry Act. The Opposition is opposed to that part of the omnibus Bill because it has become clear that the Government has backtracked so much on its original proposition that there is no need to continue with the cosmetic farce that it is now engaged in. It has adopted more changes of position in this matter than appear in the Kamasutra. This Part of the Bill is nothing more than a contrivance to save face. The only upshot of the move will be an increase in wool test charges to the industry as the Hill Samuel independent report has clearly said. The Chairman of the Australian Wool Corporation has said so, as has every objective independent observer.
If the Government believed all along that the wool industry was getting something on the cheap and that it was this and only this that offended its ideology it should have said so honestly to the industry, instead of engaging in the farce it has and inflicting confusion on the industry. The best thing the Government could do, if this Bill is passed, would be not to proclaim it. When I last spoke on this matter in the House on 14 May I said that it was abundantly clear that the Government had bungled and that it did notunderstand the role and functions of the AWTA because that body was an independent, official, impartial and highly efficient body and that its sale to the private sector was not only wrong but also dangerous to the wool industry. I pointed out the way in which the AWTA had saved the industry money, how low its costs were and that all that the Government could or would do would be to raise costs and throw the wool industry into chaos.
It has since been reported to me by a wool broker of impeccable reputation that since I made the speech the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) instituted a witch hunt in his Department to find out who I had been talking to. In case some poor person is going to be erroneously subjected

to the wrath of the Minister and victimised I wish to state before the House that before that speech I spoke to no one in the Department of Primary Industry, the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, any wool broker, anyone from the Australian Wool Corporation or any person in the commercial wool trade. I spoke with two people in the AWTA after a statement had been issued on their behalf, and I was told exactly what any member of the public would be told. I insisted that that was all I was to be told. Of course, it is ridiculous for the Minister to institute a witch hunt.
In 1971-72 I worked in the Bureau of Agricultural Economics in the wool marketing section when it was principally engaged in the Australian objective measurement project. I know what has happened in the Australian wool industry since 1971. Of course, there was no need for me to have known anything about the wool industry at all. All I would have had to do would be to read the cascade of material opposing the Government's move, which material has come from absolutely every organisation within the wool industry.
Even the wool broker mates of the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) who put him up to the crazy idea to sell AWTA were not supported by the National Council of Wool Selling Brokers. There is no need for me to ring David Asimus or Ian McLachlan or any wool industry leader. Their attitude is on the public record. The latest example is a telegram to all New South Wales and Australian Capital Territory senators from the Livestock and Grain Producers Association of New South Wales, which reads:
The Livestock and Grain Producers Association of NSW totally oppose the Federal Government's proposal that the Australian Wool Testing Authority (AWTA) be divorced from its relationship with the Australian Wool Corporation (AWC).
The Governments justification for the 'razor gang' cuts appear to be based on the premise that the user must pay. In the case of AWTA this premise is not valid as the user does pay.
In fact, the Government does not provide one cent in direct cash handouts to AWTA. At the same time, AWTA has been able to make profits over the last five years of about $1million per annum and hold its charges at about the 1970 level.
The reason for disposing of AWTA had to change and Mr Nixon has said that 'there is no longer a requirement for the Authority to have a link with the Government'.
This 'link' provides the very basis of the wool industry's marketing system. All sectors of the industry have very strongly opposed the Government's present proposal. These objections are best summarised by the International Wool Textile Organisation:

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3191

'Members of IWTO are strongly of the view that in its unique function between sellers and buyers, AWTA must be, and be seen to be, an official, independent and impartial body.'
Mr Nixon has further stated 'that the fundamental aim is to ensure that AWTA continues in precisely the same way as it does already.' 'We will establish a foundation' says Mr Nixon 'which will be designed by the industry itself.'
One thinks that the industry has already designed its own 'foundation' and that it already exists-namely, AWTA.
No real argument has been put up by the Government as to why it is necessary to dispose of AWTA. This is particularly disturbing when there is the slightest possibility of doing damage to Australia's wool marketing system.
As wool growers, we are extremely concerned with the Government's proposal to dispose of AWTA: This concern has been conveyed to the Prime Minister by a large number of our members, apparently to no avail.
The only course of action left is to seek your support to have the 'razor gang' legislation either amended-to remove references to AWTA, or defeated.'
The word 'link' is of prime importance because it is now quite clear the link between AWTA and the AWC and the Government will not be severed. If anything, the AWC will be closer to the AWTA. We still do not know what status or structure the new organisation will have, but it is quite apparent from all the confusing answers to questions in this House that the Government does not intend carrying out its original announced purpose. We are not even sure who is being consulted in the industry other than the AWC. I will read once again the Prime Minister's bald announcement of 30 April 1981 in the Review of Commonwealth Functions under the heading 'Transfer of Functions to Private Sector'. He stated:
We propose to offer for sale as a going concern . . . the Wool Testing Laboratory-
There is nothing ambiguous in that. It is a clear statement leaving no room for misinterpretation. We now have before us a Bill which is very short on detail and does not definitely state that the AWTA is to be sold to Mr Fraser's holier than holy private sector. Just about everything is subject to the consent of the Minister. Even the sale of the wool stores is subject to the consent of the Minister. In other words, in an exercise which is entirely about saving face the Minister is going to go behind closed doors with the AWC and others, first to be educated by the wool industry about the stupidity of the Government's action and then to reach a compromise which is not too ridiculous, which does not cost the industry too much and which does not destroy the effectiveness of the AWTA too much. All that will be done is that the Wool Testing Authority will be given a new name with a new board which mayor may not have voting rights. We have not been told. There is little ever to vote on. The Government has discovered that there is a part of the Department of

Primary Industry which can pass judgment on the standards. It has always been there. I better tell the Minister that it is called the Australian Wool Measurement Standards Authority. I guess the CSIRO representative will be taken off. We have not been told. Perhaps I should inform the Minister the reasons for CSIRO being on the Wool Testing Authority. It is there because of its active professional involvement in wool technology, technological innovation and measurement standards.
This Bill creates a legal device whereby the Australian Wool Corporation, which is a statutory corporation, may first set up a body corporate, which can be a statutory corporation, to acquire the testing facilities operated by the AWTA, which is a statutory authority but which is at present legally owned by the AWe. There are provisions in the Bill which permit this company to be sold to a second company which will in future undertake the operations which are at present performed by the AWTA. Apart from referring to the abundant ridiculousness of this there are two things to ask: Firstly, if the AWC clearly owns the AWTA why is there a need to set up a legal intermediate body to buy the assets of AWTA? Secondly, why is the intermediate body corporate suddenly called a company and the possible final owner also to be called a company? It is just ridiculous. If it is to be called a company and to meet some of the descriptions given by the Minister and Acting Minister it will have to be a company limited by guarantee. So far we have heard of a private company, then a foundation, then a statutory corporation and now the body is to be perhaps a company limited by guarantee.
If the AWTA is to be taken over by such a company it may not have to pay tax. But who will own the company and where will the proceeds go? The Wool Corporation will sell the assets to, say, a company or a body corporate which will last for an instant if the second company comes along. The Wool Corporation will get the proceeds. But then someone has to pay for the second company-if it comes along. If the Wool Corporation is to have a share-the Minister virtually said that it will-it then has to buy the thing it has just sold. If other people are expected to be cobuyers-let us say the wool council, wool brokers or fellmongers-where will they get the money from and why would they put the money in if they will not get a return on their money? We do not even know whether they are being consulted. The whole thing is ridiculous. The Government cannot have it both ways.

3192 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BUNGEY (Canning) (9.53)-I rise to support the views of the honourble member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin). I am pleased that he is supporting my views. 1 was proposing to oppose the clauses mentioned. I circulated my notice of this much earlier in the day than did the honourable member. I oppose this part of the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill for several reasons. It has been put to me on several occasions that the 350 decisions of the Review of Commonwealth Functions are one parcel. I do not agree with that. I do not agree that if one buys 350 eggs and one of them is bad one has to consume the whole 350 eggs. This is one bad decision amongst those 350 decisions. Let me emphasise in speaking against this decision that I support the rest of the package. But I maintain that this is a bad decision in that package of 350 decisions.
I disagree with Part IV on several basic grounds. It has always been a policy of the coalition parties as far as I am concerned that in dealings with industry, particularly primary industry, there is consultation before decision. There was not adequate consultation before decision or before the announcement of the decision to sell the Australian Wool Testing Authority or the Australian wool stores. We have always maintained this policy. Generally, within the platform of the Liberal Party, there is a provision that we have to meet two basic criteria when looking at rural marketing and statutory and orderly marketing organisations. Firstly, we should look to see that the interests of consumers and producers are protected and, secondly, we have to see that we have full consultation and co-operation with the industry involved. In both ways this decision abrogates those basic criteria that are written into our platform. I understand that the platform of our partners in the coalition has similar provisions with regard to the consultation, discussion and agreement with industry before a decision is made. I think we have only to look at some of the provisions of this legislation to realise the way in which consultation was effected. At least three times in the clauses that we are now opposing it is stated 'and shall, if so directed by the Minister'. That is far from consultation in any way with the industry.
I can assure honourable members that there was no consultation-I have checked on this very closely-with the Australian Wool Council, which has followed on from the Australian Wool Industry Conference. There was very little, if any, discussion with the Australian Wool Corporation.

There may have been some perfunctory discussion with the chairman of that Corporation but certainly not with the Corporation itself. Any discussion that has taken place with these two bodies has been in the light of the decision-not by way of reaching the decision. For that reason I cannot condone the way in which this procedure has been conducted.
An amendment has changed the way in which the decision has been promulgated. Firstly we had a decision to sell to private enterprise; now it is to be transferred in some way or another to some foundation or the like. The matter is still very unclear indeed. There is very great opposition from a number of sectors in the industry. In a previous speech I referred to opposition from the International Wool Textile Organisation. I pointed to objections from the Government in India. I pointed to the objection from the Australian Wool Testing Authority. That Authority represents all sections of the industry at the moment. Those bodies genuinely agreed that the move was not desirable or necessary. I refer to a recent Press release issued by the Australian Wool Corporation on 22 May. I quote one section of the statement. It reads:
'At this stage of the examination I can say that all alternatives would result in an increase in costs to the industry with no discernable benefit to it,' . . .
That statement was made by the Chairman of the Corporation, Mr David Asimus. I seek leave of the Committee to incorporate in Hansard the Press release of 22 May of the Australian Wool Corporation.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
Press statement 22 May 1981
Wool Corporation opposes decision to sell AWTA.
At its first meeting since the announcement of the Government's decision to sell the Australian Wool Testing Authority, the Australian Wool Corporation today declared its opposition to the Government proposal.
The Chairman of the Corporation, Mr David Asimus, said after the meeting that, as a result of the Government decision, Corporation management and consultants had been working since early this month on alternatives concerning the sale of AWTA and establishment of a successor.
'At this stage of the examination I can say that all alternatives would result in an increase in costs to the industry with no discernible benefit to it,' Mr Asimus said.
'Even a structure similar to that of the existing AWTA, with similar industry representation, could well involve significant additional cost.
'For a new organisation to fund such extra costs as well as instalments of asset transfer payments to the corporation, wool testing charges would have to be increased annually to a much greater extent than would otherwise be the case.'

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3193

Mr Asimus said that as soon as the corporation studies were sufficiently detailed they would be discussed with the wool industry and the Government.
Mr BUNGEY-I thank the Committee. Similarly we have had a number of representations from farmer organisations and the Wool Council which indicate that there has been no consultation, no agreement, with those bodies. Those bodies are still opposed to the sale of the AWTA. I ask leave to incorporate in Hansard the telegram I received from Mr J. D. S. O'Connell, the president of the wool section of the Primary Industry Association of Western Australia.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows~
M.H.Bungey 18 JullSt Armadale (18)
Request you to correct serious Government error by razor gang in proposing sale of grower owned assets in AWTA and Wool Stores by appropriate amendments to the forthcoming legislation. Government costs may well increase with the necessary bigger role for Australian Wool Measurements Standards Authority (the section of Department of Primary Industry which regulates all wool testing in Australia) needed to maintain legal status of test certificates. We strongly support Wool Council of Australia in its opposition to this legislation. Request you to inform A. J. Layton, Primary Industry Association of Australia by telegram or telephone (09) 3252933 or telex AA93465 of Government reason for proceeding with this action against total industry opposition.
J. D. S. O'CONNELL, President, Wool Section PIA
Mr BUNGEY-I thank the Committee. In a number of questions put before the House and in telegrams to the Minister for Primary Industry and the Acting Minister for Primary Industry I have been attempting to find out what costs will result to the wool industry and wool users from this decision and what benefits will accrue. In the replies that I have received-where I have received replies-I have found nothing to convince me that there will be savings in any way to wool growers or to the Government. In fact, it is quite clear-it was referred to by the previous speaker, the honourable member for Werriwathat the Hill Samuel independent report commissioned by the Australian Wool Corporation indicated that the costs of the operations of the Testing Authority will increase by at least 15 per cent by virtue of this change. That is undesirable. We can compare it with the fact that charges for services rendered by the Australian Wool Testing Authority, which have been its sole method of financing, have not increased by more than 3 per cent over the past 10 years. Admittedly, I believe that some increase, divorced from this decision, brought about by cost and wage increases is in train at the moment.

Let me emphasise clearly that there is no cost to the Government in any way, and there will be no saving on the current operation of the Authority. There will be no saving in capital or operating costs in any way by effecting a sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. No public servants are involved and there is no cost to the Commonwealth in capital or operating costs. As I see it, this is an unnecessary dictation to the wool growers, who have taken a very realistic and proper attitude to many other aspects of their industry. For instance, they contribute quitesignificantly to promotion of the industry, both within Australia and overseas. They contribute to research within their industry and for their industry, both at the producer level and in the textile industry. They also make a significant contribution towards the market support policies and practices within the wool industry. The wool growers have already been called upon and have met the challenge to service their industry without recourse to Government aid. It seems to me an unnecessary dictation to require the sale of the functions which have been provided, serviced and paid for by the wool growers. I can in no way support the sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority or a direction to the Australian Wool Corporation to dispose of certain assets in the way of wool stores.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (10.2)-1 wish to make a few brief remarks. We face a serious situation in what is happening to the Australian Wool Testing Authority. It will be the thin edge of the wedge for primary industry in this country if the kinds of principles which are being ruthlessly applied throughout this nation, led by the so called small government lobby, are allowed to continue. I can imagine what will happen if all this deregulation is applied in the primary industry area. Deregulation in this area will result in a complete destruction of the orderly marketing arrangements for primary industry goods in this country.
The honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey) made some important points about the Wool Testing Authority. He said that there is absolutely no reason to sell this Authority. It is simply a move based on ideology, not on common sense or economics. It is an attempt to prove in some ridiculous way to a small group of Liberal back benchers how tough the Government is going to be. Members of the National Country Party can now stand up and be counted, if they want to, on the question of whether they really protect the interests of farmers, especially small farmers.
Mr Ian Robinson-We know where you stand. We know what your views are.

3194 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

Dr THEOPHANOUS-The Australian Labor Party supports the Australian Wool Testing Authority and we support primary industry. 1 conclude my remarks by saying that the primary producers of this country, and all those people involved in the wool industry to whom the honourable member for Canning referred, will be looking to see how members of the National Country Party vote. Let us see whether they have any backbone. Let us see whether they have any principles. Let us see whether they will vote against this Part.
Mr BURR (Wilmot) (1O.5)-ln the interests of time, I do not intend to speak to this Part of the Bill. 1 seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the terms of a motion passed by the Wilmot Electorate Council of the Liberal Party and a telegram setting out the terms of a motion passed by the Wool Council of the Tasmaniah Farmers and Graziers Association.
Leave granted.
The documents read as follows-
Motion LIBERAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA WILMOT ELECTORATE COUNCIL
GENERAL MEETING May91981
CAMPBELLTOWN That this Council, whilst supporting in general terms the thrust of the Lynch Committee towards smaller government, views with the utmost concern the proposal of that Committee to sell the Australian Wool Testing Authority to the private sector as that proposal:
(a) is not consistent with the stated objective of the Committpe;
(b) seriously jeopardises the standard making mechanism under which the Australian and the entire world wool trade is conducted;
(c) will lead to increased testing costs to growers.
Telegram 13th May 1981
To: Mr M. A. Burr, M.P., C/o Parliament House, Canberra
From: K. D. Von Bibra, Chairman, Wool Council of TFGA
The Wool Commodity Group of the Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association, held its annual conference in Campbelltown on 7th May 1981. While supporting the principle of reducing public expenditure for inflation control, the Wool Commodity Group are adamant that the Australian Wool Testing Authority be retained in its present form.
The following resolutions were unanimously carried by the conference:
(I) That this annual conference of the Wool Council of TFGA completely rejects any suggestion that the Australian Wool Testing Authority be sold. It is quite unacceptableto this conference that the Federal Government should suggest major policy changes affecting the wool industry without prior consultation with the Wool Council of Australia.

(2) This conference expresses its full support and confidence in the operations of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. Such support and confidence, it is noted, has also been expressed by the recent annual meeting of the International Wool Textile Organisation in New Zealand.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (10.6)-1 wish to reiterate a number of things that have been said by my colleague the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). He has made it perfectly clear that the matter of wool testing will be determined by the Minister in consultation with the Australian Wool Corporation. I remind those in the chamber who have expressed concern about this measure, and I direct this response in particular to my colleague the honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey), who expressed concern about the lack of consultation, that the decision will be taken and the final shape of the new arrangement determined after full consultation between the Government and the Wool Corporation. I would have hoped that the statement made on 15 May by the Minister for Primary Industry and the responses of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Acting Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Sinclair) would also have indicated the complete bona fides of the Government so far as the Australian Wool Testing Authority is concerned.
We believe that the establishment of a special foundation to continue the present functions of the Australian Wool Testing Authority will prove to be the most appropriate way in which to deal with this issue. There can be no question of in any way diminishing or impugning the reliability of the certificates that have been issued by the Authority. I repeat the assurance given on 15 May by my colleague the Minister for Primary Industry that there will be total consultation and that a final decision will be made by the Wool Corporation in consultation with the Minister.
Mr BUNGEY (Canning) (10.7)-Mr Deputy Chairman, may I ask a question of the Treasurer?
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. Charles Jones)-The honourable member may ask a question. Whether the Treasurer cares to answer is a matter for him.
Mr BUNGEY-In view of the uncertainty here, and the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has indicated the Government's uncertainty, is he prepared to withold this portion of the legislation until such time as things are clearer and more obvious?
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (10.8)-The nature of the legislation contemplates that the final decision regarding the sale of wool testing facilities has yet to be made. I should

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3195

have thought that if the legislation, and particularly clause 115, were read very carefully, it would be seen that it has been drawn having regard to the situation outlined by the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) in his statement of 15 May.
In the event of the final decision by the Government-the Minister has indicated that it will be after consultation with the industrybeing in a particular direction, the legislation will
facilitate the implementation of that decision. In
those circumstances, whilst I fully respect the views expressed by the honourable member for
Canning, it seems to me that the sensible course of
action is to proceed with the clause as it stands in
the Bill.

Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (10.9)-What the
Treasurer (Mr Howard) has said is right in a way. The legislation is wide; it provides no details. Vir-
tually everything is left to the Minister. This mat-
ter will be resolved behind closed doors. That might be called consultation but, as it is, and as it
has been for the last month or so, nobody knows exactly what the Government is doing. Essen-
tially, the legislation is a contrivance to save face.

Question put:

That Part IV be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Hon. Charles Jones)

Ayes

59

Noes

46

Majority

13

AYES
Adermannl A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown1N.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, O. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Millar, P. C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L.
Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,!. Mce. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomsonl D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cass,M. H.
Charles, D. E. Child,J.
Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J.
Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke,R.J.L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L.

NOES

Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E. Jacohi,R. Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. McLeay, Leo
McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morrison, 'V. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis,L.G.
West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Viner,R.I. Nixofl,D.J.

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J. Scott, J. L. Klugman, R. E.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Clauses 122 to 147-by leave-taken together.

Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (10.18) -Part V of the Bill deals with bankruptcy. I want to make a few brief comments putting the Opposition's case. We are very much opposed to this
Part because we feel the Government is introduc-
ing some retrograde steps by encouraging the private sector to take over this area of investigation.
A member of the accounting firm of Hungerford,
Hancock and Offner has been appointed a member of a joint management review team to re-
view the operations of the Official Receiver sec-
tion of the Corporate Affairs Division of the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs. This
Part of the Bill implements the findings of that re-
view team in as much as it facilitates the appointment of ,public accountants to do insolvency
work. The Opposition is aware-I presume the
Government is, although it has not made it very public knowledge-that the proposals which the
Government is now suggesting are almost identical to those outlined in a Green Paper introduced
by the United Kingdom Government in June 1980. This United Kingdom Green Paper invited
comments from the legal, accounting and com-
mercial interests to the proposition that what the Government is doing here should also be done in
England. I can tell honourable members that that
paper attracted trenchant criticism from all those professional areas-from the accounting pro-
fession and the legal profession in Britain. They
saw the pitfalls that that would have introduced in Britain. This is the same type of legislation the
Government is trying to introduce here.

3196 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

This Government introduced these amendments without any reference to the community interests at all. There was no reference of the matter to the accountancy profession or the legal profession to seek opinions of their members as to what they would do. The only information that these sections of interest might have had would have been in the form of two Press releases, one on 31 December 1980 which made some reference to outside trustees and the other on 30 April 1981 which concerned the razor gang statement. Tbat Press release made a reference to the Government's intention to contract out the Government's bankruptcy work. Neither of those could be described as giving the legal profession, the accountancy profession or the business community full information or an opportunity to comment on the Government's proposals.
I will not take up any more of the time of the House. I merely tell the Government that we on this side of the House do not accept these proposals. We will be opposing this Part of the Bill. This Bill when introduced into the House included recommendations by the Committee, one of the members of which was a member of the accounting firm of Hungerford, Hancock and Offner. The object of the proposals was to get the Government out of bankruptcy work and to get private enterprise into bankruptcy work. On the very day the Bill was introduced, 10 and behold, an advertisement appeared in the Sydney Morning Herald. It was an advertisement on behalf of Hungerford, Hancock and Offner seeking a person to join that company's Sydney insolvency section. It stated that the applicant should ideally have had one to three years' experience in a professional office. Insolvency experience was not a firm prerequisite. It continued that the main areas of activity would include receiverships, liquidations, schemes of arrangements and financial investigations, et cetera. It seems to me an incredible coincidence that the company which recommended these changes that the Government should be contracting this work out to private enterprise should, on the day the Bill was introduced, be advertising for more staff. I do not think I am particularly suspicious, but I point out what a rare coincidence that is. Can we be blamed for thinking that that firm might have had some inside information on what the Government. proposed to do?
This legislation is a retrograde step. This Government has a responsibility to the business community and to help the people who have suffered desperately as a result of bankruptcies. I think it is fair to say that the only industry in Australia that has grown under this Government

has been the bankruptcy industry. The number of bankruptcies has increased unbelievably. It seems to be a very retrograde step for the Government to be abrogating its responsibility to protect the business community and those people who have suffered desperately because of bankruptcies by handing this sector over to private enterprise. We firmly oppose these amendments. To facilitate the passage of this legislation we will not seek to divide the Committee.
Clauses agreed to.
Clauses 148 to ISS-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Proposed new clause ISSA.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (10.2S)-by leave-I move:
(1) Page 42, after clause 155, insert the following new clause:
"155A. Section 19 of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975 is amended by inserting after paragraph (2) (c) the fol1owing paragraph:
'lea) Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Division; and'.".
(2) Schedule 2, page 72, proposed amendments to the Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act 1971, after
"Paragraph 51 (3) (b) . . . Omit 'Compensation' " insert:
". . . After section 54 insert the following new section:
'54A. The Commissioner shall determine a claim for compensation as soon as practicable but in any case within 120 days oflodgement of the claim.' ".
(3) Schedule 2, page 74, proposed amendments to the Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act 1971, after proposed section 65, insert:
Retention of Appeals to Prescribed Courts " '66. Notwithstanding the amendment of this Act by
the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Aet 1981, where no application is made to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for a review of a determination in accordance with this Part, an application may be made to a prescribed court for a review of the determination in accordance with this Part as if this Act had not been amended by that Act.' ".
Part VI of the Bill deals with the Commonwealth Employees (Compensation) Act. The Bill seeks to amend over 24 Acts. It is no wonder that the Committee is in confusion and there is delay in relation to this legislation. There are more clauses of the Bill to be considered. The amendments moved by the Opposition are intended to improve the legislation. Reports have been given to the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) which clearly indicate that in the area of workers compensation there are inordinate delays in dealing with people who are injured at work. Honourable members will appreciate that those people are entitled to receive speedy compensation. I am advised that death claims at the present time take from 18 months to two years to be dealt with.

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3197

Rather simple claims, such as a loss of hearing, can take from six months to 12 months to be dealt with. The report that was prepared by the Administrative Review Council states that 50 per cent of cases are taking in excess of five months to be dealt with and some are taking up to two years. My second amendment states:
The Commissioner shall determine a claim for compensation as soon as practicable but in any case within 120 days of lodgement of the claim.
Another amendment to the present Act will allow for appeals to be made to what are called prescribed courts as an alternative to what is now proposed, which is that appeals will have to be heard by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. Those practising in the profession and those who are well aware of the difficulties are anxious to retain the present position whereby an appeal can be made to a prescribed court. In New Soulh Wales, for example, appeals can be heard by the Workers' Compensation Commission of New South Wales. In support of that proposal I point out that one can see that the litigants will have much more confidence if they know their case is to be heard by a judge who has the experience of dealing with matters of that type. I see no reason why-it would be regressive to do so-we should remove the right of Commonwealth employees to have their appeals heard in this manner. In a nutshell those are the reasons why we think it is important to retain existing rights, and amendments have been moved accordingly. The amendments that have been moved are also designed to speed up the procedure and to make it mandatory that the decisions be given by the Commissioner within a period of 120 days.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (IO.28)-Perhaps I can briefly indicate to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) why the Government feels unable to support the amendments that he has moved. I appreciate that they have been moved by the Opposition out of a concern to maintain certain principles. The first amendment would have the effect, as I understand it, of setting up separate divisions of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. The Administrative Review Council report which was tabled on 2 June opposed that approach. I gather that the main reason for that opposition was that it would, if implemented, limit the flexibility of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in assigning judges between panels. The whole purpose of a number of these amendments is to increase the level of flexibility.

determining claims is attractive-I can understand why the Deputy Leader of the Opposition suggests that I point out that medical reports often take a good deal of time to be obtained. It is often in the interests of an appellant, quite apart from any question of administrative delay, that those reports are available. They will often strengthen his or her case. I am not immediately aware that such an amendment is necessarily in the interests of social security and compensation of appellants. Incidently, the transfer of appeals to the AAT does bring it under the Ombudsman who can investigate delays. I think that provides for a more flexible approach.
The third amendment, which is to allow appeals to the courts as well as to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, goes against the direction of the Bill, which is to have one avenue of appeal. Once again, this is not just something that was divined by the Government. It follows the recommendation of the Administrative Review Council. We think it is desirable and in the interests of the achievement of a speedy resolution of the appeals, and the avoiding of the confusion of conflicting judgments and jurisdictions, to adopt this approach. As I have said, whilst I understand completely the motives of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition in moving these amendments and respect the views he has put, for the reasons I have outlined the Government is not able to accede to them.
Amendments negatived.
Remainder of the Bill-by leave-taken as a whole.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (10.32)-1 want to mention briefly clauses 234 and 235, which repeal those Acts which give life to the Prices Justification Tribunal. The Opposition vehemently opposes the stupid action of repealing those Acts. I will have rnore to say about this retrograde step when the Petroleum Products Pricing Bill 1981 is before the chamber, I hope tomorrow. I have a feeling that, because of the way in which the Government has mismanaged the business of this chamber and is forcing legislation through this Parliament, we will have to deal with it tonight. I will be giving reasons why the Opposition vehemently opposes the repeal of those Acts which gives life to the Prices Justification Tribunal. Once again, because we have amendments to move concerning the Petroleum Products Pricing Bill we will not press this matter to a vote at this stage.

Whilst on the surface an amendment putting a Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) time limit on the Compensation Commissioner (10.34) -As we are dealing with the remainder

3198 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Bill

of the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill I wish to indicate that I have an objection to clause 212, which states:
The Legislative Drafting Institute Act 1974 is repealed.
The Opposition opposes that repeal. If ever we needed something we need parliamentary counsel and the ability to train them. Honourable members can see the mess in which this Government is at present, apart from other difficulties, in putting through legislation in time. The Institute was a training ground for people to become qualified parliamentary draftsmen or parliamentary counsel. Doing away with this body is not helping this Parliament or the training of draftsmen. Are we to understand that in future these people will be trained somewhere else and that we will try to hire them after they are trained? Does this Government think that it will save money by doing that? Is it not more effective to have the people who eventually will be senior counsel in the drafting area trained in the sphere appropriate for this Parliament?
It is important that we place on record our dismay that legislation which we were able to introduce in 1974 is now being repealed on the basis that it will be cost saving. Like everything else this Government has done in this area it will find that because of its hiving off of its trained personnel or its ability to train them it will have to recruit such people from somewhere else at double the cost. It is a very short-sighted measure which affects the careers of people who relied on having a future in this area. The Opposition vigorously opposes clause 212.
Remainder of Bill agreed to.
Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment.
Adoption of Report
Motion (by Mr Howard) proposed:
That the report be adopted.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (lO.35)-The Opposition opposes the adoption of the report but because of the time factor we do not wish to have a division.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Report adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Howard)-by leaveread a third time.

INCOME TAX (ASSESSMENT AND RATES) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 27 May, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (10.36)-1 move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing the second reading of this Bill, the House notes that:
(a) because a tax indexation factor of only 3.8 per cent has been applied, all taxpayers whose incomes in 1981-82 will be more than 3.8 per cent above their 1980-81 incomes and whose circumstances do not otherwise alter, will be paying a higher proportion of that income in income tax in 1981-82 than in 1980-81;
(b) such an increase in the burden of income tax continues the pattern of an increasing income tax burden during the Fraser Government's term of office, and
(c) such developments are in stark contrast to the Government's continual attempts to portray itself as a low tax party,
and accordingly deplores the Government's action in abolishing tax indexation altogether for future years, which indicates its clear intention to make full use of the secret tax of inflation'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Hurford-I second the amendment.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
Clauses 1 to 27-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 28 (Indexation).
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (10.38)-Clause 28 deals with the abolition of indexation from the tax system. Because of the time factor I do not wish to repeat the arguments that I made in my speech in the second reading debate. The indexation which is being abolished by clause 28 relates to dependants allowances and allowances for a sale parent and for a housekeeper. Indexation for these allowances is, of course, part of the overall process of indexation. It is important not only that the Schedule be indexed but also that the allowances be indexed. I rise simply to register our protest at the abolition of indexation in respect of dependants allowances and the other allowances dealt with in this clause.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (lO.39)-In the context of the consideration of this clause I would'like to emphasise two things. Firstly, the election promise of the Prime Minister

Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3199

(Mr Malcolm Fraser) in his last policy speech has been implemented in full by this Government so far as half indexation of tax is concerned. It is important when we are talking about commitments to indexation to state the very obvious proposition that if the Government is elected on a particular program and a particular commitment in this area it is relevant to accept that when the commitments made in the policy speech that have led up to that election have been discharged claims of broken promises and broken undertakings in the general area to which those commitments relate are without foundation. The commitment on which this Government was fe-elected, so far as half indexation is concerned, was to have a $500m tax deduction on 1 July. The very Bill we are debating-the Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Bill-gives effect to that. I make it quite clear that any suggestions that commitments in the last policy speech on this subject have been breached are without any foundation.
Secondly, there are arguments for and against tax indexation which I, and the Government, acknowledge. There are advantages in tax indexation, but the Government has come to the conclusion, after balancing the arguments for and against, that a system of discretionary tax reductions is preferable. Obviously the honourable member for Gellibrand is right in saying we can have half or full indexation and also discretionary tax cuts but I think he would agree that if we have a system of automatic indexation the capacity for discretionary tax cuts is reduced. I think that is elementary. It does not follow that through the abolition of automatic tax indexation, or half indexation, the quantum of tax cuts will be the less. Indeed, some people have argued that the abolition of tax indexation implies that in the future governments of either pursuasion will be under greater pressure than they have been in the past to give a greater degree of discretionary tax reductions.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (10.41)-1 would like to make a few comments on the abolition of tax indexation. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) has sought to justify the Government's decision on the ground that because the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) made a promise the Government will continue with indexation this year and it will then be abolished. In 1975, the Prime minister promised:
We will reduce the tax burden, we will put an end to Labor's tax rip off.
We will fully index personal income tax for inflation over three years . . . It will make Governmen t more honest with your money. They will no longer be able to rely on the secret tax of inflation.

However, here we are in 1981 debating the Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Bill, which is designed to eliminate tax indexation. The Treasurer did say that the Prime Minister had promised full indexation and had honoured that promise to the extent that half indexation had been reached. After six years he nearly got there but now we are heading fast back to where we started. All that huff and puff we have had for six years has amounted to nothing.
Mr Ruddock-It was relevant to reduce inflation.
Mr CUNNINGHAM-I think it can be clearly indicated that inflation is on the rise again. There is no doubt about that. Under the old 1977 policies we would be going to full tax indexation to arrest the situation, but we are going the opposite way. So much for the Prime Minister's promise. It is just like the one we finished with a while ago. Today's Sydney Morning Herald had an interesting table headed 'Poor Man's Guide to Higher Taxes'. Mr David Collins, a lecturer in economics at Macquarie University, clearly indicated in that table where tax indexation has been going under the Fraser Government. The $1.50 a week tax cut proposed in this Bill will be more like a 95c tax cut for most people. The table shows that the single taxpayer who begins the new financial year on the average earnings of $15,000 will actually pay $480 more than in the previous year. The proportion of his income lost in tax will rise from 23.3 per cent to 23.9 per cent. So, the Government'~ promise of half tax indexation, about which the Treasurer spoke before, has become effectively only 35 per cent indexation. The promise of half indexation actually turns out to be a promise of 35 per cent indexation, which turns out to be a promise that it will last for 12 months, which in turn turns out to be a promise that the Government did not intend to keep indexation going anyway. So much for this Government's approach to taxation and tax concessions.
Under the Bill, in the next 12 months, those people in the higher brackets of income rio doubt will be better off than those on lower incomes. The figures for assessable incomes show that between 1976-77 and 1981-82 the average tax for those on the lower incomes increased. For those on $9,000 a year it increased by 1.2 per cent but for those in the higher brackets of $30,000 a year and upwards it declined by from 1.6 per cent to 3 per cent. Everything this Government seems to do in taxation is designed to shift the wealth from the poor to the very wealthy. Of course, that is very much in tune with what the Fraser Government has been about for the last five or six years. This

3200 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Bill

Bill, along with many others, provides another op-
portunity for the Fraser Government to shift the wealth of the country from those who can least
afford to pay to those who can afford to pay greater taxation. The excuse for that is that if
people are given the opportunity to spend their own money then it will be spent more wisely than if the Government collects the just tax that these
people should be paying. The Opposition disagrees with that philosophy. This Government has backed off from tax indexation. It has been promising lower taxes and lower Government
spending, but we all know that this year Government revenue is up 16.2 per cent on last year. All the spending cuts appear to be in rhetoric more than anything else, yet this Government is only too efficient at giving tax concessions to those who need them least. From the evidence of this week, some of the promises which the Prime Minister has made and which the Treasurer has defended have been honoured and some people are very lucky in that they will get rather large tax concessions whilst other people will miss out; they

will get 95c a week, under 35 per cent tax indexation. Eventually, at the end of the 12 months, the promises will disappear altogether and people can expect to be paying increased taxes. What were the words used? The Prime Minister said that, after 12 months, indexation would make this Government more honest with the people's money and the people would be able to rely on the Government having no secret tax increases because of inflation.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (1O.47)-Iust to highlight the excellent points made by the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham), I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the table from today's Sydney Morning Herald to which he drew attention. The source of that table is Mr D. I. Collins of the Macquarie University. I have shown the table to the Treasurer (Mr Howard). I would like it in the record so that many can see just how iniquitous what is being perpetrated on the Australian public in the guise of a tax reduction is.
Leave granted. The table read as follows-

Assessable income 1976-77

Assessable
income 1981-82

Average
tax rate 1976-77

Average tax rate 1981-82

Difference

Effective tax
indexation

$ 4,000 5,000
7,000 9,000
10,000 14,000 18,000 20,000
30,000 50,000

$ 6,349 7,937
11,111 14,286 15,873
22,222 28,571 31,746 47,619 79,365

percent 7.8
11.6 17.6 21.4 22.8 28.2 32.5
34.8 43.0 51.8

percent 10.9 15.1
19.9 22.6 23.5
28.7 32.5
33.9 41.4 48.8

percent
+3.1 +3.5 +2.3 + 1.2
+0.7
+0..5.
-0.9
-1.6 -3.0

percent
62 57 64 84
90 95 100
109 120 161

Source: Mr D. J. Collins, Macquarie University. Assumes inflation rate between 1976-77 and 1981-82 of 58.7 per cent. Taxpayer with no dependant rebates and no family allowance.

Clause agreed to. Clauses 29 to 34-by leave-taken together, and agreed to. Clause 35 (Indexation). Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (10.49) -There is no way at all in which the Opposition would be prepared to join the conspiracy of deceit on the part of the Government in connection with the abolition of tax indexation at the end of the coming financial year. This clause would be the most important clause in the Bill as far as the great mass of Australian people are concerned. In view of the type of deceit that is and has been associated with the application of tax indexation

in Australia, we should look at the unhappy history of this concept. The honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) referred to the fact that undertakings were given prior to the election in 1975. I would accept that during the period which has elapsed, particularly in view of the fact that two elections have taken place, it would be unreasonable to hold a government to promises which were made at that time. Promises have been made subsequently and I would like to deal with them. In the first instance, the undertaking made prior to the election in 1975 was based on terms of this kind:

Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3201

Tax indexation is not only a social reform of immense importance but is also designed to encourage consumer spending. It will also make governments more honest with taxpayers'money.

mental mechanics that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is engaged in because the statement that the Treasurer made immediately fol-

We have become increasingly aware of statements of that kind since 1975; particularly, we have become aware of statements of that kind immediately prior to elections.

lowing the announcement of changes in the health insurance scheme indicates that in fact he is being affected by the same mental mechanics that have afflicted the Prime Minister. Prior to the last election the Prime Minister said that from 1 July half

It has been said that without tax indexation taxtax indexation would apply which would cost the

ation then becomes tax by stealth as a result of Government during the first year something like

inflation forcing income earners into higher tax- $500m. It is reasonable for the Australian people

ation brackets. The people of Australia were left to expect, as they did expect, that as a result of

with the impression following an undertaking that statement made prior to an election the

made prior to the election of 1975 that full tax undertaking would not apply just for 12 months-

indexation would be applied. The deceit started the Treasurer knows that-but would apply for

then. In fact, it was not full indexation. The actual the term of the Parliament. At the time that state-

index adopted was one which was discounted for ment was made the Treasurer came into this

indirect taxes. The deceit grew as the concept was chamber and used certain terms quite delibera-

referred to on subsequent occasions. During tely. He knows that the undertaking was deliber-

1977-78 supposed full tax indexation was conate and he knows that he was part of that deceit.

tinued. The consumer price index was again disHe tried to justify that decision. I genuinely

counted for indirect tax. However, added to the appeal to the Treasurer not to participate in that

list were the effects of devaluation and changes in sort of chicanery because the Prime Minister-I

the health insurance arrangements. So the disam not going to use the term-is becoming

counting component of the index was gradually increasingly referred to by millions of Australians

increased and the value of the index was continuas compounding lie after lie after lie. If I were per-

ally reduced. So the undertaking given prior to the mitted to use blunt and accurate terms of that

election in 1975 was increasingly dishonoured, kind in this chamber I would do so.

even during the first two years of the application of that undertaking.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! The honourable member might moderate

Indexation was abandoned in 1978-79. During his language a bit, otherwise he would reflect on a

that year, of course, tax scales were increased as member of this place and his remarks would be

well. Indexation was resumed in 1979-80. Again out of order.

deceit was associated with this measure. Discounting not only took into account indirect taxes, which were part of the Government's policy, but also things such as devaluation and the effect of import parity pricing. An index of only 6.5 per cent was applied at a time when the CPI for the March to March year was 7.9 per cent.

Mr ROBERT BROWN-I certainly will. I would like to read to the Committee the terms used by the Treasurer. The Treasurer will recall what he said. The Treasurer stated:
The Government has now decided that discretionary adjustments to taxation scales and allowances are preferable to tax indexation.

Half tax indexation with discounting was applied again in 1980-81. This year half tax indexation will apply. I think it is reasonable for the electorate to expect that when a clear undertaking is given, as quite clearly an undertaking was given,

That is okay so far. He went on:
However, the Government is conscious of the precise terms--
Let me emphasise that. The Treasurer stated:

to apply half indexation from 1 July 1981 that However, the Government is conscious of the precise terms

that is what would be applied. In fact discounting has been introduced again. The CPI increase for the March to March year was 9.9 per cent. After

of what was said in the Prime Minister's policy speech and accordingly I will confirm that half-tax indexation will apply from I July next, thus providing in full the benefit of some $500m foreshadowed in that speech.

discounting the figure becomes 7.6 per cent and the index applied is 3.8 per cent.

The Treasurer in effect went on: 'However, after 1 July-after we have honoured that commitment

Tax indexation is to be abandoned altogether at made prior to the election which gave the elector-

the end of this financial year. I think it is very ate the impression that it would continue for the

interesting to look at the precise words that are term of the Parliament; after we have honoured

being used in connection with this decision. I the words used in the statement, at the end of that

would suggest to the Treasurer (Mr Howard) that 12 months-the taxpayer will cop it in the neck'.

he not allow himself to be influenced by the sort of The Treasurer went on:

3202 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Petroleum Products Pricing Bill

However, that tax indexation adjustment will be the last indexation adjustment.
So we have had a continuation of the deceit which has been practised by the Prime Minister in connection with so many of the undertakings that have been given. The Prime Minister, of course, was quite blunt about the reason why tax indexation was going to be abandoned. The Prime Minister is on record as having said that the reason why tax indexation was going to be abandoned was that it was not obvious to the electorate, that the taxpayers. did not understand it, that a government got no credit or kudos for it. It is quite obvious that as far as this Government is concerned taxation policy will not be determined on the basis of rational economic policy and management. As far as the Prime Minister and this Government are concerned, taxation policy, as all the other areas of economic policy, will be used for cheap politicking, for meeting electoral bribes and will not be used to achieve the type of purposes that we should expect economic policy and sane and rational economic management to achieve.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Clause agreed to. Remainder of the Bill-by leave-taken as a whole, and agreed to. Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Howard)-by leaveread a third time.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PRICING BILL 1981
Second Reading Debate resumed from 27 May, on motion by MrMoore:
The the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (11.1)-1 think it is ridiculous that at this late hour-after 11 o'clock-we are commencing debate on a most important Bill. It is just another example of how the business of this House is being mismanaged and how inadequate attention is being given to important legislation. I repeat that debate on the Petroleum Products Pricing Bill is commencing after 11 o'clock with the expectation that we will be here until at least 1 0 'clock in the morning. We were here until 2 o'clock this morning and 3 o'clock the morning before. This Bill now before the House bears all the characteristics of the Government-ad hoc decision making, inconsistent attitudes and the projection of a facade of

concern, while proceeding unashamedly to abdicate its responsibility to govern.
The purpose of the Bill is to establish an authority to monitor petroleum products prices but the authority will have virtually no independence, low status and limited powers and resources. As long as this Government remains in office, and unless the amendment I shall move, is passed, the authority will be subject to interference by a Minister who has no commitment to its existence or fundamental purpose. The authority is to replace the functions in respect of the petroleum products industry previously conferred on the Prices Justification Tribunal. This Government has abolished the Tribunal. The Opposition is totally opposed to the abolition of the PJT. We regard the Bill before the House as a lame attempt to placate legitimate public concern about petroleum prices and concern among service station proprietors in Australia regarding the pricing practices of the major oil companies. We in the Labor Opposition believe, having been convinced by the recommendations of the Collins royal commission into the petroleum industry, that the authority should go further than is envisaged in this Bill. The amendment to the second reading which I shall move on behalf of the Opposition sets out our attitude succinctly. I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a veiw to substituting the following words:
'the House is of the opinion that(1) the Bill should be withdrawn and redrafted to
extend the role of the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority to that of an independent regulatory agency for the petroleum and petroleum products industries as recommended by the 4th Report-of the Royal Commission on Petroleum (the Collins Report), with functions to include:
(a) restructuring, monitoring and regulating the pricing system;
(b) the rationalisation, where necessary, ofretail outlets;
(c) the regulation of dealer-company relationships, and
(d) the development of a conservation program, and
(2) the Government should be condemned for its decision to abolish the Prices Justification Tribunal which was carrying out the functions of the proposed Petroleum Products Pricing Authority and calls upon it to retain a reformed Tribunal for such purposes as the provision of effective powers to monitor and inquire into the justification of prices in all oil products and other goods exempted by this Bill'.
The concept of prices justification was introduced in Australia by the Labor Government in 1973. It involved the establishment of an independent body which could inquire into prices. and report whether they were justified. There was no compulsion on the companies to accept the findings of the Tribunal. We did not have those powers under

Petroleum Products Pricing Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3203

the Constitution. It was not a price control sysaccount doubts which surrounded the reasonable-

tem. However, the Tribunal found that many inness of the price charged by its overseas affiliate

dustries set prices in ways which do not follow the companies.

orthodox model of free market competition. On

many occasions the Tribunal's members found It is a well-established fact that oil companies

that prices were not justified. Within the limited have adjusted their main points of profit taking

scope of the Tribunal's power its work proved to over time, demonstrating clearly that discretion-

be effective in providing important information ary action rather than market forces can have a

on many industries relevant to Government polmajor impact on prices. These characteristics of

icy and in limiting the extent of price increases. In oligopoly-that is, just a few firms dominating the

1979-80 the PJT's rejection of 230 price increase market-market power and multinational domi-

applications led to a saving of $160m.

nation are by no means exclusive to the petroleum

The last inquiry into the prices of petroleum products, dated 31 March this year, found that an increase in the wholesale price of motor spirit of 0.25c per litre was justified whereas the companies sought increases of between 0.9 and 3.25c per litre. What the Tribunal allowed was an enormous saving over what the companies wanted. The Tribunal also found that an amount

industry. The Government, however reluctantly and half-heartedly, has acknowledged the validity of prices justification requirements in the case of the oil industry. Why has it not done so in the other industries which are oligopolisticdominated by just a few firms? It is utterly inconsistent that this Government does not similarly recognise the need in other industries.

is included in the list price of motor spirit which provides a return on investment in retail outlets. The Tribunal asserted that this should be removed. The Government decided on the basis of that recommendation from the Tribunal, that this would occur in January 1982. It is this intention, together with the intention to inquire into other areas in the petroleum products industry, which has led the Government to make an exception in this case and to provide a continuing legislative framework for inquiries into the justification of prices.

Let us look at the prima facie evidence in some of these other industries. I will mention just a couple of them. On the London Metal Exchange aluminium is selling at about $1,140 per tonne. In Australia the Camalco Ltd price-which is the same as with A1can Australia Ltd and other companies in that field-is $1,545 per tonne. That is no less than 405 more than the London Metal Exchange price. It is 35 per cent higher in Australia for a product for which Australians should have a decided comparative advantage. We do have that advantage as long as we are not

The fact that the Government has provided for dominated by overseas companies which take

this exception is open acknowledgement of the their profits with a lame government, such as the

validity of the prices justification concept. The one we have now, not putting up any opposition

petroleum products industry has certain characto the companies doing so.

teristics which suggest that fully competitive be-

haviour is unlikely. The petroleum industry is Another example is that of coffee. The 40 per

heavily concentrated. Through a variety of cent reduction in the price of raw coffee, which

refinery exchange agreements, substantial inteforms the bulk of the value of processed coffee,

gration of the operations of the companies and, has not been passed on to the Australian con-

hence, co-operative price setting is normal in the sumer in lower prices. I could cite many other

industry. It will become even more concentrated examples apart from those two. Over the past two

following the recent takeover of Golden Fleece or three years the Prices Justification Tribunal has

Petroleum by the Caltex company. Although I gathered substantial evidence to show, firstly, that

take this opportunity of welcoming the fact that in Australia there is an increasing trend among

Caltex has taken Australian shareholders into its firms to base their prices on a cost estimate which

shareholding, the majority of firms are multinaincorporates their expectations of inflation and

tional corporations which have about 83 per cent what they believe the price increase will be. This is

of the market. The industry has become highly a prescription for inflation itself. It is a guarantee

vertically integrated so that systems of transfer for inflation when the expectation of price in-

pricing are available to enable companies to take creases is added an input to the price of the pro-

their profits at any point that suits their interests, duct. Secondly, many firms are also pricing their

for example, oil production, or transportation, products in order to finance rapid expansion into

refining, wholesaling or retailing. For example, in export markets. The aluminium industry, which I

1974 the PJT adjusted the price increase claimed have just mentioned, is a case in point. Again, this

by the Shell Co of Australia Ltd taking into means that inflation is inevitable.

3204 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Petroleum Products PriCing Bill

Clearly, free market competition is not such as already moved to abolish the Prices Justifica-

ceeding in containing inflation. There is no true tion Tribunal in the last Bill before the Parlia-

competition. Profits are up; prices are up and ment. Of course, the Government is now setting

inflation is set to rebound again, yet the Governup a so-called authority which in practice will be

ment is reducing the means available to put some subject to the dictates of the Minister. The

brake on that inflation. The poor old ordinary Government deserves to be condemned for irres-

Australian consumer is taken to the cleaners. He ponsibily doing this.

is treated as a sucker by this Government which provides no means by which the consumer's interest can be examined and prices monitored on his behalf. It is utterly inconsistent that this Government does not similarly recognise the need for prices justification in other sectors as it does in the sector of the petroleum industry which we are looking at now. I will say more about the rationale for prices justification. I believe the reasons are quite clear but I will set them out again. Firstly, effective prices justification procedures are an essential ingredient in any wages-prices package of anti-inflationary policies. Acceptance by workers and their organisations of wage restraint must be premised on the understanding that price increases-which after all have the effect of reducing real wages-are subject to a degree of public accountability. After all the trade unions must

I turn to some of the specific feature of the Petroleum Products Pricing Bill now before the House. If the second reading amendment is defeated the Opposition intends to move amendments at the Committee stage to improve the Bill. I hear some moaning from the Government side. Why do honourable members opposite not sort out their own house and make sure they are not putting legislation through at this hour? I am prepared to come back next Thursday if need be. I am prepared to debate this sort of measure in the proper time-not after 11 o'clock at night. But I am not going to allow legislation of this sort to go through the Parliament in the dying hours of the sitting without having a say on it on behalf of hundreds of thousands of Australians who agree with the sort of points I am making.

justify their claims before the Conciliation and Mr Robert Brown-They couldn't run a toffee

Arbitration Commission. Why should there not apple store.

be some justification so that on the other side of the ledger people who have control over prices have to justify their price increases? Of. course there should be justification. The alternative, apparently favoured by this Government, is Rafferty's rules. That can lead only to leapfrogging inflation.

Mr HURFORD-As the honourable member for Hunter said, Government members could not run a toffee apple store. I believe that the Bill is a pale shadow of the legislation which we need. The discretionary power given to the Minister is virtually absolute. I believe that a Minister of the complexion of the Minister for National Develop-

Secondly, prices justification is needed to ment and Energy (Senator Carrick), of the same

counter the undoubted increasing market power complexion as the Government we have, will not

of major corporations. Trade practices legislation exercise any discretion in favour of this Authority

cannot do this job in a small market such as looking at the prices of petroleum products in the

Australia's because monopoly and oligopoly is ininterests of ordinary Australians. The Minister

evitable. This is all the more so in our six major may decide which goods are to be considered

sub-markets, the capital cities, which are so under the Act. Without giving any reasons he can

widely dispersed. We need an economic watchdog exempt any goods, even petrol itself. How can we

to protect the public interest. The evidence that trust a Liberal or a National Country Party Minis-

the market will not achieve the required control is ter with this sort of power? That is why I will

overwhelming.

move the amendments at the Committee stage to

Thirdly, we need a system which not only seek to correct that.

works fairly and efficiently but also which is seen The Minister may direct the Commissioner on

to work fairly and efficiently. Social cohesion is a how he is to conduct an inquiry and what he is to

prerequisite for economic success and social cotake into account. The Minister may appoint any-

hesion is dependent on greater public awareness one he desires to conduct inquiries. There is no re-

of the workings of the economic system. There quirement that such persons have no conflicting

must be respect for that system. There must be pecuniary interest. If he wants he can appoint the

fairness and more than that there must be evigeneral managers or chairmen of the oil

dence of fairness. Justice must be seen to be done. companies themselves to do this task. He can

A prices justification system is a vital component refuse to allow the Authority to conduct an in-

of that social cohesion. These overwhelming arguquiry and he does not need to give any reasons for

ments have been ignored by this Government. It so doing. The sort of powers given to this Minister

Petroleum Products Pricing Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3205

are a farce. There are no criteria laid down for responsibility which will adversely affect the con-

determining whether an inquiry is appropriate. suming public and small business petrol resellers

That is, the Minister can decide what is done, how alike.

it is done, whether it is done and by whom it is done. This inevitably undermines the status and authority of the Commissioner. The oil companies can simply apply political pressure whenever the going gets tough. The public will not have confidence that findings do not reflect bias and politi-
cal pressure.

In summary, the Opposition considers that this is a totally inadequate Bill. It has inadequate scope and fails to provide an essential measure of independence to the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority. Moreover, it is a Bill which is cast within the context of the abolition of the PJT. This action of the Government is an abdication of

I repeat that should the Opposition's amendment not succeed at the second reading-we have not the numbers to make sure that it does succeed-I will seek in the Committee stage to rectify many of the tremendous errors in the legislation. The second major weakness of the Bill is in its limited scope. In the time that I intend to take tonight-which is a limited time, in spite of the

its responsibilities and represents a major retreat from policies needed to restrain the rate of inflation and to promote the social cohesion necessary to economic growth. We believe that the Government should reverse its decision on the PJT. We believe that it should also withdraw this Bill in order that it can be redrafted along the lines that I have stated.

noises from the other side-the Opposition has Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Is

not prepared amendments in this respect. the amendment seconded?

However, we have moved that the Bill be withdrawn and redrafted to achieve this examination of its scope. So the Opposition puts its feelings on this matter on record. The scope of the Bill needs to be extended both in terms of the products under consideration and in terms of the functions of the Authority. The Opposition believes that petroleum and petrol products should all be considered by the Authority. The Collins Royal Commission on Petroleum noted that the industry is integrated and that all aspects must be considered. It said:

Dr Theophanous-I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (11.21)-The Petroleum Products Pricing Bill is very important. It provides for a body to take the place of the Prices Justification Tribunal. It provides for the establishment of a Petroleum Products Pricing Authoity with the power to inquire into prices and price increases for petroleum products. Of course, the abolition of the PJT is provided for in the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 1981, which was introduced on 27 May last.

Almost every country in the world has some agency, or DcOne function of the PJT which will remain is the

partment of State designed specifically to deal with this industry in the areas of distribution, marketing and pricing.

power of surveillance over prices charged by the petroleum products industry. These powers will

It recommended that such an agency be established for Australia. That was stated by the Collins Royal Commission which examined aspects of the petroleum industry for many months. The need for an agency remains. The Government brought in this legislation last year to regulate franchises and the number of company-owned retail sites. As the Opposition pointed out, this legislation has not resolved all of

be given to the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority established under this Bill. The pricing of petroleum products has been a very controversial issue over the past few years. It covers a very wide field of activity. Wholesale and retail outlets, bulk distributors, primary producers and transport operators all have to be covered under a price structure. This Authority has indeed a very wide range in which to examine prices.

the problems-we pointed out that this would be This Bill provides for the establishment of a

so-in the petrol reselling industry. We said then, Petroleum Products Pricing Authority. This legis-

and we repeat now, that an agency with these lation provides for prices of petroleum products

wider powers is needed. We have indicated our only. It is very important legislation. It is felt that

attitude in the amendment that I moved at the dealing with only petroleum products could pro-

second reading stage. The Government is apparvide and enable a more thorough and efficient in-

ently already considering watering down the legisvestigation to be made. The Bill is dealing only

lation passed last year for the small business with the petroleum industry. As mentioned, the

people in the retail sector of this industry. The Bill Authority should be more efficient than if it were

before us clearly demonstrates that the Governan authority looking into a whole range of prod-

ment has no real commitment to the regulation of ucts. Every Australian is interested in the pricing

the industry. We regard that as an abdication of of petrol, distillate, heating oil and associated

3206 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Petroleum Products Pricing Bill

products because they have an everyday usage. Liquid fuels are the basis for much of the national way of life and standard of living. We are fortunate in Australia to produce 65 per cent of our petroleum requirements. We import 35 per cent of requirements from overseas, mainly from the Persian Gulf and particularly from Saudi Arabia. With a mixture of local product and imports it can easily be ascertained that pricing is a complicated matter and requires close surveillance. It means much to the economy of Australia. It is sad to say that we have great problems with delays with tankers coming from overseas and with tankers coming from Bass Strait to the refineries on the eastern seaboard. Every time there is a hold-up caused by a strike in Bass Strait it adds considerably to the cost of petroleum products being delivered to the eastern seaboard or to other parts of Australia.
This Government, by its world parity pricing policy, has made it attractive for overseas companies with the necessary know-how and expertise to provide capital for petroleum exploration in Australia, both on-shore and off-shore. The policy has also attracted locally established companies to explore and, indeed, to develop pockets of known petroleum that hitherto were not economic. We have an instance of this in Bass Strait, where Esso-BHP, owing to our pricing policy, found it economic to tap a lake of fuel in the Kingfisher field. Possibly this field will be in production by 1982 to help us to maintain a stable pricing policy. To do so we must keep up our oil exploration policy. This is extremely important. It has been good to read recently of possible petroleum finds in other parts of Australia. Energy pricing, in particular the pricing of petroleum products, is of fundamental importance. Realistic pricing will influence consumption of petroleum products and, as I stated previously, will encourage exploration for and development of additional petroleum resources.
Under this legislation the Authority will conduct inquiries and determine whether prices for the supply of petroleum products or other services are justified. As mentioned previously, what a complicated setup it is with all these fields of petroleum demand. The surveillance of the prices will extend only to defined petroleum products and to services related to the production or supply of such products. Companies will be required to notify the Authority of any proposed increases in the prices at which they supply petroleum products or associated services in a particular locality. Of course, provision exists for the Authority to withhold increases or to allow interim price increases pending the outcome of an inquiry. This is,

indeed, a very fair part of the legislation which we are debating here tonight. The Minister has power to direct the Authority on matters to which special consideration is to be given. Under the legislation provision is made for strict confidentiality of certain material. This is an important provision and appears in clauses 26 and 37 of the Bill.
It was interesting to hear from the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) that Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd has made a share offering to the Australian public to take part in the activities of that company in Australia. This is good news. The costs of the distribution of petroleum by companies are related to their refineries, to the location of their seaboard terminals and to their overall costs. Bulk installations and methods of distribution playa very important part in the costing of petroleum products. Those companies that have come into the petroleum market in this country in recent years are at a disadvantage compared with those that have been set up here for many years. With the increase in costs they cannot be expected to compete with major companies that have been established for many years. This must give them great problems. It must also give the Authority problems in establishing a fair price setup.
I will be as brief as possible, but it might be just as well to refer to some of the main provisions of the Bill. Clause 5 establishes the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority, which will be headed by the Commissioner for Petroleum Products Pricing which is a new position. This person is to be appointed by the Governor-General and may be the person who holds the office of full time member of the Temporary Assistance Authority. The appointment will be for a period of five years. Clause 11 allows the Minister to appoint one or more associate commissioners for particular inquiries. It must be understood that such appointments are necessary because a single commissioners would need help. Provision is made for the disclosure of financial interests, and for the resignation or termination of appointments of the Commissioner and associate commissioners. The Commissioner is empowered to convene meetings of the Authority at such times and places as he thinks necessary. Certain other provisions relate to the holding of meetings.
Clause 17, which is another important clause, empowers the Minister to require the Authority to conduct an inquiry, specifying the product and/or company to be investigated. In other than a prices justification inquiry, the Minister may also give directions for the conduct of an inquiry. He may specify a time limit for inquiries and he

Petroleum Products Pricing Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3207

may also direct the Authority to give special consideration to a specific matter or matters. I believe this is an adequate Bill. The honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) who led for the Opposition, was of the opinion that the Bill was not adequate. I think it covers every facet of the industry and 'in our opinion' it is an adequate Bill and has our full support.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (11.32)-Mr Deputy Speaker-
Motion (by Mr Bourchier) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Amendment negatived.
Mr Hurford-Mr Deputy Speaker, with your indulgence, I should explain that we did not divide the House so that there would be more time for debate. However, I trust that the Government Whip will allow the honourable member for Burke to say a few words in the Committee stage.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (11.33)-by leave-I move:
Clause 3, page 2, lines 33-35, omit paragraph (c) of the definition of 'petroleum product'.
Clause 4, page 3, line 4, at the end of sub-clause (1) add or by.'a trading entity in which a company has a beneficial financial interest'.
Clause 12, page 6, lines 9 and 10, omit 'being an interest that could conflict with the proper performance of his functions in relation to that inquiry,'.
Clause 12, page 6, lines 14 and 15, omit 'unless his interest is disclosed in any report in which he participates', substitute 'being an interest that could conflict with the proper performance of his functions in relation to this Act'.
Clause 16, page 8, line 12, omit " with the approval of the Minister,'.
Clause 16, page 8, lines 17-21, omit sub-clause (5), substitute the following sub-clauses:
'(5) In performance of its functions, the Authority shall have regard not only to the need for the company or companies concerned to achieve a level of profitability that is sufficient to enable the company or companies to maintain an adequate level of investment and employment but also to the desire of the Government of the Commonwealth, in pursuing the general objectives of national economic and social policy, to implement an equitable antiinflation policy, and in particular, the desire of the Government of the Commonwealth to subject prices to public scrutiny so as to ensure-
(a) that companies are in a position of public accountability which parallels that of unions' requirements to justify their members' wage levels before the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission; and
(b) that unreasonably high profits are not being made at the expense of consumers and that unnecessarily

high costs, either as the result of inefficiency or other unjustified reasons, are not being passed into prices. (6) In sub-section (5)"unnecessarily high costs" includes such items as costs arising from(a) excessive transfer prices between related
companies; (b) excessive royalty payments and the like to
overseas parent companies; (c) exceptional wages and salary increases; (d) unnecessarily high interest payments and rents; (e) unnecessary advertising and packaging
expenses; (f) inefficient operations, and (g) the refusal to make proper allowances for pro-
ductivity improvements; and 'unreasonably high profits' includes levels of profitability, resulting from the abuse of a strong market position, that are more than sufficient to enable the company or companies to maintain an adequate level of investment and employment. '.
Clause 20, page 14, line 19, omit "$10,000", substitute '$100,000' .
I thank those who gave me leave, but I would have been surprised if they had not done so. In fact, I am doing the Government a good turn by moving the amendments in this way rather than moving each of the eight amendments separately. I wish that we had here the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore), who is responsible for the Bill. I made the eight amendments available to his office some hours ago and I hoped that in some cases he could have accepted one or two of them. That would have meant that we would have had to move them separately. However, it means that they are given some attention, and the next time a similar Bill is before the chamber I hope it will be amended in the way I have suggested.
Before dealing with the amendments, I point out that generaly they have two features. One is to make the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority independent of the Minister. There are so many cases in this Bill where the Minister's discretion is involved, and without independence, the Authority will have no power but will be merely a cipher of the Government. The Minister, of course, is a sycophant of the oil industry, and the people's interests would be neglected. The first amendment relates to clause 3. The power provided in this clause for the Minister to exempt any product for the purposes of the Act is one of the many discretionary powers conferred on the Minister. That would be removed by this amendment. The second amendment relates to clause 4. It is important that no scope is available for the purposes of the Act to be hindered by the use of noncorporate entities such as trusts or partnerships. Our amendment would mean that such noncorporate entities, where they were subsidiary to a company, would have the same effect as if they

3208 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

Petroleum Products Pricing Bill

were a company. The Prices Justification Trijustification inquiries to 'give such directions as he

bunal had some problems with these nonthinks fit as to the conduct of the inquiry or the

corporate forms. Whilst the Constitution limits matters to be taken into consideration'. We be-

the powers of the Commonwealth in these cases, lieve there is no need for the words that are in-

the provisions of this amendment would be uncluded and which our amendment seeks to delete.

likely to offend in that regard because they are concerned with circumstances where a company is an ultimate beneficiary to a trading entity.

Finally, the eighth amendment relates to prices. The penalty for increasing prices after the Authority serves notice on a company should reflect

The third and fourth amendments relate to the seriousness of the offence. The penalty in the

clause 12 of the Bill. The Prices Justification Tri1973 Prices Justification Tribunal Act was

bunal Act provides that no member of the PJT $10,000. Inflation has made a tremendous erosion

shall have any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in the value of $10,000, yet that is the figure

in relation to a matter subject to an inquiry. The placed in the Bill. Of course, it makes a nonsense

Opposition sees no reason to water down that proof the offence. Inflation, and the fact that the Bill

vision of the Act and cannot imagine any reason relates only to the petroleum products industry,

why a commissioner or associate commissioner implies that a stronger penalty should be applied.

should be allowed to have such an interest. We We say that that penalty should be $100,000. In

can only imagine that the Government is conthe Trade Practices Act the penalty is $250,000,

sidering appointing someone from the industry as and the profits that could be made by a company

a commissioner or associate commissioners. Of if it sells petroleum products at a few cents a litre

course, that would be utterly objectionable to us above the justified price would be enormous. A

and it should be to everyone. We have moved the penalty of $100,000 instead of a measly $10,000

third amendment to make it quite clear that that would be much more appropriate. I commend the

could not happen. The fifth amendment deals eight amendments to the Committee.

with clause 16 (3). We believe the Authority must have a reputation which commands the respect of the industry with which it deals. It will be a toothless tiger if its operations are subject to the whims, biases and weaknesses of the Minister and his Government. In other words, this is another amendment which comes under the feature of making the Authority more independent than this Bill allows.

Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (11.40)-1 have only two minutes in which to speak, so I had better race on. I ask honourable members not to interrupt me because they will waste my time. I support the Government in the all important area of petrol pricing. For many years I was involved in the petroleum industry. For years 1 thought that the Prices Justification Tribunal was unable to fix a fair and just price for all the consumers of petrol

The sixth amendment relates to clause 16 (5) and the motorists of Australia. We saw a stupid

of the Bill. A major criticism of the PJT has been situation where the PJT fixed a maximum whole-

the inadequate guidelines in the legislation as to sale price for petrol in every capital city. Yet in

the meaning to be attached to a justified price. fact, some oil companies were able to sell below

The existing provision in the Bill is inadequate that wholesale price to the disadvantage of many

and biased, and it is for that reason that we seek to motorists in this country. We allowed this to go on

delete that provision and suggest a new one. To year after year without raising an eyebrow.

reduce the extent of inconsistent interpretation, to define more clearly the functions of the Bill, and to ensure that the Minister's actions are not without guidance, we have moved this amendment. Of particular importance is our view that the Authority has a role in the fight against inflation, and in providing a check on prices which parallels the accountability of trade unions before the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.

When 1 first became a member of parliament I made the point that in Tasmania, for example, we were paying 30c a gallon more for petrol than were the motorists in Victoria. The stupid situation exists in South Australia where the price is 7c a litre-I think it is around that figure-more than any other capital city. Petrol is a very precious commodity. Today we all depend and rely on petrol. In the cities and country areas of

Coming to the seventh amendment, clause 18 Australia there should be a fair and just price for

gives another broad discretion to the Minister everybody. I issue a warning to the Government

which we oppose and which this amendment that I will be watching the Petroleum Products

would delete. If the clause were allowed to stay as Pricing Authority very closely. If I feel that one

it is, it would enable the Minister to prejudice an party is being disadvantaged by decision making

inquiry by limiting its criteria for assessment. that could be said to be to the detriment of motor-

Clause 17 (4) already gives adequate power to the ists, I will be watching the situation. The honour-

Minister in respect of inquiries other than prices able member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford)

Petroleum Products Pricing Bill

4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3209

suggested that the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs should not have an overriding authority over the Authority. Of course, the Government needs to monitor to a degree that decision making if it is not in the interests of the motorists of Australia. We are dealing with a very precious commodity.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (11.42)~I commend the amendments which have been moved by the Opposition to the Petroleum Products Pricing Bill. I commend the Bill to honourable members opposite, the Committee, and especially those who live in country areas. Unless these amendments are carried the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority, which is proposed to be established in place of the Prices Justification Tribunal to exercise control over the price of petrol and other oil products, will not be able to exercise proper control. One can see this if one looks at the main and central clause of the Bill-clause 18-which reads:
The Minister may, by notice in writing under his hand delivered to the Commissioner, direct the Authority to give special consideration, in exercising its functions and powers under this Act, to the matter or matters specified in the notice and the Authority shall comply with any such direction.
This clause is so broad that it means that all the other factors which prices justification tribunals are normally required to take into account need not be taken into account if the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs so directs. We have a situation where under this clause, for example, if the Authority makes a judgment that in the opinion of the Authority the profitability of the oil companies has been taken into account but in the opinion of the Minister the Authority should have made a determination for much higher profitability for those oil companies, then the Minister is able to direct the oil companies to accept his view and take notice of his opinion to such a degree that the Authority would have to overturn its original view. Under those circumstances, what kind of protection will be given to the motorists of Australia? It gives the total discretion, the total power, to the Minister. If the Authority does not take notice of the Minister's message it will be contravening the Act itself.
In what way then will we have an independent tribunal? In what way will we have a tribunal that is supposed to take into account the various factors which are involved in the complex task of determining the price of petrol? These parts of the Bill are complex. It is not just a matter of determining what is in the interests of the profitability of oil companies. It is also a matter of determining what is in the public interest and, in particular, of determining whether, for example,

an analysis has been made as to whether those kinds of prices are unnecessarily burdening the community in this day and age. The Authority needs also to take into account other factors such as the distribution of petrol and petrol pricing. The honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck) mentioned this point in his remarks. 1 notice, however, that he did not vote for the Opposition's overall amendment which was moved to the second reading and which would have guaranteed and protected the point which he made earlier.
We recommend to honourable members opposite the amendments we have moved. They are not radical or outrageous. They are there to protect the consumer. We call upon honourable members opposite to support them if they are genuinely concerned to ensure that petrol pricing is maintained at a reasonable level. We are aware of the reasons that this Bill has been introduced. It has been introduced because of the fact that the Government wanted to wipe out price control in virtually every other major area of the economy. The Government is aware that there are certain members of the oil industry, especially those who belong to the National Country Party, who would be very upset if a decontrolling of the price of petrol were introduced because this would affect people living in remote country areas.
Therefore, the Government has agreed to replace the Prices Justification Tribunal with an authority concerned with a very limited task regarding the price of petrol. This suggests that somehow oil companies are the only bodies that need to be controlled in the matter of pricing and in the matter of protecting the consumer against conspiracy. 1 am referring to the conspiracy of the oil companies and other companies in presenting their cases to such an authority. People who have worked on the PJT have told me about the fact that companies do engage in conspiracy in terms of their representations to the Tribunal. There is no protection against this sort of thing in the present law. We commend the Opposition's amendments. They will protect the consumer and we ask that all honourable members support them.
Mr WILSON (Sturt--Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (11.48)-1 wish to take a few minutes to respond to the points made by the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford). I realise that it is late but 1 think when amendments are put forward it is appropriate that there be a response, albeit brief. With regard to the first amendment, petroleum products cover a very wide range of refmery goods and it is not possible to delineate them in the Schedule to the

3210 REPRESENTATIVES 4 June 1981

PetroleulII Products Pricing Bill

Petroleum Products Pricing Bill. In the normal course of events the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority will deal with those products of significance to the community and the economy as, in fact, the Prices Justification Tribunal does now. The existing provision allows a desirable flexibility in the event that for particular reasons it becomes necessary to specify additional products outside the jurisdiction of the Authority.
With regard to the second amendment proposed by the honourable member for Adelaide, I inform the Committee that it is not acceptable to the Government. The additional words are not necessary. I draw attention to the fact that provision exists in clause 4 (3) for the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs to declare any other companies which might become involved in the refining or in the production of petroleum products. In the meantime, the relevant companies will be covered by the Act. As the honourable member for Adelaide would know the Commonwealth has limited powers over the non-corporate sector. This Bill, therefore, focuses its attention on the corporate sector.
The third amendment, like the first two, is not acceptable to the Government. It goes further than the self-discipline concept of the Bowen report and would put an unreasonable stricture upon an associate commissioner who, by definition, would only be appointed from outside the Authority for particular inquiries. The existing words are consistent with other legislation. The fourth amendment is not acceptable as the existing words provide for proper disclosure of any relevant interest and they are consistent with other legislation. With regard to the fifth amendment, it is the policy and intention that the authority will conduct inquiries only with the approval of the Minister, as is the case with inquiries presently carried out by the PJT. The authority will in no other way be constrained in its normal price monitoring functions.
The sixth amendment is not acceptable to the Government as the Authority is not an appropriate body for reporting on broad economic and social policy issues. These functions rest with other bodies and with the Government directly. The Authority is concerned with the petroleum products only and will have the powers necessary to determine whether prices are justified on the basis of reasonable costs. In relation to the seventh amendment, the policy intention is that the Minister will have a power of direction to ensure that the Authority has regard to the particular matters where necessary in the carrying out of functions and powers.

Dr Theopillmous-Why should you?
Mr WILSON-The honourable member for Burke asks why he should. The justification is that a similar provision exists in the Industries Assistance Commission and the Prices Justification Tribunal legislation. In relation to the eighth amendment I point out that the existing penalty is consistent with penalties for similar breaches. There is 110 demonstrated need for a higher penalty. In conclusion I make reference to the points raised by the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck). I am sure that he will watch this Authority carefully, as he said he would. If he is concerned, I am absolutely certain that we will hear from him in the House.
Amendments negatived.
Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Tbird Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Wilson)-by leaveread a third time.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY GAMING AND LIQUOR AUTHORITY
BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 27 May, on motion by MrHodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
MI'SCHOLES (Corio) (1 1. 54)-The Opposition does not oppose this Bill. However we believe that the distribution of funds and functions which should properly be the responsibility of a local government body should be declared and, where it is practicable, inserted in the Bill. It is our intention to move an amendment to the motion for the second reading which indicates our attitude to the manner of decision making on the distribution of funds from these bodies to the community and welfare funds. It is also our intention to move an amendment in the Committee stage relating to the makeup of the Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority. In the first instance it has not been possible for us to draft amendments to the Bill which would have been practical in order to meet what we see as being a desirable end. Therefore, we believe that our objective can be salisfactorily achieved only by the Bill being redrafted. I move:
That all words after 'That' he omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
the Bill be withdrawn and re-drafted to provide that the dispersal of funds raised by the Authority. other than those committed to the racing industry, will be in accordance with determinations of the Australian Capital Territory

A.C.T. Gaming and Liquor Bill

4 and 5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3211

House of Assembly but limited to purposes associated with sport, recreation, culture, welfare and. community related activities in the Australian Capital Territory.
The purpose of the amendment is to make it quite clear that the distribution of those funds which are paid to the community welfare fund-an amount of about $2m a year in the Australian Capital Territory-are allocated in accordance with decisions which are made by the people who are elected by the residents of the Territory to carry out those functions which would normally be associated with local government and, to a limited extent, a State government or a territorial government. At this stage, given the nature of legislation which controls the making of laws in the Australian Capital Territory, the amendment would have to be made by ordinance which we believe should be disallowed only by this Parliament and not subject to alteration by the Minister for the Capital Territory.
It is appropriate, I think, that funds in an area should be allocated by the people closest to the needs and concerns of that area-the elected representatives. They should make the decisions. They are the elected members and the people of the Territory have the opportunity to deal with them if they do not properly do the job that is expected of them. The people of the Australian Capital Territory have no opportunity of affecting the numbers in this place except on a fairly marginal basis-
Mr Ruddock-They are supposed to be getting self-government.
Mr SCHOLES-That matter has been up several times tonight. The honourable gentleman does himself no service by parroting that phrase. Self-government is an obligation in a democracy; it is not something one can opt out of. There is only one other place in Australia which is treated in the same way as the Australian Capital Territory is treated and that is the City of Melbourne where the council has been dismissed because it would not treat certain developers and large business organisations well in giving them building permits. The organisations are very substantial donors to a party with which the honourble member has some association. The council has now been replaced so that the centre of the city can be raped. That is not necessary in this city. If a Minister or a government-
Mr Hodgman-What do you mean by that? Mr SCHOLES-It is not necessary. The power already exists for any government that wishes to take such action to do anything it so desires outside the Parliamentary Triangle. It is an area where one person, the Minister is responsible

to a government charged with national responsibilities and not seriously concerned with these matters, makes decisions on behalf of, in a completely paternal manner, a substantive section of the Australian community. The Department of the Capital Territory is not elected for or answerable to the community.
The debate relating to this Bill is not appropriate for a discussion of the constitutional requirements of the Australian Capital Territory. The Government has chosen that the Australian Capital Territory will not have self-government on the basis of a referendum. We will not discuss the merits or otherwise of that result. The Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) said earlier that he is prepared to go some way towards self-government provided a formula can be arrived at. If the functions within the Minister's responsibility were taken away from the responsible governments in any of our electorates or States, there would be an uproar from honourable members who sit opposite. It would interfere with the rights of those people who govern those areas. Those rights are denied in the Australian Capital Territory. By moving this amendment we seek to give those rights in respect of the distribution of funds which come from taxes levied on gambling and racing in this area to the people of this Territory. It is a right to which they are entitled, and it is an obligation that they are entitled to be expected to undertake on their own behalf.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the amendment seconded?
Friday, 5 June 1981 Mr FRY (Fraser) (12.1 a.m.)-I support the amendment moved by the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes). The Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Bill is acceptable. It is one of the few things in the razor gang recommendations for Canberra with which I found I could agree. It amalgamates a number of authorities which is a sensible thing to do. It should work out in theory and I hope it works out in practice. The way in which this Bill has been drawn up provides a need for the amendment which the honourable member for Corio has moved. The need for that amendment reflects the general contempt which the Government has for the views of the locally elected representatives of the people in Canberra.
The Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) said, in his second reading speech, that he proposes that the Authority should include a member of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly and a legal practitioner. I do not think that is good enough. I think provisions

3212 REPRESENTATIVES 4 and 5 June 1981

A. C. T. Gaming and Liquor Bill

should be written into the Bill in the terms that have been suggested by the honourable member for Corio to ensure that there is adequate representation from locally elected people. Of course it is terribly important that the locally elected Assembly should make the decisions about where the money is disbursed. They are familiar with the needs of the community. They are the people who should make the judgments. They do it conscientiously. Last year they spent a lot of time considering how the money should be allotted. Then we had the disgusting situation of the Minister quite arbitrarily overruling the recommendations of a committee of locally elected people who know what are the needs of the community.
Last year the former Minister for the Capital Territory, Mr Ellicott, quite arbitrarily reduced the sums recommended by the Assembly and awarded significant amounts to other organisations which were not recommended by the Assembly. Recommendations were introduced for organisations such as the HandicaI?ped Citizens Association, the Canberra Commumty Legal Service, the Asthma Association, the Epilepsy Association and the Specific Learning Difficulties Association. These were organisations seen as having real needs in the community. The Mini.ster saw fit arbitrarily to reduce the recommendatIOns by the locally elected people and, in their place, he gave significant sums, for example, to the Duke of Edinburgh Awards Scheme and the Canberra Horticultural Society, which were not included in the recommendations. These are laudable organisations and I do not begrudge them getting some money, but I resent the Minister ma~ing arbitrary decisions and reducing recommendatIOns made by locally elected people.
The fact that we are here after midnight debating a Bill concerning domestic matters in the A~s tralian Capital Territory points up the absurdIty of the arrangement that this Government has for the administration of Canberra. People from all over Australia are sitting here after midnight considering legislation which sets out the way in which the people of Canberra may disburse funds raised within their own jurisdiction from poker machines, from the Totalisator Agency Board and from the administration of liquor licensing laws. I think it is an absurd situation. We do not need people from Tasmania, Victoria, Queensland or anywhere else to tell us what to do with the funds that we raise in Canberra. We are quite capable of doing the job. How would honourable members opposite feel if a group of people from all ov~r Australia started telling the people of Tasmama or Queensland how they should disburse the funds

that they have raised? We do not need hill-bi11ie~ from Hobart telling us how to disburse our funds. We can do it ourselves. This debate points up the absurdity of the arrangements in this city.
It is all right for the Minister to make bi~ noises about being a democrat and about supportmg self government. Why does. he ?ot write that il~to the Bill? Why is he not faIr dmkum about thIS self government question? Earlier today he said that he had offered self-government to the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly. I did not know about it and I am sure that the House of Assembly does not know about it. Let us stop the talk and allow the people of Canberra to make decisions about their domestic concerns. We do not need other people to tell us. We need to accept that responsibility and, if we are given the opportunity, we will.
I hope the Minister will consider these representations. I hope he will see that the locally elected people are represented on these organisations and that their voices are listened to. We do not want just token representation; we want real representation by people who are elected in Canberra, who have the right of recall if they do not perform as well as we think they should. The people of Canberra do not have this representation now. The Minister can do what he likes and make all sorts of arbitrary decisions and the people of Canberra can do nothing about it. I repeat: How would the people of Hobart feel if we made those sorts of decisions for them?
Mr HODGMAN (Denison~Minister for the Capital Territory) (12.6 a.m.)~The amendment is not acceptable to the Government on two grounds which I will state briefly. Firstly, I am amazed that the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry) and the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) do not yet know that the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly cannot make determinations. Determinations are made under the law in this place by the Minister. I would be quite happy for the House of Assembly-if it is prepared to look properly at the question of self-government-to have the right to make determinations but, as a matter of law, the House of Assembly cannot, and never has, made a determination. So to bring in an amendment to the effect that it should make determinations is a legal nonsense, and I am amazed that it has come forward.
Secondly, in relation to the disbursal of funds I draw to the attention of both honourable members that the Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Bill does nothing to vary the current disbursal of funds derived

A. C. T. Gaming and Liquor Bill

4 and 5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3213

from the Totalisator Agency Board, poker macould at least have understood this-ten pages of

chines and liquor licensing. It is almost as if, with amendments would have been necessary to

respect, the honourable members have not read achieve the real purpose of my second reading

the Bill. This Bill has nothing to do with the disamendment. That would at least have meant I

bursal of funds. The honourable member for had looked at the Bill. He may be able to have had

Fraser criticised me, as Minister for the Capital drafted that sort of amendment without looking

Territory and a member from Tasmania, but at the Bill, but then he has someone to do it for

apparently he does not even know that the betting him. I do have to look at the Bills handled in this

totalisator ordinance was amended only a matter chamber.

of two weeks ago. The amendment is before the House of Assembly. Apparently he does not know that this Bill does nothing to vary the disbursal of TAB funds. Apparently he does not know that a commitment was given last year, to which he has not made any reference, for one per cent to be put aside as additional revenue to the racing clubs. Apparently he does not know that there is a further proposal for a racecourse development fund. Last, but not least neither the honourable member for Fraser nor the honourable member for Corio appear to know that this Bill does nothing to vary the current disbursal of funds.
Of the amendment that has been moved and the amendment that has been foreshadowed, one is a legal impossibility and the other is absolute nonsense. 1 do not mind being accused of being a dictator and I do not mirtd being accused of being an autocrat, but I suggest, with the greatest of respect to .both my honourable frieJ,lds on the other

The purpose of the amendment I propose to move is to guarantee that members of the House of Assembly will be appointed to the Authority. The Opposition has proposed that two members of the Assembly should be automaticaUy members of the Authority, and that those members should be determined by the Assembly. I am aware that the Minister feels that would inhibit his opportunity to spread the membership of this Authority as widely as possible. I do not think it would be objectionable if an additional member were appointed because this amendment entrenches in the Bill the one member of the Assembly that the Minister said in his second reading speech he would be appointing and adds one additional member. That could be easily accommodated, if the Minister were of that mind, by merely changing the number of members from five to six members.

side of the chamber, that next time they move The reason the amendment suggests two

amendments relating to the Australian Capital members from the House of Assembly is that it

Territory they should look at the Bill and make gives a better opportunity to provide a balanced

sure their amendments are in order before they representation of the Assembly on the Authority.

bring them into the House so that they do not I am fully aware that the member currently

waste the time of the national Parliament.

appointed is not of either major political party in

Amendment negatived. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The question now is: 'That the Bill be now read a second time'.

the Assembly. That is the current situation and we would not expect to amend legislation of this nature every time there is an election for the ASSembly. I think, wherever possible and practi-

Mr Scholes-Mr Deputy Speaker, the Oppocal, without interfering with administration and

sition is not dividing on the Bill.

other things, it is desirable, where representatives

Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.

of parliaments are involved, to have both sides of the political equation represented. It is the usual practice in this ParHament that where appoint-

In Committee

ments of members of Parliament are made to vari-

The Bill. Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (12.10 a.m.)-I think the Minister for the Capital Territoty (Mr Hodgman) has misunderstood completely the second reading amendment I moved to the Aus-

ous bodies, members from both sides are appointed. Usually that involves two members, although at the moment the Assembly is a multisided body. That is because of the nature of the elections.

tralian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor I believe this amendment does not detract from

Authority Bill and the amendment I will move the Bill. It entrenches a right. The Minister may

during this Committee stage. I cannot understand have all the goodwill in the world, but one day he

how he found any suggestion of changes in the dismay be elevated or demoted, or he may depart

bursal of funds in the previous amendment or in this place because of old age or for some other

the amendment I will move. It was not drafted reason and another Minister will be appointed.

because-I would have thought the Minister That follows as sure as day follows night. He may

3214 REPRESENTATIVES 4 and 5 June 1981

A.C.T. Gaming and Liquor Bill

not have the same views. The Minister twice removed was very much in favour of self government in the Territory. Subsequently, the following Minister was not. We could argue all night about the effect that the attitude of that Minister to self-government had on the referendum. I believe the people of Canberra, given the sorts of financial assurances which they are entitled to expect if they were offered an obligation, would accept self-government and the responsibility of choosing the people who will make decisions on their behalf. In this chamber tonight matters relating to the Australian Capital Territory which we feel are of substance are being decided by a majority of people, none of whom have any electoral responsibility-putting aside national responsibility-to the people of Canberra or are in any way answerable to them. I move:
Clause 5, page 2, omit sub-clause (1), substitute the following sub-clause:
'( 1) The Authority shall consist of 3 members appointed by the Minister and 2 members who are members of, and nominated by, the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly constituted by the House ofAssembly Ordinance 1936 of the Australian Capital Territory as amended.'.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (12.15 a.m.)-I thank the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) for the spirit in which he has moved his amendment, but it is not acceptable. The first matter of concern to me and the Government is that if the honourable member thought about it he would realise there are very strong grounds for objecting to an authority constituting an even number of members. To create an authority of six members is to invite the situation of a 3-3 vote, with all the problems that that places upon the chairman of a small body. The Government concluded that five was the appropriate number. Whilst I recognise the spirit of the honourable member's amendment to give increased representation to the House of Assembly, without any disrespect to the House of Assembly, I draw to the honourable member's attention that we are amalgamating into one authority the Totalisator Agency Board, the Poker Machine Licensing Board and the Liquor Licensing Board. We have had representations from groups in the Australian Capital Territory wanting to be included on the Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority. I mention some of them: Galloping, trotting and greyhound interests, licensed clubs, retailers of alcohol, wholesalers, poker machine licensees, consumers and a miscellany of government officials who also

want to be seated on the Authority. The Government took the view-I think it is a proper viewthat it should maintain the one person representation from the House of Assembly which currently exists on the three boards. I do not say that the House of Assembly does not want more representation, but I do say it has not asked for it. I appreciate the spirit of the honourable member's amendment, but I am not prepared to acceptnor is the Government-that of a board of five, two should be members of the House of Assembly.
In response to the first point raised by the honourable member for Corio in respect of his earlier amendment, which is in some way related to the amendment before the Committeeindeed, the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry) spoke to this amendment when we were dealing with the first amendment-I suggest that one could look through the Bil1150 times without finding anything about the disbursal of funds. It is not a question of 10 pages of amendments; it just could not be done.
Last but not least, in relation to the question of self-government I am sorry to have to inform the honourable member, because apparently he is not aware ofit, that I met with the House of Assembly within one week of my appointment as Minister. I told it-it was publicly reported-that I welcomed its suggestions about moving towards self government. I would be delighted if the people of Canberra would take up some of the responsibilities which flow over my desk every day and accept for themselves the responsibility to do things which I am convinced the most highly educated, articulate and intelligent community in Australia is quite capable of doing for itself. The House of Assembly has less legislative or governmental power than the National Aboriginal Conference. I simply draw to the attention of all honourable members that I welcome thoughtful and wellprepared submissions on self-government. Unfortunately, I have heard nothing of substance except from a citizen's group being led by Mrs Craven, and certainly nothing from the House of Assembly.
Amendment negatived.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (12.18 a.m.)-by leave-I move:
(1) Clause 5, page 3,lines 8 to 16, omit sub-clause (7).
(2) Clause 11, page 6, after sub-clause (1), insert the following sub-clause:
'(IA) Where the Authority is considering, or is about to consider, a matter relating to a body, whether corporate or unincorporate, that is the holder of, or that has applied for,

A. C. T. Gaming and Liquor Bill

4 and 5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3215

a licence under the Liquor Ordinance 1975 of the Australian Capital Territory as amended and in force at any time (whether or not that matter arises under or in relation to that Ordinance), a member-

(a) who is the secretary of that body; or

(b) who directly or indirectly receives any remuneration, emoluments or fees from that body,

shall be deemed for the purposes of sub-section (1) to have a direct or indirect pecuniary interest in that matter.'.

(3) Clause 35, page 12, lines 5 to 43, page 13, lines 1 to 5 omitsub-c1auses (2), (3), (4), (5),,(6), (7), (8), (9) and (10).'

The amendment to clause 5 will ensure that persons who, because of their knowledge of and expertise in the area of the Australian Capital Territory liquor trade, the value of whose contributions to a body such as the Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority cannot be underestimated, are not excluded from being eligible for appointment to the Authority. However, the amendment to clause 11 will ensure that such a person, if appointed, is required to disclose any direct or indirect pecuniary interests he or she might have in a matter being considered by the Authority and to absent himself or herself from any deliberations on that matter by the Authority. The amendment to clause 35 will omit those provisions which purported to give the Australian Capital Territory Registrar of Titles power to impose obligations and liabilities on the Totalisator Agency Board and the Poker Machine Licensing Board when in fact those boards cease to exist once the Act is proclaimed. The amendments are drafting and formal ones. I have discussed them with the Opposition. I understand there is no objection. Accordingly, I commend the amendments to the Committee.

Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (12.21 a.m.)-With

the reservation that I have not actually seen the

amendments but have discussed them with the

Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodg-

man), the Opposition does not object to the

amendments, provided they do in fact meet the

purpose which has been suggested. I hope that the

earlier remarks of the Minister relating to self-

government can enable us both in a very short

period to ce,ase to hold positions relevant to the

Australian Capital Territory because I think it is

quite objectionable that this Parliament should be

in a position of carrying out a function which is

not properly the responsibility of the national

Parliament-that is, of governing a small

territory.

.

Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (12.22 a.m.)-I just seek to apologise to the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes). I thought he had received a copy of the amendments. I assure the honourable member that the amendments are in fact formal. They are

of no consequence, except that had we not moved them we would have finished up in a situation where we might no~ have been able to appoint a person properly equipped in relation to the liquor industry to sit on the board.
Amendments agreed to. Bill, as amended, agreed to. Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave-adopted.

Third Reading

Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman)-by leave-

read a third time.

.

AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY AMENDMENT BILL 1981

Second Reading

Debate resumed from 28 May, on motion by MrFife:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (12.24 a.m.)-It is almost exactly 12 hours since I last addressed the House and in almost exactly another 12 hours I will be addressing it again. I am beginning to feel a little bit like a chiming clock. Because the hour is late I do not intend to delay the House. However, there are a few things which one should say on the Australian National University Amendment Bill. The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Australian National University Act as it relates to the activities of student organisations on campus. This is the second attempt that the Government has made to stifle student organisation at the Australian National University. This attempt demonstrates two very endearing qualities about this Government. Firstly, this Government is not only silly but it is persistently silly; and, secondly, it has an almost infinite capacity to bungle its enactments. In 1979 the Government introduced a Bill to amend the Australian National University Act, which was described by the Minister at the time in a passage of Hansard which I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard. Leave granted.

The document reads as follows-

.The se7tions of
wIll prOVide that:

the Bill dealing Membership of

with student organisatiqns
a student organisation will

be voluntary; fees payable in respect of membership of a

student organisation will be voluntary; compulsory fees can

only be used for the provision of amenities or services; where

the .Council of the University makes compulsory fees moneys

available to a student organisation for the provision by that'

o~rug~atnifsi~asttiobne

of approved satisfied that

atmheengiotiveesrnoirngsebrvoidcyes~fththeatCoorugnacni-l

Isation IS representative of its members; in addition, where the

Co~ncil of the University makes compulsory fees moneys

available to a student organisation for the provision by thai

organi~ation of amenities or services, then it is the duty of the

Council to ensure that the moneys are applied only in respect

3216 REPRESENTATIVES 4 and 5 June 1981

Australian National University Bill

of the provision of amenities or services that are not of an academic nature, that are of direct benefit to the University, and that have been declared in university statutes to be amenities or services in respect of that organisation; compulsory fees moneys are not to be paid to a national organisation which represents students but they may be paid to a national student organisation whose principal function has to do with sporting or recreational activities, or with a particular education, social or cultural field, or with the interests of post-graduate students; financial statements are to be prepared and audited each year showing details of the manner in which compulsory fees have been expended.
Mr DAWKINS-The main target of the provision was the ANU Students Association and that explanation, which I will not read, was a long winded way of saying that membership of the Association was to be voluntary and that funds collected via the compulsory services and amenities fee were not to be used for political activities and most importantly these funds were not to be expended on the affiliation to the Australian Union of Students. Regrettably for the Government, that law did not work. The main problem was that the ANU Students Association had other forms of income which the Australian National University Council, following legal advice, decided was not subject to the constraints imposed by the 1979 amendment.
Following the Council's May 1981 meeting, the Association transmitted to AUS its affiliation fee from funds it had derived from sources other than the compulsory fee. Just before the May meeting the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) wrote to the Council advising it to decide otherwise and threatened that this legislation would follow if it did not. Retribution was swift and that is why we are now debating this legislation, the purpose of which is to attempt to ensure that all the income that the Association receives, however derived, will be subject to the same constraints as the income from fees. The honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) has alerted me to one point and that is, however the income is derived by application of the income from the fees, the income will be subject to the same restrictions as those imposed by the 1979 amendment.
This Bill is necessary only because the Government bungled its earlier attempts, and one \Yonders whether this attempt will be any more successful. As I said before, this amendment is also silly. It reveals that this Government is still iinprisoned by the Australian Student Liberal Federation. The members of this Government are hostages of members of the kindergarten Liberal Party who, like mollycoddled children, have forced their big brothers and sisters in the Government to achieve the purposes which they have so patently failed to achieve through the

democratic processes of the ANU Students Association. The ANU Students Association is a very democratic association and makes its decisions by way of regular general meetings. The Association has decided that it wants to remain affiliated to the Australian Union of Students and continues to reaffirm that decision. The kindly Liberals have never been able to get a majority of students to agree with them that the Association should leave AUS. One would think that' this Government and this horse-tiding, fast-cardriving Prime Minister would have more important things to do than be brow beaten by a pack of spoiled brats. But then, as Senator Chipp has said, he is really only a kid at heart and cannot resist playing little games like dropping ice cubes into people's pockets and then squealing with delight at the reaction of his victims.
But there is a much more serious side to this matter. Firstly, the Association should be able to make its own decisions about how it spends its funds. After all, it is not compulsory for students to belong, even though it is compulsory for students to pay the services and amenities fee. The Council of the University decides what proportion of income from that fee will go to the Association. In my very firm view it should be up to the democratic processes of the Association to decide how that fee income is to be applied. In support of that argument I want to quote briefly from a letter dated 30 April 1979 from Sir John Crawford, the Chancellor of the Australian National University. He says:
The Council has long believed that in a modern university it is very desirable that, so far as it is at all possible, students themselves should manage their own student organisations. Whether the ANU Students' Association should, in the ordinary manner, be affiliated to the AUS or not is, in the Council's view, for the ANU's students themselves to decide. Referenda on this question have lately been held on other campuses.
At ANU simple procedures exist to determine the question.
I could not agree more' with Sir John Crawford on that matter. It should be up to the democratic processes of the ANU Students Association to work out the way in Which the funds which they receive are applied. It is not up to governments. It is not even up to university councils to use draconian methods to determine or constrain the way in which those funds will be applied.
It is a fact that the statutes which set up all the universities throughout Australia provide for students' associations in some form or another. They exist to organise the student body and to represent it to the university, the Government and the community. All these associations obtain funds from fees which are paid by students. In most cases they are part of compulsory fees. It is

Australian National University Bill

4 and 5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3217

my strong opinion that these separate associations need to have a national organisation to encourage debate on educational and other issues and, importantly, to represent the collective student view to the Government. After all, the Commonwealth is now responsible for the almost total funding of tertiary education. The students need to have a say before government as government makes decisions about important matters. The Commonwealth also makes decisions about the level of assistance which is provided to students going through universities and colleges. Again, it is important that there be a national organisation to represent the views of students on these important matters.
It is perfectly legitimate for student bodies on all the campuses to affiliate with AUS and to pay fees to it in order to support its activities. It is not only important it is also vital that they do so. A well run and well representative AUS is not only good for students in Australia but it is also good for Australia. The contribution of AUS to the education debate in the late 1960s and early 1970s was invaluable. It led to a number of changes of policy which came about at the time of the election of a Labor government. The AUS or its predecessor has been responsible for a number of important initiatives. I mention just one, the Aboriginal scholarship scheme, which AUS introduced at a time when there was little or no support for Aboriginal students. Consequently, very few Aboriginal students were involved even in secondary education, let alone tertiary education. It has to be remembered that the Abschol scheme became redundant only when an alternative scheme was instituted by the then Minister, W. C. Wentworth. As a result the need for Abschol was virtually removed. The AUS has done great work. It is now emerging once more as a powerful force in Australia, especially in the education debate.
It is not surprising that this Government does not like the AUS. It is not surprising that the Government's juvenile foot soldiers in the Liberal Students Federation do not like it either. As long as this Government and the Liberal Party are wedded to an education policy which is based on privilege the AUS will always criticise them and their policy. The Government must realise that it is always inconvenient to have critics but in a country which is supposed to be a democracy criticism is an essential part of the democratic process. There is an even more obnoxious aspect to this legislation and the way in which the Government has pursued its mindless obsession

with the AUS. It concerns the way the Government has stood over the University in a most grotesque way. The Government refused to discuss the amendments to the Australian National University Act in 1979. It has refused to discuss these amendments in 1981. It is true that there has been some communication between the University and the Government but it has always been on the basis that unless the University accepts the Government's view the Government wi11legislate to ensure that it does not have any choice. It is intriguing in this context to point out a reference by Sir John Crawford in his letter of April 1979. He said:
May I add that, as you will know, it has nowhere proved easy to legislate satisfactorily on these issues. Council has accordingly stated that it will review within two years the operation of its Statute. It believes that this is the better way to proceed at this time rather than by amendment of the principal Act by way of an addition to section 29.
Sir John Crawford was indeed prophetic when he made that remark. Here we are less than two years later amending the bungled legislation which the Government introduced against the wishes of the University in 1979. The Government was simply concerned to stand over the University. This constitutes a very grave interference in its affairs. It goes further than that. The Australian National University Act provides that the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition should each nominate two members of the Parliament to the Council. They are not there as representatives of the Government and the Opposition but as representatives of the Australian community to act as they see fit as representatives of the Australian community on the governing body of Australia's national university. One of the Prime Minister's representatives is the honourable member for Dundas. He has behaved in a totally unprincipled way in his membership of the Council. He has used his position simply to be a toady for the Government. He has threatened the Council that unless it follows the Government's directives or the intentions of its legislation dire consequences will follow. At the May meeting he said that by not agreeing with the Government the University had earned itself a bad reputation.
Mr Ruddock-Where did .you get that information?
Mr DAWKINSIt is contained in a forthcoming article in Woroni which I am sure the honourable member will be pleased to read.
Mr Ruddock-l would be interested to know who the author is.
Mr DAWKINS-The people who were on the Council are entitled to report to the people who elect them on what goes on in the Council.

3218 REPRESENTATIVES 4 and 5 June 1981

Australian National University Bill

Mr Ruddock-If it is reported accurately, and you are supposed to vouch for the accuracy of statements you quote in this House.
Mr DAWKINS-I have not quoted anything.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fremantle should continue. The honourable member for Dundas should remain silent.
Mr DAWKINS-He will have his opportunity to speak. So much for his views on academic freedom and the autonomy of universities. He was not content with that and went further. He said that serious consequences would follow if the University did not comply with the Government's directives. He pointed out that the University was seeking co-operation in respect of, amongst other things, superannuation supplementation. This was an outrageous abuse of the honourable member's position on the Council. It led the Chancellor of the University to describe his threats as subtle blackmail. It is quite unprinCipled for the honourable member for Dund~s to behave in that way as a representative of the Parliament and the Australian people on the Council of the Australian National University. It typifies the arrogant approach which this Government has taken in trying to control student organisations at the ANU and, for that matter, at the Canberra College of Advanced Education. It is for that reason that the Opposition strenuously opposes this legislation. It should not proceed; it should be defeated.

We became aware when reading the accounts of the students' association that certain moneys were being paid to subsidise certain legitimate student activities. But it was claimed that revenue earned from those activities was being set aside by the students as though it was revenue of their own that they had earned by legitimate activities. I think that it is fair to the House that I, as one of the Parliament's representatives on the Council of the Australian National University, should indicate the nature of the deception involved. Deception is exactly what it was. I had no hesitation in telling my colleagues on the Council that that is what I though it to be. I have no shame at all in having done that. I have no shame in responsibly reporting to that body my view of the determination of my colleagues to ensure that the intention of the Government, expressed in statements in this place and expressed in an Act of Parliament, be carried into effect. I certainly told the Council of that determination. That view was already before the Council because it had the letter from the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) before it. I think that I have a responsibility not only to tell the Parliament of views of the University, as I do from time to time, and my colleagues in our party councils, from which I was appointed and the views the people within the University hold, but also to tell those on the Council of the attitudes of the Government. Council members are free to vote as they see fit, as they did on that occasion.

Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (12.38 a.m.)-The Australian National University Amendment Bill is to put beyond doubt certain questions that have been raised in relation to the operation of the Australian National University Act as it applies to the funding of student organisations at the University. When the legislation to amend the ANU Act was introduced, I and numbers of my colleagues were certainly of the view that the funds made available to the student organisations were to be properly applied to the activities that the amendments to the Act envisaged the students' assoCiation might carryon. A question was raised at that time as to whether there was any possibility of funds made available for a particular purpose being laundered by the students' association in such a way as to relieve them of their speCial character as funds that could not be remitted to the Australian Union of Students and for that body to obtain them by subterfuge. The fear that some of us had at that time but which we were assured that the Act would deal with was realised when the University Council and the students' assoCiation sought legal advice.

I will explain the nature of the deception involved in this exerCise, A place called Childers Street Hall received a subsidy of some $1,031, yet revenue of $635 was claimed to be earned from that hall. In other words, the subsidy was greatly in excess of the revenue. Lennox House, for its operations, received $6,539 in subsidies, and the revenue derived was $1,905. In Orientation Week there was an element of revenue earned from activities as well as a subsidy. A Rank Xerox photostating machine was subsidised by some $2,198 and students were charged $963 for using the machine for copying. Telephone accounts came to $5,710 but $710 was collected from the students using the phone. The magazine was subsidised to the extent of $14,802. It received advertisements to the value of $2,162. Very little money was not the subject of a direct subsidy from the general services fee. In my view all of the revenue had that character. The University in looking at thatwhether it was legally right or not I regard as irrelevant-morally was involved in a deception in approving, as it did by resolution, of students taking that subsidy and claiming that they had

Australian National University Bill

4 and 5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3219

somehow earned income from their own activiat ensuring that students, both in Canberra and in

ties. That was the most blatent laundering exerthe rest of Australia, take no part in political

cise that I can imagine. I have pleasure in reportactivities which indicate their strong opposition to

ing to the Parliament and to my colleagues the the policies of the Government. It is sheer hypoc-

activity in which I believe my colleagues on the risy to argue that the membership of student or-

Council were involved.

ganisations should be voluntary when the

Certainly I told my colleagues on the Council that I would inform the Parliament and honourable members of what I thought of that activity in which the University Council was about to indulge. This legislation is merely to put beyond doubt that which we believed we were implementing in the legislation in the first place. I very much regret the news made known to me

Government itself was voted into office by a compulsory vote. Government members like to ignore the fact that more than half of the Australian voting population did not vote for the present Government. Yet, these people are forced to pay taxes to fund Government policies and are forced to abide by the laws promulgated by this Government.

tonight-not as a member of the Council-that What difference is there between being a

the students' association, in the knowledge that member of the Australian community, an Aus-

this legislation was to be proceeded with, has paid tralian citizen, and the membership by students of

those moneys which quite improperly, in my view, the university student community? The principles

came into its hands to the Australian Union of of universal sufferage and democratic rights are as

Students. I certainly support this legislation very characteristic of student bodies as they are of the

strongly. I have no shame whatever for the action Australian community as a whole. The Federal

I have taken on the University Council. I will conGovernment is not prepared to allow individual

tinue honestly to inform the Council of the views I citizens to opt out of their responsibilities to the

believe are held not only in this Parliament but community. Why then does the Government

also amongst my colleagues that I represent on the make legislation which permits individual

Council.

students to opt out of their responsibility to the

Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (12.45 a.m.)-Mr Speaker, I oppose the Bill-
Motion (by Mr Bourchier) agreed to:

university student community? Obviously the Government is not concerned that students who refuse to join a student organisation will be able to enjoy the benefits which their fellow students

That the question be now put.

have won on their behalf. But the Government is

Mr Dawkins-Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, I indicate that because of the lateness of the hour the Opposition does not intend to divide

concerned when individual citizens refuse to pay their taxes. Furthermore, it will prosecute them to ensure that those taxes are paid.

on the second reading of the Bill. But that should Double standards are the stock in trade of this

not be taken as a weakening of the Opposition's Government. I suppose that Opposition members

position. We think the Bill is outrageous and we should not be surprised at this hypocritical atti-

oppose it very strenuously.

tude. Of course we all know that once this Bill has

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

been passed pressure will be brought to bear on those State governments whose university Acts

Bill read a second time.

are not as regressive against the students of their

In Committee

universities as are the provisions contained in the present Bill. We also know that the Federal

The Bill.

Government will not hesitate to use its funding

Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (12.46 a.m.)-As I was saying at the second reading stage before I was rudely interrupted, the internal affairs of the students of the Australian National University

powers to bludgeon those State governments which may resist making a similar attack on the independence of the university students in their States.

are being grossly interfered with by this GovernThere is a strong degree of paternalism about

ment. The Australian National University the interference of the Government in student

Amendment Bill is another attempt to stifle matters which in this more enlightened age is evi-

further the students' activities. This highly imdence of the conservative philosophy of Govern-

moral Government has only one purpose, as is ment members. Students are quite capable of

clearly expressed in the legislation, and that is to handling their own business, as university councils

prevent the students at the Australian National all over Australia have accepted for many years.

University from engaging in political activities reAs mentioned previously, the Government has

lating to education. The Bill is particularly aimed made quite clear that it is taking the present

3220 REPRESENTATIVES 4 and 5 June 1981

Australian National University Bill

action because it is not prepared to tolerate student political action. It is part of the democratic process that groups in the community . should be able to organise and make represenlations to the Government. The plain fact is that the student unions have, over the years, become autonomous bodies which exist to provide services, representation and resources for the benefit of the student body. In carrying out such functions they are of necessity involved in political activities. In this sense they are analagous to trade unions. It is this similarity which draws unto them - the hate of Government members.
The Federal Government, by restricting the means by which the student body and the Australian National University can gain essential funding for such organising purposes, is denying a basic democratic right of our society to the students. The truth of the matter is that the Federal Government fears the powers of the student body to bring home to the Australian people the danger of their living standards which the present educational policy of the Government represents. Restrictions in the Tertiary Education Assistance System allowance, the introduction of fees for second and post-graduate degrees, the forced amalgamation and closures of colleges of advanced education and the cut in the facilities of the Australian Schools Commission are all reductions in educational services which will greatly restrict the ,opportunities of Australians to improve their educational skills for the benefit of Australians as a whole. It is not too late for the Federal Government to reverse this trend.
Mr Bourchier-Fair go.
Mr MILTON-I have nearly finished. Be patient. It is not too late for the Federal Government to move away from its confrontationist attitude to students in tertiary educational institutions. I. say just one thing before I close my remarks. Listening to the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) confirmed the impression which I gained when I was a member of the Council of the University of Melbourne that the nominees of Liberal governments on university councils are there just to act as stooges for the Government. They have no true understanding of university traditions and no sympathy for the students. I believe this Government should withdraw this iniquitous Bill and accept that the fundamental right of the student bodies is to engage in political activities and that it is a normal, necessary ingredient of tertiary education.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (12.52 a.m.)-Student unions have over the years played a constructive role in Australian political debate. The Australian

Union of Students is included among them. In the major political issues in which Australia and its predecessors have engaged in recent years-the question of the Vietnam war and conscription and the needs of education-their views have been justified by experience. The political positions adopted by those organisations were at variance with the views of honourable members opposite. Quite unimpeachably the student unions and Australian sponsored campaigns were supported by the bulk of their members, as they continue to be supported. Those campaigns were in the direct interests of and of direct concern to those members. It never pays one to be right in politics; it only pays to win. If one is right and loses one is doubly damned. One's opponents' efforts to exculpate their own moral inferiority will make them doubly vicious. Behind the pompous asininities of honourable members opposite about compulsory unionism and the importance of prohibiting the use of service funds for political purposes of direct interest to students lies a steely determination to render the organisations ineffective.
Like the Australian Broadcasting Commission cuts, like the cuts in expenditure in the area of Aboriginal affairs, in this issue there is a liberal dosage of naked and unloved revenge. It is not surprising that the Government has trouble makeing its legislation stick. When one gets down to it, it is impossible to implement unless one puts an officer of the Auditor-General's Department in every student union office. One gets to the obvious situation where there are buildings provided by amenity funds in which political meetings for AUS purposes or other purposes are held. Are the students to be charged every time they walk into those buildings for an AUS meeting? There are typing services available in the student union organisations and printing machines. They are useful for handing out notices that are related to amenities. Will an officer of the Auditor General's Department determine when it is an amenity-related notice or an AUS-related notice. It is nonsense. This piece of legislation, like the previous piece of legislation, will not resolve that problem. The Liberal Party will keep poking a stick at it. The great Liberal Government will offend every liberal principle on academic freedom when that suits its purpose, but this ought not to cause us to be surprised as there is no other liberal principle that the Liberal Party is not prepared to jettison when it so suits it.
This Government in its various metamorphoses over the last couple of decades has been extraordinarily hard on the younger generation. It has rendered them jobless, restricted their access to educational possibilities and marched them off to

Australian National University Bill

4 and 5 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3221

fight in disastrous wars. This Bill is merely a minor part of a general trend of youth bashing by a government whose leading members were born mummified. It is not surprising, therefore, that about 66 per cent of the young population in the last election voted against this Government. They will continue to do so. At the next election they will defeat the Government. The people will be convinced that they ought to defeat the Government because of the stupid sorts of actions that the Government has undertaken.
Bill agreed to. Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.

Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Fife)-by leave-read a third time.
House adjourned at 12.57 a.m. (Friday)
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 4 June 1981, pursuant to statute:
Cocos (Keeling) Islands Act-Ordinance-1981-No. 1Postal Services (Amendment).
Conciliation and Arbitration Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 119.
Navigation Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 118.
Student Assistance Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 117.


