House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 121, 1981 Thursday, 2 April 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

2 April 1 981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 23 1

Thursday, 2 April 1 981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon.. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1 0.30 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Confidential Medical Records
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely concerned by the invasion of privacy caused by Government agents seizing patients' medical records.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, should legislate to pro tect the private and confidential nature of medical records from scrutiny except on the express and informed consent of the patient or an order from a presidingjudge.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will every pray.
by Mr Dean. Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic prod ucts, and the inhumane use of arumals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Jndustries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of cosmetic companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which ani mals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate: ( l ) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated; (2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will everpray.
by Ml' Humphreys. Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of u ndersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
( 1 ) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have heen decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should there fore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.

(2) That by being denied the entitlements, sucb as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that tbe Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act ( 1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by mer chant seamen during World War II.
Andyour Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys. Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Tbe humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a tbreat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heri tage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the pro tection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice ofconservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys. Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speakr and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Tbat funding in the area of childrens services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least tbe real value of funding allocated in the 1 975-76 budget. And furtber, that annual budget allocations in the area of childrens services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Leo McLeay. Petition received.
Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
I . We call upon the Commonwealth and State Governments to select a site for Sydney's second airporf now and to protect it by immediate development.
2. We do not agree to the expansion of the Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport.
3. We support the Marrickville Muncipal Council's oppo sition to the airport extension proposals.
4. We do not agree that nuisances from aircraft noises are reducing.
5. We oppose any shorter evening 'curfew' hours.

1 232 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 198 1

Petitions

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that there be no extension of Kingsford-Smith Airport, Sydney.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will every pray.
by Mr Leo McLeay.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that your pet itioners are gravely concerned at the prospect of any legislation regarding Plant Variety Rights. The reasons are as follows:
l . We believe it would transfer control, the key aspect of agriculture in this country, to overseas interests not respon sihle to the Australian Government.
2. We believe it would restrict the growing and trading of many seeds.
3. We believe it would cause a decline in the genetic diver sity ofcrops making them more subject to destruction by pests and diseases.
4. We believe thorough investigation of the effect of similar legislation OVerseas and a full public debate is required before any decision is made.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament re frains from enacting any legislation on Plant Variety Rights.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will every pray.
by Mr Porter.
Petition received.
Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions and the ACTU, the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our national airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold tbe country to ransom and continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Abortion
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens ofAustraliarespectfully petition:
That the government will act to prohibit the use of all public monies for the killing of unborn children. That the said use of government monies is an unacceptable government en dorsement of a great national tragedy----the deaths annually of at least 80,000 unborn children.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Street. Petition received.

Airline Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domesticpolicy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive air fares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting Western Australia and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Bungey. Petition received.
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF FRESHWATER STUDIES Notice of Motion
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) - I give notice of my intention to present at the next sitting a Bill for an Act to establish an Australian institute of fresh water studies and for related purposes.
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION CONVENTION No. 87
Notice of Motion Mrs DARLING (Lilley)1 give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
Thatthis House 1 . Expresses its support for the International Labour Or ganisation Convention No. 87 concerning freedom of associ ation and protection of the right to organise; 2. Notes that, among other countries, Australia, Poland and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics are signatories to the Convention; 3. Affirms its unanimous support for the struggle of the Pol ish Solidarity Workers Union and the Polish people in the midst of this grave domestic and potentially international crisis; 4. Confirms unconditionally its total opposition to any intervention by Soviet armed forces or other Warsaw Pact countries in the international affairs of Poland; and 5. Commends the Leader of the Opposition for already ex pressing this view to the Russian Ambassador.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
DOMESTIC AIR FARES Mr HAYDEN-- My question, which is directed to the Minister for Transport, relates to the Holcroft report on air fares, which shows that last year economy class passengers subsidised first class passenger and other air fares to a total of some $ 1 2m. I ask: Is the Minister aware that the Government's new air fare policy will mean that

Questions Without Notice

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 233

economy class passengers will still be subsidising first class and other passengers by at least $7m a year? Will the Minister, as a matter of urgency and equity, redress this outrageous injustice whereby people, generally of modest means and paying their own fares, subsidise the air fares of first class passengers especially, most of whom are on business accounts?

Mr HUNT-The Leader of the Opposition has identified an area of concern to the Government. It was certainly identified in the Holcroft report. In dealing with the application for the fare increase, which overall averages 8.9 per cent, the Government took into account the recommendations of the Holcroft report. It varied the ratio between first class fares and economy fares from 1 .375 : 1 to 1 .45: 1 . Instead of there being an 8.9 per cent increase across the board, the actual increase in economy fares was 7.4 per cent.

In further refining the recommendations of the

Holcroft report prior to the consideration of the

next application for a fare increase following fuel

price rises, wage rises, et cetera, we will certainly

take into account the point which was raised by

Holcroft and which the Leader of the Opposition

has our

identified. He can power to move

be sure that as quickly

we as

wpiollsdsiob. laell

in to

achieve the equity that is necessary between first

class passengers and economy class passengers.

We are well and truly on the way. I am pleased

that the Leader of the Opposition has suddenly

woken up to something that happened while he

was in government.

DRUG TRAFFICKING Mr BIRNEY-I ask the Minister for Administrative Services: Is it a fact that seizures of cocaine bound for the Australian drug market have almost doubled in the past year? Is it a fact that a substantial part of these drug shipments have come from Central and South America? Is the Minister concerned that Australia may be a new target for hard drugs produced in Central and South America? What action is being taken to counter the threat of a large scale drug connection with these countries? Mr NEWMANIam advised by the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police that the force is aware of an increased use of cocaine in Asia and the South Pacific Islands. I am also advised that the police are worried that there may be an attempt to extend the use of cocaine in that area by trafficking into Australia. I made an an nouncement on 1 4 January that the AFP, foresee ing an increase in heroin available in the Golden Triangle, would be taking measures to meet what was then seen as a threat. Likewise, the AFP is

taking steps now to prepare itself for any increase in cocaine trafficking in Australia. The measures that have been taken are: Firstly, an AFP drug liaison officer will be making regular visits to the Pacific Islands area, particularly following major seizures of cocaine 'in Tahiti and Fiji. Secondly, an AFP drug liaison officer will be making a trip to South America to confer with officials there who are involved in limiting drug trafficking. An additional AFP officer has also been posted to Bangkok as a temporary measure to liaise with drug officials there.
This is an area of grave concern for Australia. These measures will help. I n addition, I emphasise two other areas in which the AFP is co-operating very strongly with State police forces. One is the establishment of joint task forces with State police officers and Australian Federal Police officers working together in specific areas against drug traffickers. Secondly, a very important step was taken at the last Federal Police Council to establish an Australian crime intelligence bureau which will allow the police forces to target specific drug offenders. I assure the House that not only the AFP but also the State police forces are working together to try to beat this threat.
DOMESTIC AIR FARES Mr LES JOHNSON-I refer the Minister for Transport to his statement yesterday in which he indicated that the new air fares would increase the revenue of Trans-Australia Airlines and Ansett Airlines of Australia by $ 1 .2m a week, or over $62m a year. I ask: To what extent will that increase in revenue increase the profits of the two airlines? Mr HUNT-The reason I said that it was cost ing the airlines $ 1 .2m in lost revenue is ,that because of increases in fuel prices and wages as from I January, since the last adjustment to fares, an overall increase of 8.9 per cent in air fares wasjus tifiable. The fact that the fares were not adjusted resulted in the airlines losing about $600,000 in revenue per week. The Department of Transport, in examining the applications for fare increases, was absolutely satisfied in advising me that the fare increases were justified. It did not make any alteration to past criteria in respect of profit levels or profit margins.
B52 BOMBERS Mr FALCONER-My question, which is addressed to the Prime Minister, concerns B52 flights passing through Darwin, which was the subject of a statement in the House by the Prime Minister. Is the Prime Minister aware of reports of a United States document apparently approved

1234 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 198 1

Questions Without Notice

by both the State Department and the Defence Department concerning 852 flights passing through Darwin? Can the Prime Minister give any information about the status of this document and the nature of its contents?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I am aware of the document. It is a Press guide prepared by the State Department in Washington and authorised for use by US authorities in answering questions. I have a copy of the document and, as many honourable members may be interested in reading it, 1 seek leave to have it incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted. The document read as follows-
EMBASSY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

therefore, eliminate the requirement of prior consent. What is your response?
ANSWER: Paragraph VII, which was proposed by the Government of Australia, contemplates consultations between the two governments to ensure that the Government of Australia has full and timely information concerning the B-52 operations. Paragraph VIII, also proposed by the Government of Australia, sets forth factors which the Government of Australia will weigh in considering whether to grant its agreement to any request by the United States for an alteration of the terms of the Agreement. The requirement for prior con sent contained in Article I is unequivocal and absolute. It is not in any sense diluted by the consultations contemplated by Article VII. It is, in fact, strengthened by Article VIII which elaborates on the right of the Government of Australia to grant or withhold its consent to an alteration of the Agree ment. There [s absolutely no support in the text of the Agree ment or in its negotiating history for the construction ad vanced by Labor Party spokesmen.

Canberra, ACT Australia
Press Guidance-US-Australian Agreement on B-S2's
QUESTION: Can you confirm that the United States and the Government of Australia have reached agreement on the staging of United States B-52 flights from Australian air bases?
ANSWER: Under the terms of notes exchanged in Canberra on March I I , United States B-52's which are presently flying non-stop surveillance missions over the Indian Ocean from Guam will now land en route at Darwin Air Force Base in Northern Australia. The planes will conduct routine navigational training exercises en route to Darwin. After refueling and crew rest there, they will engage in surveillance missions over the Indian Ocean.
QUESTION: Will these aircraft be armed?
ANSWER: As the Prime Minister announced in Canberra March I I , these aircraft will be unarmed and carry no bombs. However, the B-52H aircraft that will be operated through Darwin is equipped with an integral tail gun for defensive purposes.
QUESTION: The Prime Minister of Australia has stated that before his Government could agree to any change in the nature of these missions, it would need to be informed con cerningwhether nuclear weapons were beingcarried. Can you comment on this?
ANSWER: No comment other than to point out that the Agreement specifies Australian Government approval be obtained before the facilities are used for any other category of operations. Furthermore, it remains the policy of this Government neither to confirm nor deny the presence of nu clear weapons on particular missions.
QUESTION: Members of the Australian Labor Party have criticized the agreement between the United States and Australia concerning B-52 transits on the ground that there is no assurance that the United States will seek Australia's agreement on any change in operations under the Agreement.
ANSWER: Article J of the Agreement states "The B-52 staging operations shall be for sea surveillance in the Indian Ocean area and for navigation training purposes. The agreement of the Government of Australia shall be obtained before the facilities are used in support of any other category of operations." It is hard to imagine a more unequivocal requirement for prior consent by the Government of Australia in the event that different operations are contemplated by the United States.
QUESTION: Australian Labor Party spokesmen have argued that Articles VII and VIII override Article I and,

QUESTION: Labor Party spokesmen have argued that the Agreement is flawed because a formulation presented to Foreign Minister Street by Secretary Haig was not included in the formal Agreement. Can you comment?
ANSWER: The written Agreement is complete and embodies the entire understanding of the parties. The formu lation presented to Minister Street was intended to be a suggestion of how the Agreement could be described and explained publicly. It does not in any sense contradict the Agreement; it is merely explanatory and in fact is similar to public statements which the United States Government has made concerning the Agreement.
28 March, 1981
DOMESTIC AIR FARES MI' LES McMAHON-I refer the Minister for Transport to his statement of 1 3 August last year in which he said that the Government wanted to encourage the introduction of new types of air fares and to make them available to as many Australians as possible. How does he reconcile that statement with yesterday's announcement of the withdrawal or reduction of a wide range of dis count fares, including advance purchase excur sion and standby fares?
Mr HUNT-The Government, in its consideration of the Holcroft inquiry's recommendations, took into account a very significant recommendation which indicated that in considering air fare adjustments it needed to be understood that dis counts should not be applied in a way that would increase the economy fares of the ordinary travel ling passenger. When the two airlines made their applications for fare increases they proposed a re duction in the APEX fare from 40 per cent to 35 per cent and a reduction in the standby percent age discount and in a number of other discount areas. It was a commercial decision taken by them. Since it accorded with the general thrust of the recommendations of the Holcroft report, the Government resolved to approve the application by the airlines.

Questions Without Notice

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 235

THAILAND Mr SPENDER-I draw the attention of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to reports of a coup in Thailand, apparently led by the deputy army chief of staff, General Sant Chitpatima. Can the Minister advise the House of, firstly, whether the coup has been successful and, secondly, the implications of the coup or attempted coup on Thailand's political stability and its position vis-a vis Kampuchea and Laos? Mr STREET-J am informed that yesterday a military group calling itself the Revolutionary Party announced that Prime Minister Prem had resigned and that it had assumed Government powers in Thailand. The group is led by the Army Deputy Commander-in-Chief, General Sant Chitpatima. I have to say, though, that there is considerable uncertainty about the situation. Ac cording to reports both General Prem and the King have gone to the north-east of Thailand and Prem has denied that he has resigned and he has called on the coup leaders to surrender. General Prem claims to have the support of all the army commands in the provinces, as well as the navy and the air force, but this has not yet been confir med. Naturally the Australian Government hopes that the situation within Thailand can be resolved quickly and peacefully. According to information available to me, day-to-day life in Bangkok appears to be functioning normally and there have been no reports of any harm to Australian citizens in Bangkok. I understand that the airport is still operating normally. But in view of the un certainty of the situation and the speed with which it could change, intending travellers to Thailand would be well advised to check with the airline concerned or with my Department before travelling. I need hardly add that the Australian Embassy in Bangkok is watching the situation closely.
DOMESTIC AIR FARES Mrs KELLY-I ask the Minister for the Capital Territory: Is it a fact that air fares between Sydney and Canberra will be increased by 38.8 per cent, with an average journey increase from Canberra being 30.7 per cent? Is the Minister aware that this increase is significantly above the overall increase of 7.4 per cent? Does he acknowl edge that Canberra will be more adversely affected by this increase than any other city? How can he justify the damaging effects that these increases will have on tourism, which is Canberra's major private sector industry? Will the Minister explain to this Parliament what measures the Government will take to compensate for this economic blow to Canberra?

Mr HODGMANLet me say in response to the honourable member's question that the stat istics are public knowledge and that a number of the matters raised in her question are, in fact, purely statistical. The honourable member ought to appreciate two things. Firstly, she should look at the question in context; and secondly, she should listen, if she will, to what I believe is a reasonable explanation of the Government's de cisions, which [ support completely. I make the point that the honourable member rushed into print without, with respect, taking the opportunity to consider some basic facts to which I will now refer. The first thing that I want to draw to the attention of the House is that only 1 1 per cent of the two million tourists who come to Canberra, do so by air.
Opposition members interjecting Mr HODGMAN-Just a moment. [f honour able members want an answer they will get it. The remaining 89 per cent travel here by other means. In discussions with the newly appointed Tourist Commissioner, Mr Don Hamance, and in discussions this morning with the Canberra Visitors Association we have resolved that this problem, as it has been put by the honourable member, is one which will be tackled and accepted and, if I might say so, will be overcome. The decision is a proper one. The honourable member would well appreciate that a target has been set to double the number of visitors to the national capital within three years. Mrs KellyHow are we going to do it now? Mr HODGMAN-I say to the honourable memberMrs Kelly-They can't come by train; come on. Mr HODGMAN-With the greatest respect, the honourable member is not interested in hear ing; she is only interested in talking. I say to the honourable member that the factual situation is that already, by decisions taken by my colleague the Minister for Transport, this Government has made the national capital more accessible by road. There are negotiations in relation to increased rail accessibility. T repeat for those who are genuinely interested in the problem, that it is something we believe can be accepted. We believe the Government's decisions are fair. We go further and say that those in the tourist industry will not react with the same knee-jerk, off-the-cuff reaction of the honourable member. Those directly concerned believe this problem can be taken in its stride ami that the national capital's tourist poten tial will be enhanced and developed as a result of the policies of this Government.

1236 ' REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

DOMESTIC AIR FARES Mr McLEAN-My question is to the Minister for Transport. Do the air fare changes announced yesterday constitute an interim adjustment only? If so, can the Minister give an assurance that when the most appropriate fare setting formula has been finally established, such further re ductions in the air fares to and from Perth as are necessary to eliminate all cross-subsidisation by these long haul travellers will be applied? Mr HUNT-The answer to the first question is yes. The adjustment that was made to air fares, as announced yesterday, was an i nterim response to the Holcroft recommendations. Further study will be done on the recommendations of the Holcroft report. The people associated with that report indicated that it would take some consider able time to adjust the basis of their recommendations to the 1 980-8 1 financial year because they did their calculations on the 1 979-80 year. Since then the costs to the airlines have risen by 30 per cent, so that could cause some distortion of the 1 979-80 calculations. We will be seeking outside expert advice as is required to enable us to establish the Holcroft recommendations in the new air fare formula when the next adjustments are made to air fares in Australia. Our objective is to remove unfair cross-subsidisation that has worked against the best interests of people flying over long distances in this country. Although people may have to pay higher fares when com muting between Sydney and Canberra, they have been subsidised for a jolly long time.
REFUSAL OF VISA TO SOVIET SPORTING OFFICIAL
Mrs CHILD-Is the Prime Minister aware that a meeting in Australia of executive council of FINA, the controlling world body of amateur swimming, has been disrupted because a visa has been refused to a senior Soviet official of that body? Is the Prime Minister also aware that, because of the Government's action in preventing the official visiting here, Australia now faces a world-wide ban as an international swimming venue? Will the Prime Minister explain to the House why sporting bodies in this country continue to be unfairly penalised by the Government's sanctions against the Soviet Union when our trade and commercial contracts with the Rus sians continue to increase?
Mr STREET-The first point I make is that it is not Government policy to hinder the work of international sporting bodies. The second point is that information available to us from Moscow identified Mr Murysere as the head of the swim ming department of the Union of Soviet Socialist

Republics sports committee and made no reference to his being an official of the Bureau of the International Swimming Federation. Honourable members will know that following the Soviet in vasion of Afghanistan the Government an nounced its intention to discourage sporting and cultural exchanges with the Soviet Union and the application for a visa in this instance was treated in line with the policies I have just mentioned.
URANIUM Mr MILLAR-J ask the Minister for Trade and Resources whether it is correct, as reported today, that certain unions have decided to stop the export of uranium by Queensland Mines Ltd. lf this is the case, what effect will this ban have on our relations with overseas customers? Mr ANTHONY-The Seamen's Union of Australia and the Waterside Workers Federation of Australia have said that they will not handle uranium produced by Queensland Mines Ltd, and that they would prevent the export of it. This is, of course, frustrating the operations of that company. I point out that the contracts which are being honoured are contracts which werc entered into before 1972. It was the undertaking of the Australian Council of Trade Unions indeed I believe it is Australian Labor Party policy-that these contracts would be honoured. The Seamen 's Union and, therefore, the Waterside Workers Federation are flying in the face of decisions pre viously taken. They are not honouring those de cisions and, as a result, exports are being inhibited. I think it is a very poor state of affairs when people enter into long term contracts that these contrads are likely to be disrupted. The Government is certainly looking at the options to see what can be done. But, as far as Australia's reputation is concerned, the Government has no intention of seeing our name marred by the irres ponsible actions of unions, particularly unions which will not even accept their own decisions.
TAX AVOIDANCE Mr DUFFY-I ask the Treasurer whether he is aware of blatant use by professional persons of a tax avoidance scheme based on the assignment of book debts. Is it a fact that, because these people are assessed on a cash receipts basis, they are not taxed on accrued debts which can be assigned as gifts to a spouse and in this way become capital which is not taxed when received by the spouse? Further, is the Treasurer aware that in Melbourne over 1 00 medical practitioners, dentists and bar risters, including several Queen's Counsel, are using this scheme to avoid paying huge amounts of tax? Could the scheme be easily closed off by

Questions Without Notice

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 237

requiring that these people be taxed on an ac cruals basis as applied to other business and pro fessional taxpayers? Does the Treasurer propose to take any action against this blatant abuse?
Mr HOWARD-I am aware, from what I have been told by the Commissioner of Taxation, and consistent with his obligations under the secrecy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act, that a number of taxpayers are seeking to take advantage of the device that the honourable gentleman has very accurately described. It arises from the fact that a limited number of self employed people, who are regarded as performing personal services, continue to be allowed by the Commissioner of Taxation to be taxed on a cash receipts basis, notwithstanding the effect of the High Court's decision in 1 970 in the Henderson case, which effectively, as I understand it, gave the Commissioner of Taxation authority to re quire that all income be returned on an accruals basis. As a consequence of that decision people such as solicitors and accountants, but not doctors or barristers, were required to return their income on an accruals basis. As I am advised, the Commissioner of Taxation does not accept the efficacy and therefore the tax avoiding consequences of what this group of people is purporting to do. He has advised me that he will be contesting very vigorously what is being done. I might further in form the honourable gentleman and the House that, if those efforts are not successful, the Commissioner might consider taking further action, including requiring that an accruals form of taxation returning be adopted by people who presently enjoy the privilege of returning their income on a cash receipts basis, thus applying in full the authority given to him by the Henderson decision.
B52 BOMBERS Mr BRADFIELD-Can the Minister for De fence inform the House when B52 bombers are expected to commence staging through Darwin? Mr KILLEN Arrangements have been made for a B52 aircraft which would be on a routine navigational flight over Cape York to land in Dar win in the first week in May. It will be ac companied by a KC 1 35 tanker. I think the land ing in the first week in May is to mark the Coral Sea celebrations.
TAX AVOIDANCE Mr MILTON-Is the Treasurer aware of a tax avoidance scheme presently flourishing in Australia whereby discretionary trusts with all beneficiaries overseas are established, which en ables the tax paid on net income by individuals to

be nil? Will the Treasurer undertake to investi gate this practice, which is costing the country millions of dollars in lost revenue?
Mr HOWARD-I will be very happy to inves tigate what the honourable gentleman has just said. If he or any of his colleagues have any further details on that scheme or any other schemes, I will be more than happy to have them very fully investigated.
HOME SAVINGS GRANTS Mr BOURCHIER-My question, which is directed to the Minister for Housing and Con struction, concerns the home savings grants. Is the Minister aware that, because of the delay of sev eral months before a grant is actually paid, some home builders are unable to use this grant effec tively to assist them in the initial stages with the actual building of their homes? Is he aware also that they cannot use the fact that a grant has bcen approved to obtain bridging finance? Will he consider issuing a certificate or voucher that would be acceptable by finance institutions? Mr McVEIGH-I am aware of the problems and difficulties enumerated by the honourable member for Bendigo. I thank him for his question and congratulate him for his long interest in this matter and the many constructive proposals he has put to me. We appreciate the difficul ties but, notwithstanding the points that he made, it is per tinent to point out to the House that at present applications for home savings grants are running at an all-time record. We have been staggered by the number of people making application under and obviously good use of that important incen tive scheme. The present legislation does not allow for the certificate commented on by the honourable member to be issued. However, as the Minister for Housing and Construction, I am fully aware of the problem. It should be appreciated that there is an economic difficulty in that the amount of money allocated to the scheme-in exccss of $50m this year-is part and parcel of budgetary and monetary control. I will be looking at ways of overcoming the problem. However, there is the additional problem of how one enforces the rules and regulations. Obviously a time lag is required for assessment of the bona fides of any application. I will give to the House an instance of a difficulty that comes readily to mind. A person called Smith obtained a home savings grant in about 1 975, just after the Australian Labor Party had abolished the scheme. He then sought to obtain a further loan by chang ing his name by deed poll to Asmith. I give that as

1238 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

an example of a difficulty which could be experi enced if a certificate of this sort were issued. However, we will be monitoring tl'fe positioil aild looking at ways of overcoming the problems enumerated by the honourable member.
DOMESTIC AIR FARES Mr ROBERT BROWN-I ask the Minister for Transport: What proportion of Sydney Canberra air passengers travel on official govern mcnt business and for other government fare paid purposes? In view of the Minister's failure to set a profit ceiling and in view of the fact that a reduced number of private passengers will travel on that route because of the savage 40 per cent increase in passenger air fares, to what extent will the Australian taxpayers, through government expenditure, further subsidise the profits of private pam pered airlines? Mr HUNT-The Government makes no apol ogy whatsoever for attempting to remove, in this air fare adjustment, the very substantial subsidy from those passengers who have been travelling over very long distances to those more fortunate passengers who travel between Canberra and Sydney. Those passengers do have other means of transport available to them. They have a coach service, a train service and a very good road ser vice. They do have a choice. This places them at a distinct advantage when compared with those people who have to travel to Darwin, Perth or dis tant places. In regard to the other part of the question about the percentage of travellers who are on expense accounts, or the percentage of passengers travelling on the Sydney-Canberra route, I think the figure is in excess of 50 per cent. I will get the exact percentage for the honourable gentleman and give it to him after Question Time. I do not have the percentage figure with me but it is in my office.
DISALLOWED QUESTION Mr Sainsbury having addressed a question to the Minister for the Capital TerritoryMr SPEAKER-The question is out of order.
35-HOUR WORKING WEEK Mr LIONEL BOWEN-My question is directed to the Minister for Industrial Relations. I refer to the decision of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission in relation to the hours of work in the case known as the Altona case. Will the Minister inform the House as to the Commission's findings regarding the net cost of implementation and also the number of new jobs as assessed by the company in its submission to the

joint working party which was tendered in evidence in that case?
Mr PEACOCK-I do not have all the details regarding this matter with me, but it is timely all the same for a question to be raised about what agreement the parties entered into on that occasion. It should be noted that whilst the parties to the Altona agreement submitted that the cost would be minimalI think they alleged it would be $34,000 net, or 0. 1 8 per cent of total wages of current award employees-in a number of cases the cost offsets amounted to nothing more than an undertaking to work normally in accordance with existing awards. In effect, the employees are being rewarded for past inefficiencies. They will receive the 35-hour week for such 'concessions' as those applying at one of the companies there. My recol lection is that the company will implement correct timekeeping. The saving is alleged to be $ 1 6,250. It will use work and job cards more efficiently resulting in a saving of $40,000. It will restrict tea breaks to the existing allocated time-a saving of $30,700. So much for the con cessions and the offsets. As I say, there seems to me to be an agreement to work no more than in accord with existing awards.
TAXATION DE DUCTIONS Mr N. A. BROWN-My question is addressed to the Treasurer, who r assume does not work a 35-hour week. Does he work at home performing work for which he is paid as Treasurer? If so, in the course of doing that does he incur some costs? If so, was he disappointed to find that the High Court of Australia, in one of the rare victories recently by the Commissioner of Taxation, had disallowed a taxation deduction in the case of a person running an office at home and incurring in cidental costs associated with it, those costs being incurred, as was maintained, ih the course of earn ing assessible income? All that being so, will the Treasurer consider this decision and consider changing the legislation to allow such expenses to be deductible? Mr HOWARD-The answer to the first part of the question is no. The answer to the second part of the question is yes. Answering the third part of the question gives me an opportunity to point out to the House that what the High Court of Australia has in fact done in the Forsyth and Handley cases, as I am presently advised, is to re store the position which had long existed. The Commissioner of Taxation did not allow the de ductions that were claimed by Forsyth and Handley in the circumstances of their cases. That practice had existed for many years. It was not until the decision, I think, of the Supreme Court

Questions Without Notice

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 239

of Victoria in Forsyth's case and then the decision of the Federal Court of Australia which put that practice in doubt. The result of the High Court's decision is to restore the law to its former, long practised and long adhered to position. In those circumstances, as I am presently disposed and advised, I would not be recommending to the Government that the law be changed in the manner requested by the honourable gentleman.
Mr N. A. Brown-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. l did not ask whether there was a change. r asked whether the Treasurer is considering a change.
Mr SPEAKER-I think the Treasurer says that he is not going to do that. That certainly implies that he has considered it.
TAX AVOIDANCE Mr JACOBI-My question, which is addres sed to the Treasurer, concerns tax avoidance. Does the Treasurer agree that whatever amendments he makes to section 260 and section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act, the real battle still lies with the High Court of Australia? Has his attention been drawn to the recent decision of the House of Lords in which the House of Lords specifically rejected the judgment of the former Chief Justice in the Westraders case? Is it a fact that the House of Lords was able to arrive at this decision despite the absence of a blanket provision such as section 260 of the Income Tax assessment Act? Will the Treasurer now consider an appro priate amendment to oblige Australian courts to alter their canons on the construction or their interpretation of taxation laws so that such laws are applied in accordance with the intent of this Parliament? Does the Treasurer agree that such amendments are necessary to strengthen the redrafted section 260 and section 1 36 of the Act? Mr HOWARD-- With your indulgence, Mr Speaker, I convey to the honourable member for Diamond Valley my regrets if I misunderstood the intent of his question. In reply to the honourable member for Hawker, I state that not surprisingly my attention has been drawn to the decision of the House of Lords in the case to which the honour able member referred in which their lordships appear to have taken a robustly practical approach to the interpretation of the taxation stat ute in question. Naturally, the consequences of such an approach, if continued in other parts of the common law world, would not be irrelevent to what might happen to the tax avoidance industry and to the construction of taxation legislation. As to his specific request that legislative action be taken to indicate to the courts what approach they should adopt in interpreting statutes, that

sort of issue more properly lies within the responsibility of my colleague, the Attorney General, to whom I will refer what the honour able gentleman has said. I would only comment that the role of the courts in interpreting the laws of this country is long established and that powerful reasons would need to exist before the role that they have traditionally played could be in any way qualified or interfered with.
TASMANIA Mr LUSHER-I ask the Treasurer whether it is necessary, for defence purposes, that some Australians occupy Tasmania. Is this the only reason some Australians live in that State? Will the Treasurer table a cost-benefit study indicating how much mainland Australian taxpayers con tribute to the maintenance of a population of Tas mania? Will the Treasurer consider transferring all Tasmanian subsidy appropriations to the de fence vote? Failing this, can the amount be trans ferred to the social welfare vote? Failing that, can sovereignty of Tasmania be transferred to New Zealand and, if any subsidies are still required, can they be paid under the foreign aid vote? Mr HOWARD-I think that the best answer I can give to that question is to say that I will analyse it thoroughly.
DOMESTIC AIR FARES Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Minister for Transport whether he recalls saying among other things last August, in relation to a proposal by the Labor Party that Tasmanian air travel should be subsidised, that such a practice would 'bankrupt this nation quicker than an airline could fly from Hobart to Melbourne'; but, more relevantly, whether he recalls saying:
Mr Hayden would know that a subsidy of this type would be extremely difficult to confine to Tasmania. Residents of Western Australia, the Northern Territory, North Queens land, Western Queensland and outlying areas throughout Australia could all justly claim that they face similar dis advantages . . . The inevitable outcome may well be that the entire airline network would have to be included in such a taxpayer subsidy arrangement.
As he has declared that it would be a matter of justice for the treatment which he anounced last night would be extended to Tasmania, or be also extended to Western Australia, the Northern Territory, North Queensland and outlying areas throughout Australia, when will that declaration of justice be fulfilled by the extension of the sub sidy announced last night to those other areas that he has identified as having a fair claim to the same sort of treatment?
Mr HUNT-When the Government took this decision it had the benefit of the Holcroft report.

1 240 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

When the Labor Party made its policy announce ment all it had in mind was trying to win votes in Tasmania. The Government's decision was a rational decision. The Labor Party's decision was a political decision and, in respect of those people-extMenrdeHd?a.yden-When will the justice be
Mr HUNT-The hoourable member has been done like a dinner and he knows it. In respect to those people living in Western Australia, Darwin and so on, as a result of the recommendations of the Holcroft report, we are moving to ensure that justice is done. The people who have been travelling those routes have been subsidising thc people travelling the short-haul routes, the F27 routes and whatever, and what we are seek ing to do is achieve a just--
Mr Hayden-I raise a point of order. The Min ister is trying to evade the issue. He gave a firm pledge that, in a similar situation, he would subsi dise North Queensland, the Northern Territory, Western Australia and outlying p arts of Australia.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The h onourable member will resume his seat. There is no point of order.
Mr Hayden-When will he do it? He is being hypocritical.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I ask the Leader of the Opposition to remain silent.
Mr HUNT-The whole thrust of the Holcroft inquiry's recommendations-I suggest that the Leader of the Opposition read its report-is that there has been extensive cross-subsidisation. The Government made a preliminary examination of that report and made an interim adjustment, pending further consideration of that report, to remove the inequitable cross-subsidisation from those people who travel to and from Darwin, Perth or wherever. The decision in regard to Tas mania was taken against the background of the Holcroft report. The Holcroft report indicated that if there were to be subsidies to compensate Tasmanians for the fact that they have no land bridge, it should be done off-Budget and not through the fare setting system.
Mr Hayden-But Holcroft didn't recommend it.
Mr HUNT-I said 'if'.
GENERAL AVIATION STUDY Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) -For the information of honourable members, I present the report on the general aviation study.

Copies of the occasional papers prepared by the Bureau of Transport Economics for the purposes of the study are available from the Parliamentary Library.
AUSTRALIAN TOURIST COMMISSION AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.
FEDERAL PROCEEDINGS (COSTS) BILL 1980
Message received from the Senate agreeing to the amendments made by the House of Representatives.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION Mr HAYDEN ( Oxley Leader of the . Opposition ) --I wish to make a personal explanation. Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentle man claim to have been misrepresented? Mr HAYDEN-Yes, Mr Speaker. As the Min ister for Transport (Mr Hunt) was walking away from the table after he answered the last question that I directed to him r interjected that Holcroft did not recommend a subsidy to Tasmania, and the Minister said: 'Yes, he did. You should know bettcr than that'. That is not correct. Holcroft did not recommend a subsidy to Tasmania. He made it clear that he had the strongest reservations about such a proposal but that, if the Government was going to do such a thing, there ought to be an explicit subsidy.
DEVELOPMENT OF RAAF BASE, LEARMONTH, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Report ofPublic Works Committee Mr BUNGEY (Canning)-In accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1 969, I present the forty-fourth general report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and also the report on the following proposed work: Development of the Royal Australian Air Force Base, Learmonth, Western Australia. Ordered that the reports be printed. Mr BUNGEY-by leave-This general report summarises the Committee's activity during 1 980 and is in two parts. Part one covers the period I January to 1 8 September 1 980 relating to thc , twenty-fifth Committee during which time 1 2 rc ports were presented to Parliament, and part two deals with the period 26 November to 3 1 December 1981 relating to the incoming twenty sixth Committee. The report reviews the standard

Trans-Australia Airlines

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 241

of submissions presented during 1 980 and con tains a summary of developments covering the six-year period which culminated in the amendments to the Public Works Committee Act which widen the ambit of the Committee and which have just passed through both Houses of the Parliament. As with previous general reports, information concerning proposals reported on by the Committee over the previous five years is also included. "
TRANS-AUSTRALIA AIRLINES Discussion ofMatter ofPublic Importance Mr SPEAKER-I have received letters from the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) and the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) proposing that definite matters of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion today. As required by Standing Order 1 07 I have selected the matter which in my opinion is the most urgent and important; that is that proposed by the honourable member for Shortland, namely:
The widespread public concern over the Government's intention to dismantle Trans-Australia Airlines as a publicly owned enterprise.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) ( 1 1 .56)-There is widespread concern across Australia at the Government's intention to dismantle Trans Australia Airlines as a publicly owned transport enterprise. The carefully guarded statements of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) on the future ownership of Trans-Australia Airlines are but the latest episode in the shabby, sordid story of mismanagement of aviation policy and the continued preferential treatment of the proprietors of Ansett Airlines of Australia. The Minister's deliberately vague statements about Trans Australia Airlines were designed to conceal his true intent which is the sale of TAA to private enterprise, a course which was strongly urged upon the Government by Mr Rupert Murdoch and Sir Peter Abeles at their original negotiations for the new two-airline agreement and by a group of Government back benchers led by Senator Rae. Irrespective of the denials of those opposite, the sale of Trans-Australia Airlines will have one inevitable result and that is the creation of a private monopoly in the provision of major domestic airline services in this country with, consequently, higher air fares and greater profits for Ansett.

This will all happen at the expense of air travel lers of this country.
Trans-Australia Airlines 'was set up to provide a system of airline services across Australia when the aviation industry was in its infancy. The sole investment of the Australian people in Trans Australia Airlines has been $ 1 5m, and that was by the Chifley Government in the 1 940s. It has not cost the taxpayers one cent since. Despite the many obstacles, disabilities and impediments placed in its path by successive conservative governments the people's airline has become the major domestic airline and the leader in the intro duction of innovative services. It enjoys the support of a majority of the Australian air travellers. Due to the dedication and service of its employees over the last 35 years it has succeeded in establish ing itself as a symbol of national endeavour, national identity, national pride and achievement and as a symbol of Australian national spirit. All Australians share its ownership.
The Government's plan to sell up Trans Australia Airlines would rob Australians of their share of ownership of the airline and place owner ship in the hands of wealthy investors' and stock exchange speculators. This move is the forerunner of other Government moves to sell off only the profitable public enterprises or those sections that return a profit, and sell them off to the private sector and so deprive Australians of their share of ownership of valuable national assets. It is a des picable plan that amounts to a pilfering of public property and it deserves the strongest condemnation by this Parliament and by all Australians. Trans-Australia Airlines is one of the few profitable areas of our public transport system and it is essential that it remains in full public ownership with its continuing objective being the provision of safe, convenient airline services at minimum cost to travellers. It should not be sold off to line the pockets of the Government 's wealthy friends whose sole objective is personal profit and who are responsible for those who sit opposite being in government today.
Two spurious arguments have been advanced for the sale of TAA: Firstly, that it arises from the recommendations of the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares. That argument is totally false. Nowhere in any of the 36 recommendations of the inquiry is there any suggestion, not even one word, that recommends or mentions the sale of Trans-Australia Airlines or a change to its financial structure. Secondly, the proponents of the sale of TAA claim that it suffers financial disabilities in comparison with Ansett, which problem can be remedied only by selling the airline. Those disabilities-higher

1 242 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Trans-Australia Airlines

interest charges, inability to borrow locally, loss incurring country services, superannuation contributions-are matters that can be overcome by relatively minor amendments to existing legis l ation. They are matters for decision by government, not by the airline, because the airline is forced to operate within the environment created for it by government policy. Those disabilities in no way justify the selling of TAA to private enterprise. The Minister, his predecessor and the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) have re peatedly denied that the Government intended to sell Trans-Australia Airlines. But the fact is that it is Australian Liberal Party policy that TAA should be sold within four years. Just as the Government deceived the public on the pro visions of the new two-airline agreement, so it has deceived electors as to its intentions in respect of Trans-Australia Airlines. Four weeks ago I showed in this Parliament the manner in which the Minister for Transport had misled the Parliament and the public as to the conduct and activi ties of the Holcroft inquiry. Government members have asserted that TAA is responsible for a restriction of competition in airline services. That assertion also is false.
TAA was the target of the two-airline agreement when it was devised. The real obstacle to greater competition in air services has been the policy of successive conservative governments of protecting Ansett, whatever the cost. The new two-airline agreement shows that fact indisputa bly. The true intent of this Government to sell off TAA can be seen from the advice that has been given to the Minister for Transport. In recent months he has spoken repeatedly of the need to 'commercialise' TAA as have other proponents of the sale of TAA. It is obvious that the Australian NationaL Airlines Amendment Bill (No. 2) 1 980 presented to this chamber on 1 8 September last is to be discarded. Its purpose, we were told by the Minister at that time, was to make TAA more commercial. What the Minister did not tell us, and what has now been revealed, is that he was given expert advice almost a year ago that the only way by which TAA could be made fully com mercial would be for a majority shareholding in the airline to be sold off to private enterprise, and therein lies the nub of what the Government's action is all about, therein lies the reason that the Minister has not been able to tell the Parliament what the Government proposes to do in respect of the ownership of TAA. He knows very well what it is-it is to pilfer this property of the people; it is to sell off the airline which will lead eventually to the creation of a private monopoly in air services.

The Minister knows what I am saying is correct: He knows that the advice to which I have referred is correct. But why has not the Minister in a forthright manner brought that advice to the notice of the Parliament? Why has he not included that advice in the many statements he and his colleagues have made in respect of the future of airline services in this country? Why has he not spelt out what he really means by commercialising TAA? The reason he has not spelt it out is that it would have exposed the Government to massive public reaction prior to and during the election campaign and it would have exposed the Government's intent now. As I have said, the advice ex poses the Government's intent and it explains the deliberate vagueness of the Minister about the financial structure and the future of TAA.
The Minister's scant five-line statement yesterday-it was almost a throwaway line-was designed to conceal the Government's true objective. All Australians who value the services provided by TAA and their ownership of TAA as Australians mU,st now express their opposition to this robbery by legislation that the Government proposes in respect of TAA. They must speak up now and express to this Government in the stron gest possible form that they will not tolerate this thievery, that they will not tolerate this pilfering of public assets to line the pockets of supporters of this Government.
Let me make this point clear: TAA is a creature of government; it is subject to government con trol; its disabilities are of the Government's cre ation. Yet honourable members opposite profess to be competent economic managers. It is clear from the evidence available that they cannot even superintend responsibly the affairs of the airline. It has been starved of capital and forced to oper ate with a higher borrowing ratio than its com petitor. The only capital injection it received was the $ 1 5m in the 1940s to which I referred earlier. It was forced last year by this Government, by this Minister and by this Prime Minister to pay a higher dividend to the Government than was commercially sound. It has been required to oper ate heavy loss incurring country air services by government demand. It has incurred greater superannuation liabilities than Ansett by government edict. To assert now that those financial disabilities are the fault of the airline is to be utterly dishonest and irresponsible.
Government members who have participated in the orchestrated campaign which has been waged against TAA and which has been sup ported by the Ansett Press have never questioned the financial performance of Ansett Airlines of

Trans-Australia Airlines

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 243

Australia, its efficiency or the meagre airline in formation which has been provided by that company to this Parliament and which consists of a sparse one page of sectional headings. Yet those opposite in this chamber or in the other chamber who are the proponents of the sale of TAA have never once put forward a case as to why Ansett Transport Industries should provide full and detailed information to this Parliament on its financial performance and on its airline activities. In 1 979, Senator Rae, the leader of the push, valued TAA at $30m, which he said was a reason able figure. Last year Mr Rupert Murdoch put a value on TAA of $1 50m, which is five times the previous figure. Yet Senator Rae and his sup porters participate in the Government's transport and finance committees, and they obviously have a major input into Government policy in respect of aviation and finance. There we see the com petence of the economic managers. They are at tributing one-fifth of the real value of TAA because it is a public asset. As it is a profit making enterprise, they want to get it out of the hands of the public and into the hands of the private sector. I have been advised this morning that already Mr Robert Holmes a'Court is in Canberra to put a proposition to purchase TAA to the Minister and to the Government. So let there be an end to the cant opposite that the Government does not pro pose to sell TAA. Let those opposite be honest and forthright for once and try to tell the truth.
The public record shows that this Government cannot be trusted to carry out any of its undertak ings. It cannot be believed. Its Minister for Transport cannot be believed. His performance and the Government's record of broken promises show that fact. Nor can the assurances of the Min ister for Transport in respect of TAA's future be given any credence. The simple facts are that the changes proposed to TAA and its sale constitute the pirating of a valuable national asset, the pilfer ing of public property for the benefit of this Government's wealthy supporters, and the de struction of a national symbol of achievement. The Australian Labor Party-and let me make this quite clear to any intending purchasers-will use every resource at its disposal to block the sale of Trans Australia Airlines, to block this pilfering of public property and, if by some mischance the Government manages to sell TAA in part or in full, the next Labor government will restore it to rightful public ownership, that is, to the owner ship of all Australians, not just to the privileged few whom this Government represents.

Peter Abeles in the negotiations with the Government in respect of the new two-airline agreement was that TAA should be sold to commercial interests. The letter has been made public within recent days. Correspondence between the Minister for Transport and Sir Peter Abeles dated 3 March last year, which my colleague the honour able member for Sydney (Mr Les McMahon) revealed last week, shows that to be true. It shows that Ansett requested the introduction of auto matic air fare increases, and it shows that Ansett requested that TAA should have a net profit tar get of 1 0 per cent on revenue before tax. Government advice shows that a set profit figure for TAA, related either to a share of revenue or to a set target, irrespective of the decisions made by the airline or the Government, would in effect guarantee profits for Ansett, irrespective of efficiency, or performance.
In his letter to Sir Peter Abeles, the Minister said that the Government rejected Ansetl's prop osition. But, in the new two-airline agreement which was signed some months later, the Minister caved in completely, and yielded to the request of Ansett. Provision was made in the agreement for Ansett to have automatic fare increases and, in September last, provision was made in the legislation for TAA to change the structure of TAA's profit objective, so providing exactly what government expert advice recommended against. This Government is in effect thieving a valuable public asset for the benefit of its friends, and the Minister for Transport is a principal tool in this shameful exercise.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) ( 1 1 . 39)-The Opposition's matter of public im portance reads:
The widespread public concern over the Government's intention to dismantle TAA as a publicly owned enterprise.
It signals the great difficulty that the Labor social ist party has in accepting the principles of private enterprise. The very fact that the Australian Labor Party associates the Government's inten tion to make Trans-Australia Airlines a public company with dismantling reveals beyond any doubt that the Labor Party still firmly adheres to its socialist intentions. Tn the minds of members of the Labor Party anything associated with private enterprise apparently is associated with disman tling. The Labor Party is a socialist party with socialist objectives. The Liberal and National Country parties happen to be private enterprise parties and this Government is a private enterprise government.

I said at the opening of my speech that the It is clear that the Labor Party sees as its clear prime demand of Mr Rupert Murdoch and Sir objective a completely state-owned economy.

1 244 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 198 1

Trans-Australia Airlines

Any move to make a statutory corporation a public company is claimed to be an act of dismantling, pulling down, tearing to pieces or stripping of pro tection. There is no doubt that the Australian Labor Party is still driven by its basic philosophy of socialisation of industry, distribution and exchange. The Labor Party quite deliberately has not spelt out its policy in respect of aviation. It covers its aviation policy in no more than three or four sentences.
Mr Morris-That is a lie. You know it to be a lie.
Mr HUNT-I wish to quote from the Australian Labor Party's platform and constitution as adopted by its thirty-third national conference in Adelaide in 1 979.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar) Order! The honourable member for Shortland will withdraw that remark.
Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, what the Minister is saying is--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will withdraw the reflection.
Mr Morris-It is untrue, but I withdraw the comment.
Mr HUNT-I wish to quote from the Labor Party's aviation policy as arrived at during the 1 979 Adelaide conference. It states:
Examine the effects of the existing airlines policy on passenger and freight carriage.
Ensure that air travel as a principal mode of long-distance public passenger transport is accessible to as wide a range of the community as possible.
Throughout the period that the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) has been shadow Minister for Transport he has never ad vanced a constructive policy in the aviation or transport areas generally. In fact, his whole per formance in these areas has been characterised by a continual barrage of destructive criticism. However, every so often he falls back on the procla mation of the 1 975 Inter-State Commission Act as Labor's panacea for the ills of the entire transport system. I can think of no more ill-defined remedy to meet the dynamic needs of aviation or transport generally.
In order to understand the motivations that lie behind the matter before the House, one needs to recall the history of the Labor Party's invol vement with aviation. Towards the end of the last war the then Labor Government decided that the interests of the Australian industry would be best served by implementing its socialist policy by nationalising the airline industry. Fortunately, this was found to be unconstitutional but, as a last

resort, the then Government looked to its Australian National Airlines Commission, which began operations as Trans-Australia Airlines in 1 946 to establish itself as a monopoly airline. The Australian Labor Party did everything in its power either to delay or to refuse Australian National Airways dollars or sterling funds to pur chase competitive aircraft while making such funds available to the government-owned oper ation. It directed all government business to the government-owned airlines. There is not the slightest doubt that the Labor Party discriminated against the private sector in characteristic socialist fashion.
The Labor Government of the day did every thing in its power to overcome the constitutional problem to achieve socialisation of the airlines by attempting to squeeze the private sector out of existence. It allowed TAA to operate without a commercial structure in direct competition with private enterprise in an attempt to destroy the survival of the private sector. We were so close to having a socialised airlines monopoly in this nation that it does not matter. I can think of nothing more drab or more unresponsive to public demand than such a socialised monopolistic setup. It is fortunate that for all but three years since 1 949 we have had a Liberal-National Country Party government which has attempted to allow both TAA and Ansett to conduct their operations within the concept of a two-airlines policy on as commercial grounds as possible.
In 1949 the Menzies Government decided that the nation's interests would be best served by a competitive airline policy. The Liberal-National Country Party Government is opposed to a mon opoly situation, government or private, in the transport area. We are opposed to that concept of a monopoly, whether the Government or private enterprise owns it. In the years that the Liberal National Country parties have been in government they have ensured that TAA has been able to operate in competition with Ansett. It did not allow TAA to operate in a privileged position which would untimately result in a government monopoly, or allow TAA to be disposed of in such a fashion as to allow a private enterprise mon opoly to take over airline operations in this country.
In making TAA a public company, the Government will ensure that it remains as a separate airline, whether the Government owns all the shares or whether some shares are made available to the public. Decisions have yet to be made about the nature of the structure of TAA operating as a public company. Let it be clearly understood that no action will be taken that will allow Ansett to

Trans-A ustralia Airlines

2 April 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 245

buy into TAA. That possibility is just not on under any circumstances. Our objective in making TAA a public company is to give it a commercial flexibility which is necessary to compete with Ansett in the market place and to remove the cost burdens that are not shared by AnsetL 1 would like to remind the honourable member for Shortland that the problem of superannuation was created in 1 973 when the Labor Government was in office and it indexed pensions.
Mr MorrisWhat have you done about it? What have you done in the last five years?
Mr HUNT The honourable member should not try to run away from it. The Opposition was responsible for the problem when it was in government. So many of the problems which this country faces today owe their origins to some of the stupid actions that were taken by Labor when it was in government. We make no apology what sover for having embraced the principles of private enterprise and competition. We do not ad here to the socialist philosophies of state ownership. In relation to TAA, let me quote what Mr Frank Ball, the General Manager of TAA, is reported to have said. The report states:
TAA welcomes the move to make the airline a public company, TAA's General Manager said today. We envisage it will be a company along the lines of Qantas. TAA has always acted in a competitive way but because we are a statutory authority we have cost burdens not borne by our competitor. This was pointed out by the Holcroft inquiry and in our annual report. We now look forward to putting our views to the Government on the nature and structure of the rules that will have to be drawn up for the new company.
Mr Charles JonesCan you give me an assur ance that it will be on the same basis as Qantas?
Mr HUNT-I will give no assurance at all until all the options have been considered by the Government and until Cabinet has had a chance to look at them. I continue to quote what Mr Ball is reported to have stated:
These, we expect, will remove previous burdens and set a new TAA up with an appropriate capital structure and free us from the constraints of a statutory authority in respect to our commercial activities. Similar objectives were contained in the revisions to the Australian National Airlines Act which were introduced into Parliament last September.
There we have the General Manager of TAA ex pressing support for the concept of making TAA a public company.
Mr Morris-That is quite dishonest.
Mr HUNT-I would think that most people associated with this great airline, TAA, would welcome the opportunity to operate-
Mr Lloyd-Did I hear the honourable member for Shortland say that the General Manager of TAA was dishonest?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) There is no point of order.
Mr Morris-No. I was referring to the Minister. I said that the Minister was dishonest.
Mr HUNT -What an irritating little man. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Shortland will remain silent: I ask him to withdraw his remark. Mr HUNTI could not care less what he says about me. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member is required to withdraw under the Stand ing Orders of the House. The honourable member for Shortland will withdraw. Mr Morris-Under pressure from you, Mr Deputy Speaker, and in deference to the Chair, I withdraw. Mr HUNT-I would think that most people associated with this great airline, TAA, would welcome the opportunity to operate in more di rect competition with Ansett without the shackles and constraints that the various government de partments naturally have over government controlled statutory corporations or commissions. The Holcroft report makes it quite clear that there should be, in the interests of the public, a freer environment which determines fares. The Government's adherence to the two-airline policy has always be'en based on its desire to ensure that the major trunk routes throughout Australia have available to them a regular scheduled service serv ing all the major ports of call, with the most safe and sophisticated aircraft available and with the highest possible utilisation of capacity, thereby keeping air fares down to a minimum. It is no part of the policy of this Government to foster either a government monopoly or a private monopoly on our major air routes. It is our belief that TAA, having successfully established itselfas a statutory corporation, is now sufficiently mature to operate in the market place as a public company. We consider it to be absolutely necess ary that competition between these two major air lines should be as free as possible in the interests of the travelling public. I have no doubt that, with all the expertise and experience available to TAA, it will operate as a highly competitive airline when the claws of the bureaucracy are removed from it as a statutory corporation. Qantas Airways Ltd, as a public company with the Commonwealth owning all the shares, has proved beyond any doubt that it can compete against the biggest and the best airlines in the world. The fact that it has operated as a public company so succesfully for so long vindicates the Government's decision to

1 246 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Trans-Australia Airlines

make TAA a public company. Qantas is undoubtedly one of the best airlines in the world. Certainly it is one of the safest and one of the most competitive.

Mr West-Well, why are you selling it?

Mr HUNT-I am talking about Qantas and it is not for sale. I believe that when TAA becomes a public company and is free from government and bureaucratic control it will be more flexible an operation able to meet competition more effectively in the market-place. If we are to maintain air fares at their relatively cheap level-by international standards domestic air fares in Australia are cheap-it is necessary that TAA should operate as a public company. We make no apology what soever for putting the philosophies of this Gover nent into practice. We believe in the principle of private enterprise. We abhor and reject the miser able socialisation policies of the honourable member for Shortland and the Labor Opposition, as the Australian people have done in all but two of the elections which have been held since 1 949-in 1 972 and 1 974. They were deluded. If the honourable member and the Labor Opposition had their way--

Mr West-All right. What are you going to sell next?

Mr HUNT-Look at the honourable gentle

man. One can tell by the look of him that he is a

real socialist. He has four legs. is. He would nationalise an ant

What a colony.

monster .

he

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will withdraw the personal reflection on another honourable member.

Mr HUNT-I withdraw,

Mr West-Will you tell us what you are going to sell off next?

Mr HUNT-I would love to sell the honour able member but I would not get a price for him.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Has the Minister concluded his remarks?

Mr HUNT-Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker.

Mr MORRIS ( Shortland) - M r D eputy Spealcer, I claim to have been misrepresented.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member seeks to malce a personal explanation. He may do so.

Mr MORRIS-The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) in his remarks stated that I failed to present to him or to make available a copy of the Australian Labor Party's policy. He consistently referred to a platform policy. I should inform the House that the Minister knows that I know that he and his predecessor have regularly received

copies of all policy statements apart from the platform policy to which he referred. Either he cannot read, he cannot hear or he persists in mis leading the House. These statements are available at all times.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The discussion is concluded.
ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES CONSERVATION BILL 1981
- Second Reading Debate resumed from I April, on motion by Mr McVeigh:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) ( 1 1 .55)-We are dealing with the Antarctic Mar ine Living Resources Conservation Bill 1981 which was debated last evening. I am in the con cluding stage of my speech. I reiterate the point that we should consider the Antarctic from the point of view of foreign policy. It is very import ant that, whilst we are a party to the Antartic Treaty and whilst we welcome this legislation which relates to conservation, we bear in mind that we have done very little to establish our sov ereign rights effectively by displaying a practical interest in the area. I recognise that we spend a small amount of money but we even have to rent an icebreaker. Our financial resources are a mere $ 1 5m. [ made the point last evening that the Government of West Germany, for example, is planning to spend several hundred million dollars in the next three years. We claim three-sevenths, or six million square kilometres, of the total area. Unless we do something tangible about that claim by providing more financial resources, establish ing our own fishing rights and recognising the competing interests under the law of the sea con vention, other nations will regard themselves as being entitled to the high seas below the 60-degree parallel. These things have to be faced up to by Australians from the point of view of foreign policy.
When considering that matter we must also look at the claims of the underdeveloped countries. To assist such claims would give us some guarantee of recognition in the future of our interest in the area, not the least of which is the fact that we should be sharing some of those resources with the underdeveloped countries. I refer to scientific aid, such as bringing the scientists of those countries to the Antarctic, and aho, in ac cordance with the law of the sea convention, giving them a share of the resources. If the law of the sea convention is ever established it is proposed that the underdeveloped countries should get, say,

Antarctic Marine Conservation Bill

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 247

5 per cent, of the resources in the area. The same criterion ought to apply now. For all these reasons we would like the Government to become interested in what we can do. It should be not merely the office boy in Hobart but also one of the managing directors of the resources of the Antar tic. We could then establish in the future our legit imate claims to the area and guarantee that we are not excluded because we are too weak and subser vient and unable to finance those claims. In that case we would lose our chance to protect those resources.
Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) ( 1 1 . 58)-1 wish to make a few comments about the Antarctic Mar ine Living Resources Conservation Bill because of its importance to Australia's involvement in the Antarctic territory and also because of my recent experience when I was fortunate enough to undertake a round trip from Melbourne to the Antarctic territory aboard the Thala Dan. This Bill legislates for Australia to become an official member of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. More im portantly it provides for the headquarters of the new international Commission to be established in Hobart. Previous speakers, including the honour able member for Denison (Mr Hodgman) last night, have pointed out that this is the first time that an international commission of such a nature has been based in Australia. That is significant in its own right. Perhaps the commission to be established to look over the continental base resources will also be based in Australia. I understand that we are the first nation to ratify the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Re sources. Indeed, it is a further development of Australia's involvement and international reputation in the Antarctic. This involvement originated many years ago and we have made significant contributions not only to the exploration of that continent but also to its subsequent development.
At the moment we are involved in a major rebuilding program of our three continental bases at Mawson, Davis and Casey, a program that will extend over 1 0 years and involve about $55m. We are presently looking very carefully at proposals to build our own ship to transport both cargo and passengers from Australia to the continental bases. We have looked at and I believe we should continue to look more seriously at the prospects for providing effective air transportation through New Zealand, by means of ski-equipped transport aircraft, to all three or at least two of our conti nental bases. As a signatory to the Treaty we are looking to what may eventuate when the Treaty

comes up for renewal in 1 989. We have a very his toric presence in that continent with the explo rations and the very fine record of Sir Douglas Mawson. I advocated in this House some weeks ago that this Government should look seriously at the prospect of bui1ding a memorial to Mawson in Australia and at the same time restoring his hut in Australia's Antarctic territory to provide a per petual memorial to him and his efforts in that continent.
I was interested in one of the speeches last night which referred to the enormous biological resources that are now being realised in the seas around the Antarctic continent. Figures given on the estimated amount of krill were between 800 million tonnes and 5,000 million tons. I presume the figures related to production per year. J under stand that this means that krill is the largest pro tein source yet to be exploited in the world. We know that there have been discoveries of econ omically important and significant minerals in the continent. We know that hydrocarbons have been found off-shore on the continental shelf. We know that the Antarctic is being viewed by some nations as being of strategic and tactical sig nificance. The Antarctic has moved from being regarded as a continent of major scientific interest, particularly for its contribution to meteorology, to an area of vast interest for its resources, both biological and non-biological. I therefore believe the Australian Government should be congratulated for being the first to rat ify this important Convention on the Conser vation of Marine Living Resources in the Antarc tic and sub-Antarctic waters.
Australia's record on environmental concerns in Antarctica is very gooo. We are leaders in many ways of dealing with waste, both biological and non-biological, as a result of our presence in the Australian Antarctic territory. I have a very com prehensive report which refers to the Antarctic environment, particularly the proposed rebuild ing program of Australia's Antarctic stations. Most stations in the Antarctic pollute the environment, which is very fragile. Most stations are discharging untreated sewage effluent into the sea. Solid and non-combustible refuse is being col lected at tips and in many cases, particularly dur ing the summer melt season, it is also pushed di rectly into the sea. Much of the biodegradable refuse is thrown to the scavengers, the skuas. Some of the chemical waste is of considerable concern, particularly chemicals that relate to colour photo processing. They are also being dis charged into the sea or into pits without any real attempts at environmental control. I am pleased to say that Australia's efforts in environmental

1 248 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Antarctic Marine Conservation Bill

control in the Antarctic are very sound. Our new party to the Convention. Illegal harvesting or re

rebuilding program will provide some of the most search that is done without a permit or in contra

up to date and effective means of waste disposal vention of a permit will carry a maximum penalty

and toxic chemical neutralisation and disposal in of $50,000 for individuals and $ 1 00,000 for a body

the entire continent. The marine resources of corporate.

 the continent, to which I have referred are vast
indeed. They include not only the wh les, seals

and birds of Antarctica which, of course, are of

t lesser economic interest but also krill fish and
perhaps squid. !,he area is one of he major

sources of protem for human consumption, per

phraopvsI.dneost

so a

much major

directly but component

indirectly, of rations

in that it for live

stock and other feeding purposes. I hope that con

ventions such as this one will ensure that the Ant

arctic marine resources are not overexploited but

can be preserved and used in balance, not by

upsetting the very delicate ecosystem that we

know exists in that area.

Whilst the Bill basically is designed to cover Australians in their actions in the Southern Ocean, it will have jurisdiction over all people and vessels within Australian waters and the Australian fishing zone. Since the Antarctic conver gence is north of Heard Island and Macdonald Island-two Australian territories in the Southern Oceanthe Australian fishing zone around each island falls within the Convention area. I suppose we shall, therefore, have to regulate fishing by foreign vessels in these zones under the Fisheries Act because they will need Australian permission to harvest marine living resources in these areas.

 AuIstcraalliaf?mr

a greater respect of

impetus research,

and emphasis by particularly mar

ine research. That is one of the areas in which we

have been lagging for some time, although in re

cent years there has been some attempt to pro

r mote further marine research facilities in

AeqnUti.aprpcetdicat.oOpnreoVoIdtehemsahriipnse

has been research

partly re facilities.

Many other nations are far ahead of Australia in

terms of marine research and marine biological re

search in the Antarctic territorial waters. We

know also that many nations are fishing those

waters. We do not know how much krill and fish

is being taken by, for example, some of the East

European countries. I am very pleased to note

that some of those countries have seen fit to be sig

natories to this new Convention.

I know that many other members wish to speak in this debate. In closing, I compliment the Government in moving as quickly as it has. I ap plaud Australia's record in the Antarctic. I believe that we have a commitment in many ways to lead the world in our approach to the Antarctic environment.

The Opposition supports this legislation and is

happy that Hobart was named as the site of the

headquarters of the Commission set up under this

convention. I hope that this will boost the

Government's flagging interest in research in

Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. The Conven

tion on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine

miavdinegquRacIseos,uracsesa, rehofwouevnedr,inhaasll

some glaring international

agreements reached by consensus, but it also has

major breakthroughs. it recognises the need to

prevent irreversible changes to the ecosystem and

uses the ecosystem approach harvesting. It defines

the northern boundary of Antarctic waters using

ecological criteria instead of an arbitrarily decided

latitude. The ecosystem approach to harvesting is

embodied in Article X I of the Convention. As a

 result, harvesting of prey species-that is
krill  in the Antarctic waters will be limited if th

reduction in that species is affecting predator

species, that is, seals or whales. Previous fishing

agreements have usually considered species in iso

lation ignoring the cffects of harvesting on non

target species.

Mr WEST (Cunningham) ( 1 2.7)-The Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Bill ratifies the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources signed in Canberra last May. Fifteen nations signed the Convention. Australia has been designated the depository country for the Convention and also will be the first country to ratify the Convention. There will be a permit system established to allow the harvesting and researching of marine organ isms in the Convention area-those waters between the Antarctic continent and the Antarctic

The northern boundary of the Convention area is defined as the Antarctic convergence. This con vergence is where temperate waters meet cold Antarctic water and form a natural boundary which effectively isolates the cold water species of the Antarctic. For example, krill are not found north of this convergence. The 1 9 59 Antarctic Treaty set a northern boundary of the Antarctic region as 60 degrees south which, whilst precise geographically, does not mirror the natural physi cal boundary of the Antarctic marine ecosystem of the Antarctic convergence.

convergence. The Bill also recognises permits or Whilst agreements on these two matters are

authorities issued by another country which is a major advances for an international agreement,

Antarctic Marine Conservation Bill

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 249

the Convention has a number of weaknesses, as pointed out in Dr Suter's book Antarctica: World Law and the Last Wilderness. The Convention specifically avoids provisions for setting national catch quotas and limitations on fishing effort. Without national catch quotas, we may see a massive build-up of fishing fleets which will make it unlikely that those countries will reduce operations in the future to comply with future scien tifically agreed on quotas. Membership of the Commission is restricted to those States that are engaged in fishing or research activities in Antarc tica. Even then, admission depends upon a unani mous vote of acceptance by the Commission countries. That is a closed shop arrangement with Antarctica being claimed as the exclusive domain of the treaty nations.
Amendment of the Convention depends on consensus being reached so that each country has a veto. If this is not enough, any country party to the Convention need not accept conservation measures developed by the Commission by con sensus. The United States of America, I under stand, proposed a two-thirds majority voting system but this was not accepted by the other parties including Australia. Enforcement of decisions will be virtually impossible, I am afraid. Britain, New Zealand, the United States of America and Nor way all argued for a strong system of observance and inspection with adequate enforcement. But other countries stopped this. The Convention does have an observer system but it requires only flag state endorsement. The section of the first Canberra draft of the Convention affording ob servers freedom of access to vessels, including reasonable facilities and accommodation, was dropped in the final document.
I realise that these points arise from a difficulty in getting 1 5 nations to agree on a common document such as this. However, we must question the prime purpose of the Convention. Is it to regulate the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources or is it to regulate their exploitation? Sev eral other conventions also deal with living resources in the Southern Ocean. They include the Convention of International Trade in Endangered Species, the Convention covering the Inter national Whaling Commission and the Conven tion on the Conservation of Antarctic Seals. There could be problems developing from such a fragmented approach to management of Antarc tic marine living resources.
The waters south of the convergence are ecologically distinct from the waters to the north. Most species remain entirely within the area although some, notably whales and seabirds, mi grate through it. As with all marine systems, there

is continuous interaction between the living or ganisms and the non-living environment. The Antarctic marine ecosystem is relatively simple, containing few species. A single species of krill holds a central position in the food web. It feeds on phytoplankton and zooplankton and is in turn the major food of the baleen whales, crabeater and other seals, fish and squid and many other or ganisms. Krill and the organisms that feed on it form the major economic living resources of the Southern Ocean. The harvesting of any of these organisms or groups of organisms in the Antarctic marine food web will have repercussions on other species in the ecosystem.
In 1 977, the reported catch of krill was 1 22,500 tonnes. The 1 978 catch by Japan, Poland and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was more than 200,000 tonnes. There have been estimates of krill production as high as 1 ,000 million tonnes a year. Prior to whaling, the baleen whales con sumed probably 1 90 million tonnes a year and, although decimated in number, may now con sume 50 million tonnes. People have argued that this leaves a surplus of 140 million tonnes a year which could be safely harvested. However, since the krill is central to the food web, a massive har vest could throw the entire ecosystem out of bal ance. In 1 978, some United States scientists suggested that, in order to encourage the recovery of whales, the interim catch of krill should not excced one million tonnes to 2.5 million tonnes. Soviet scientists have also reduced their estimates and some are now talking of a sustainable catch of 1 5 million tonnes.
Antarctic fin fish will be another major target for exploitation under the Convention. In 1 977, a fin fish catch of 279,000 tonnes was reported by the USSR, Poland and East Germany. Glowing projections of sustainable fisheries of millions of tonnes a year are frequently made by fishing countries but it should be noted that areas in the Ant arctic have already been overfished-such as the waters off South Georgia during the early 1 970s. With the tragic tale of the decimation of the whaling stock freshly in mind, the world should tread cautiously before plunging into the exploi tation of the marine resources of the Antarctic. I n the short to medium term, Australia will not be fishing these waters, but we must exert our influence on the Commission to ensure that past mistakes are not repeated. Although the ecosys tem approach which has been adopted by the Convention is a step in the right direction for the conservation of Aritarctic marine living resources, we cannot assume that the fishing nations signa tory to the Convention will be more interested in conservation than in achieving large catches to

1 250 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Antarctic Marine Conservation Bill

justify their large investment in research and fishing fleets.
Before I conclude I make the point that so far there does not appear to have been much attempt by the Commission to take into account anti-oil pollution devices and to set up art appropriate program. I draw attention to the fact that most of the super-tankers of the world, carrying oil between the Persian or Arabian Gulf and Europe, still travel via the Cape of Good Hope. Many of these tankers range from 250,000 tonnes upwards. The biggest seas in the world develop off the Cape of Good Hope around Cape Agulhas. Waves sometimes reach 1 00 or 1 50 feet in height. The so called holes in the sea can develop. It is not gener ally known that such a hole almost broke the back of the Queen Elizabeth during World War II. Many scientists and oil industry and shipping experts have pointed to the fact that it is quite conceivable that ' a super-tanker could break its back off the Cape of Good Hope and spill any thing up to half a million tonnes of oil into the Southern Ocean. I make the point that that ocean is the only ocean that encircles the globe unob structed by a land mass. Currents can circle the globe and it is quite possible that the Commission will have to do more to set up an oil spillage con trol mechanism. It is certainly not outside the realms of possibility that we could witness a huge oil-spillage disaster similar to that in which the Amoco Cadiz and Torrey Canyon were involved off the Cape of Good Hope, which is not so far from the Antarctic.
Antarctica is the last great wilderness of the planet. International co-operation is essential if we are to ensure the continued survival of marine and terrestrial ecosystems which will come under increasing pressure by competing interests for the living and non-living resources of the Antarctic. The Antarctic Treaty nations must not become a club to utilise the resources of Antarctica for their own exclusive benefit and take little note of the interests of the rest of the world. The protection of Antarctica's fragile ecosystem must be given top priority and resource exploitation must take second place to ensuring that this aim is preserved.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) ( 12.20)-The purpose of the Bill is to enable Australia to implement the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, as drawn up in May of last year. The 1 3 Antarctic Treaty consultative parties, with the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, last year took part in what I believe was the most import ant conference dealing with the Antarctic since 1 959, when the Antarctic Treaty was first signed.

That Treaty contained no provisions relating to resources exploitation. At the Seventh Consulta tive Meeting in Wellington in 1 972, the New Zealand delegation suggested that, in view of this omission, the question of the exploitation of living and non-living resources, and the consequent en vironmental implications, should be placed on the agenda for the Eighth Consultative Meeting. That is the real history of this Convention. A few months later, in February 1 973, the sea bed re search vessel Glomar Challenger, which was then engaged in deep sea drilling projects, found traces of methane and ethane in the Ross Sea area.
The subsequent Eighth Antarctic Treaty Con sultative Meeting, which was held in Oslo in 1 975 was, I believe, the turning point in attitudes towards the Antarctic. This meeting was the be ginning of a serious examination of problems which could arise if the l iving and non-living resources of Antarctica were to become commer cially exploitable. The intensive scientific re search which had taken place during and since the International Geophysical Year had revealed the fragility, if honourable members like, of the Ant arctic environment and the value of Antarctica generally. It was at the Oslo meeting that it be came clear that the Antarctic Treaty, which for 1 6 years had preserved Antarctica from the ad verse effects of commercial and ideological rivalry while promoting a unique co-operative international effort in scientific research, was coming under increasing strain. Since 1 975, the Treaty parties have been working intensively to maintain Antarctica's unique status as a continent of peace.
The Conference, which I was privileged to attend, culminated some three yea,rs of negotiations and discussions on the conservation of the entire ecosystem of the Antarctic. In essence, the Convention envisages the establishment of a Commission and a scientific committee with the task of putting into effect and overseeing the effetive conservation of marine living resources in the Antarctic. All nations which become party to the new Convention, whether or not they are parties to the Antarctic Treaty, assume an obli gation not to engage in any activities in the Ant arctic Treaty area that are contrary to the pur poses of that Treaty. They also undertake to be bound by specific articles of the Treaty and mspeeacIfuirceasllytatkheonsebyreclaotninsuglttaotitvheepdaermtieilsituanridsaertioitn, of the Antarctic, its use for peaceful purposes, the protection of its environment and its preservation as a zone free from international tensions and dis cord. I believe that it has accomplished that since it was first structured.

Antarctic Marine Conservation Bill

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 125 1

Embodied in the Convention is the concept that the whole Antarctic area, with its separate regional ecosystem, is to be treated as a single ecosystem because of its interrelationship with the living species that exist in the area. It covers all the marine living resources of the area and comp lements the provisions of the International Whaling Commission and the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Seals. For this reason, the Convention visualises the establishment of a scientific committee for the study and exchange of information with respect to Antarctic marine living resources. My assessment was that the Confer ence was a success. Not all parties were in agreement with the final convention. The fishing nations pressed for a weakening of the fishing re strictions in the area, whilst the conservationists demanded stricter controls.
It is of the utmostimportance that the concepts of responsible stewardship should prevail and that immediate economic consideration should not be the only criterion for deciding man's role in the Antarctic. The Antarctic and the Southern Ocean influence the whole world. Not only do these re gions play a crucial role in the formation of the earth's climatic and weather conditions, thereby affecting food production, but the far south also contains a significant reservoir of natural resources that could affect our welfare. We ought to take cognisance of the fact that for 50 years scien tists have been at work in the Southern Ocean frankly, 50 years is not long enough-and are now joining in an international research program, to which no one has referred until now. One hopes that that program-the Biological Investigation of Marine Antarctic Systems and Stocks or BIOMASS-will ensure that the Southern Ocean can be used with wisdom. Using information gathered from ships, shore stations and satellites, scientists hope to have results available by the mid-1 980s.
The damage to the Antarctic ecosystem began with uncontrolled whaling. With the use of whales in the production of manure, stock food, pet food and oil, whaling became a large scale industry in the early part of this century. In 1 925 the new pelagic floating factories began to operate, free to hunt whales anywhere in the Southern Ocean. With the increase in whaling, the whale society changed. Female blue and fin whales not only began to grow faster but also died earlier and did not grow as large as normal. I believe 1 9 3 1 marked the beginning of the end of the blue whale, the biggest animal that had lived on earth. In that year there was a record catch of 30,000 whales, which was predorriinantly used for oil. Sadly, it is - ironic that the catch was a massive

waste as the demand for oil dropped dramatically. Thereafter, the giant whale became a rare sight in the Antarctic. In 1 965, when so few blue whales were left that it was no longer profitable to hunt them, hunting was banned. It was a tragedy, Other species of wha1esfins, humpbacks, sperms and seis-have suffered similar fates to that of the blue whale.
We have had the same problem with seal hunt ing, which also was extensively pursued in the early part of the century. We often forget that in 1 9 6 1 it was the Antarctic Treaty nations, showing concern for uncontrolled sealing, that moved towards an international agreement to control sealing in the Antarctic. After 1 1 years, in 1 972 the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Seals was signed and six years later1 7 years after the initial moves-the Convention came into force when it was ratified by seven countries, However, that convention is only an attempt to manage properly the harvesting of Antarctic seals because there is no law or police force to enforce the Convention. Many honourable members on both sides of the House do not realise what a con vention is and what it entails. The ratification of this convention was much overdue and by the time it was ratified the Ross seals, fur seals and southern elephant seals had to be totally or par tially protected.
Perhaps the greatest interest in the Antarctic marine ecosystem presently lies in the supplies of krill. The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Re search lists an intensive study of the life history of krill as a priority. Nobody is certain how fre quently krill eggs are spawned, how deep they fall, how fast the young krill grow or how long they live. In fact, nobody knows much about krill except that it might provide the world with some 1 00 million tonnes of high protein food a year. That is more than man's entire fish catch in any given year. Krill is currently the main food source for whales, seals, squid and many birds and fish in the Antarctic. An intelligent guess based on crude data puts the annual consumption of krill at about 300 million tonnes. Estimates change all the time as new information is acquired. Even supposing that these figures are accurate, vital information is still missing. The estimated total annual pro duction, of krill does not correspond with the estimated total annual consumption.
We ought to be mindful of the tragedies that have befallen the Californian sardines, the Peruvian anchovy and the Antarctic baleen whale. We do not have adequate information concerning the stocks of Southern Ocean resources.

-
1252 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Antarctic Marine Conservation Bill

A t the two Convention conferences I attended bi ologists admitted that. We have virtually no es timates of the abundance and biomass of fish populations in the Antarctic, and we know next to nothing of Antarctic squid. The problem is further complicated by the structure of the Ant arctic ecosystem and its complex interaction between seals, whales, sea birds, penguins and fish, all competing for food which consists almost entirely of krill. Since krill is the key species of the Antarctic ecosystem, it is not difficult to visualise that its unwise exploitation could trigger disas trous changes throughout that ecosystem.
In a world facing critical energy and protein shortages, the natural resources of the Antarctic have become a major focus on international interest, and the existing framework of cooperation in the Antarctic has come under increasing challenge. Close attention is being directed towards the need to recognise and ac commodate some of the pressures for exploitation of the Antarctic resources while ensuring that the region's delicate ecosystem is preserved. However, as yet no headway has been made by the par ties to the Antarctic Treaty on the issues of national sovereignty. The fact that mineral resources are non-renewable, as well as the intrinsic nature of mineral exploration and extraction activity, poses a far greater problem than did the issues at the Convention on the Conservation of Marine Living Resources. I do not think there was one delegate who did not recognise that. Australia and other claimants will be looking for a role in a regime commensurate with their sovereign status. Such a regime must also be consistent with the aims of protecting the Antarctic environment and its living resources. Australia's approach to he negotiations on an Antarctic minerals regime thus includes as an objective the maintenance of an effective moratorium on the exploration and ex ploitation of the resources, pending a study of the environmental implications. I believe the Government and its officers have applied their minds to that pressing problem. Antarctic mineral exploi tation could leave a tragic environmental legacy.
The effects of land based installations on the fragile Antarctic ecological balance mean that any mineral exploitation which may ensue can be undertaken only with a complete knowledge of its effects on the marine living resources if the inten tions of the Convention are to be achieved. It struck me while attending the conference on the convention that, whatever the roles of diplomats and politicians may be, the real answer to the ap propriate development of the Antarctic lies with the Scientific Committee-that is, with the biologists and the physicists. The Antarctic Treaty

has so far ensured the protection of the Antarctic environment while guaranteeing freedom of scientific research in the Antarctic. If the parties cannot come to an agreement on mineral resources, the Treaty itself will face its most serious challenge. Beyond any doubt, that would be the most serious challenge to the continuity of the Treaty. Any attempt to find solutions outside the Treaty could undermine its viability. My attend ance at two conferences confirmed that beyond any doubt. On the other hand, development by the Antarctic Treaty parties of a resources regime which did not take into account the growing international interest in Antarctic resources might also threaten the continued viability of the Treaty. It cannot operate any longer on a club basis; it has to have some sense of international responsibility. So far there is no evidence to suggest that resource regimes cannot be built on the structure of the Treaty. 1 believe, and hope, they can. However, the real test of the Treaty will come when a min erals regime is to be concluded, and the difficulties which may arise should not be underestimated.
The bringing together of countries with such di vergent political philosophies and such divergent attitudes on a number of contentious aspects of the Convention is a tribute to the skill of the leaders of the Australian delegation who chaired and hosted the concluding conferences leading up to the signing of this Convention. J want to place on record my sincere gratitude to them. [ fully appreciate the fact that the responsibility on the Australian delegation was enormous. This Con vention is testimony to the excellence and skill of Ambassador Roland, Ambassador Brennan and in particular the staff who gave them such worthwhile support. It is with great pleasure that I support the Bill.
Motion (by Mr Bradfield) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Original question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Motion (by Mr MeVeigh) proposed:
That the Bill be now read a third time.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) ( 1 2.36)-1 wish to take the indulgence of the House for a moment to point out that in May 1 978 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced that in future the Government would respond formally to recommendations included in reports of parliamen tary committees Within six months of those re ports being tabled. I simply draw attention to the

Excise TarifAf mendment Bill

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1253

fact that the annual report for the House of Rep As a taxing policy the new oil-old oil formulas

resentatives for 1 979 indicates that the very im also produce some difficulties. As technology im

portant interim report of the Joint Committee on proves, more and more oil may be taken from

Foreign Affairs and Defence on Australia, fields already classified old oil. However, there is

Antarctica and the Law of the Sea, which was no incentive on Esso-BHP to extend the life of

introduced on 1 June 1 978, was not responded to existing fields beyond that which is permitted

in 1 979. The 1 980 report indicates that it was not under the current old oil formula. Full parity

responded to in 1 980. I do not want to put the pricing to the producer would not be necessary to

Acting Minister for Science and Technology ( Mr achieve this but probably more than is currently

McVeigh) on the spot, but he might care to com permitted under the old oil formula is required.

ment or to pass the matter on to his colleague, the While the situation maintains, there is more

Minister for Science and Technology (Mr incentive to expand elsewhere. From talking to

Thomson) , to see why it has not been dealt with. some friends who have been involved in the oil in

It is an extemely important subject and it is ex dustry I understand that this is increasingly be

tremely relevant and germane to the Bill before coming a factor in the operations of Esso-BHP in

the House. I think the House deserves the cour the Bass Strait fields. The companies are being dis

tesy of a Government response to this very im couraged, under the current formula, from

portant report which is nearly three years old.

expanding or introducing new technology into

Question resolved in the affirmative.

their operations in the area because they see no substantial advantage in doing so and they would

Bill read a third time.

prefer to conduct exploration activities elsewhere,

EXCISE TARIFF AMENDMENT BILL 1981

where the new oil parity pricing policy is likely to apply.

Second Reading Debate resumed from 26 March, on motion by

What arises when a field is discovered in an old oil area, which is simply too good for the company to pass up, is the ridiculous situation which we

Mr Moore:

now have in the Fortescue Field. What is there is

That the Bill be now read a second time.

patently old oil, but is declared new oil with a few

Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) ( 12.37)-This Bill, the Excise Tariff Amendment Bill, ratifying last January's oil price rise is the centrepiece of this Government's non-energy policy. It remains a revenue raising exercise which achieves neither oil exploration nor conservation. Any reduction in the usage of oil by consumers in Australia can largely be explained as being due to the economic downturn which has only recently bottomed out and by a shift to smaller cars and energy conser vation which would have occurred with any price rise, including one far less steep than the crude oil levy has managed to impose over the last few years. The Government claims an increased rate of exploration for its parity pricing policy. It has constantly sought to associate the crude oil levy with it. The association is, of course, quite spuri ous: Nothing of the parity price on old oil goes to the companies. Parity pricing on new oil, which the Opposition not only supports but also ,introduced, is of course a condition for the exten sion of exploration and development of new

geological rationalisations thrown in. The pro ducer gains a massive windfall at the expense of the Australian taxpayer and consumer. Some thing far less than full parity was required to get crude oil from Fortescue out of the ground, but it was something more than what is permitted the producers of old oil. If we had a competent auth ority publicly monitoring these developments we might come up with some very interesting data on disincentives to upgrade old oil activities and further potential sleights of hand similar to that which occurred in the case of Fortescue. The Government should be prepared to think beyond the old oil-new oil formula which was a tempor ary expedient introduced by the Whitlam Government preparatory to a more thorough going development of national energy policy, and which with the crude oil levy and continued par ity pricing introduced by this Government has become a blight on Australian economic develop ment. It might introduce some interesting changes.

fields, but of itself it does not amount to a The Australian Labor Party for several years

sufficient policy to achieve those ends. Despite has presented two constructive proposals which

increased drilling just one per cent of locally would obviate many of the difficulties which now

produced crude oil is classified as new oil. The arise and which would encourage development. A

amount of exploration is manifoldly pathetic resources rental tax would take care of excess

when OUf 1 00-odd wells per annum are compared profits in situations such as those produced in For

with several thousand in Canada.

tescue. As oil prices increase geometrically in the

1 254 REPRESENTATTVES 2 April 1981

Excise TariffAmendment Bill

1 980s it would also pick o ff excess profits which may well be made in the development of new fields. Price rises are likely to move well beyond the levels that are required to make some new fields, which are currently under exploration, economic. I believe that we are likely to see examples of this process in fields off the north west of Western Australia. The potentiality for such development can be seen in the changing value of a related fuel about to be extracted from that area-liquid natural gas.
More important than any of these, however, for a rapid extension of oil exploration and extraction in Australia would be a decision by this Government to go in the direction of public involvement in the process, in the manner of every other country, apart from the United States of America, where oil currently is extracted. In discussing this I would like to draw the attention of the House to an interesting report of the Department of En ergy, Mines and Resources in Canada, entitled: 'The National Energy Program 1 980'. As that report points out, governments have responded to the dramatic changes in the oil industry by developing a large public sector. The British National Oil Corporation has been extensively engaged in exploration and development. Rather foolishly the ideologically inspired tinkering of the Thatcher Government has deprived the British public of all the benefits that it might expect by restricting the corporations activities in the North Sea. However, it continues to remain an import ant part of the British process of oil production and extraction and will, I understand, at least be permitted by the Government to enter into joint arrangements in the development of some of those off-shore leases; the type of joint arrangement in fact that we on this side of the House would envis age for our idea of a hydrocarbon corporation. That type of arrangement appears to be proving so successful around the globe. As I havc mentioned, Canada is a nation which, whilst in many ways it has an economy and a resources base equivalent to ours, nevertheless is much more suc cessful in the exploitation of its mineral resources, i ncluding oil, and much more successful in ensur ing that that is done on behalf of the public and to the p ublic benefit through public involvement and intervention.
Mr Barry Jones-With much more longer term social implications too.
Mr BEAZLEY-Precisely. Alberta, Ontario, Quebec and Saskatchewan have established corporations partly or wholly owned by the provin cial government. I should point out here that some of the governments involved are tory governments and some were governments which,

like ourselves, were affiliated with the Socialist International. But the corporations which were established by those governments have been maintained by subsequently elected conservative governments and, of course, the Canadian federal government, which has been exclusively of one a variety of conservative party-that is liberal or officially conservative-has created Petro Canada. Here is how the Canadian Department of Energy, Mines and Resources assessed the value of Petro-Canada:
Events since Petro-Canada was created have reinforced the general appreciation of the positive role that can be played and has been played by such an instrument. as a 'window' on the industry. a stimulus to activity. and a supporter of domestic industries providing goods and services to the energy sec tor. Nevertheless. direct public sector participation in this sec tor remains too low. By world standards. the degree of private sector involvel1lent in the Canadian oil industry is high.
I ask honourable members to think how much higher it is when we compare the Australian situation with the world standard. The Department continued:
The industry owes much of its prosperity to cash flow and incentives by Canadian consumers and taxpayers. few of whom are in a position to share in the benefits of industry growth. For most Canadians. the only way to ensure that they do share in the wealth generated by oil. and to have a say in companies exploiting that resource. is to have more companies that areowned by all Canadians-more companies like Petro-Canada.
Many of the arguments that have been advanced by the Labor Party in debates on this matter in the Parliament over the last several years revolve around the sorts of propositions that have been put forward in this report. I will just take one of them. I refer to the value that the Department of Energy, Mines and Resources in Canada sees in organisations like Petro-Canada providing Canada with a window, as it puts it, on the nature of the oil industry and its development.
We in this country are babes in the wood when dealing with international corporations not only in oil areas but also in pretty well all areas of min erals and energy exploitation. The value of a hy drocarbons corporation, even though under our proposals this corporation would not be the sole developer of any fields, is that it would provide Australian civil servants and Australian M inisters with an expertise that they lack. It would permit them an understanding across a wide range of minerals and energy development that they do not possess at the moment, of international markets, the prospects for attracting investment and the prospects of effectively utilising that investment. They will find this denied to them at the moment be c a u s e of t h e i r u n w i l l in g n e s s -- t h e i r ideologically based unwillingness, not a rationally

Excise TariffAmendment Bill

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 255

based unwillingness-to see development of the sort we have proposed take place.
All the developments in Canada that I have been talking about have come from free enterprise governments, governments that say they are committed to free enterprise principles. We could not have presented a more ringing, if in direct, endorsement of the reasons we propose for a hydrocarbons corporation.
As an aside the Canadian report says one or two other interesting things. It states:
Some have argued that Canada ought to tie its prices to the world price. This would be a mistake. Under such a policy Canadian prices would reflect uncertain and erratic move ments in world oil prices. Canadian economic performance would be made even more vulnerable to the economic reper cussions of the world oil situation.
It goes on:
Moreover, linking Canadian and world energy prices is not necessary for energy reasons. To be sure energy prices must rise, and higher prices are one mechanism to bring about increasedenergy conservation. But it is equallyimportant that consumers and producers have a clear view of steady predict able future price rises. There is no need to punish consumers with large, unexpected price changes.
Again, this Canadian energy report, produced by a responsible authority in Canada and endorsed by Conservative and Liberal Canadian governments, makes precisely the points about the effect on the Canadian economy of the type of policy on oil parity pricing pursued by this Government that we have been making in this House for years now.
Mr Hurford-We of the Labor Party.
Mr BEAZLEY-That is right. The report points out the very considerable damage it would envisage being done to the Canadian economy by precisely the stepstaken by this Government. The steps taken by this Government do not even have the rationale put forward by advocates of similar policies in Canada in that they are being taken as a means of raising revenue; they are not being taken as a means of pursuing an energy policy related to conservation. So the Australian Government, in order to get itself out of some of the problems that essentially it has created by its reluctance to crack down on the Australian tax avoidance industry, has produced an economic policy which the legislation we are discussing today celebrates and which, in the terms of a re sponsible Canadian authority, is likely to produce economic disasters and difficulties. The point is that effective energy conservation and oil explo ration and production require extensive planning and a considerable sense of national direction. Only an authority capable of involving itself thoroughly in the whole process and only a government determined to involve itself

thoroughly in the whole process will produce the systematic development that we need in this country.
We have put forward constructive proposals. But the Government shows no signs of learning either from our proposals or from the experience of countries in a similar position to Australia. H is not learning not because it does not see the essential rationality of our propositions. It is not learn ing because it operates in this area with ideologi cal blinkers that are very much to the detriment of the long term interests of the Australian population.
Mr BURR (Wilmot) ( 12.54)-1 was most enlightened to hear the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) make reference to the proposal by the Australian Labor Party to introduce a national hydrocarbons corporation. I had thought from my reading of some Press reports of moves from within the Australian Labor Party that perhaps it was moving away from its socialist objectives. But on the basis of what the honour able member for Swan said today it is blatantly clear that the Australian Labor Party still has a very firm objective to nationalise the oil industry in Australia. I think that point needs to be remem bered by the House. I think we need to remind the public of what are the objectives of the Australian Labor Party if it ever had the opportunity to govern in the future. From my point ofview, and I think from the Government's point of view, we would see the nationalisation of the oil industry by whatever mechanism as a disaster that could lead only to higher oil and petrol prices in this country. Such a move would certainly chop off the possi bility of further development and exploration in the oil industry.
The Bill validates the policies that this Government has followed for quite some time in that it has tied the price of Australian produced crude to the base rate that is charged for Saudi Arabian light crude oil. That policy has been disputed by some honourable members on the opposite side of this chamber as being not in the best interests of Australia. The proof of the pudding is in the eat ing. Since the Government moved to world parity pricing for light crude oil, there has been a very substantial increase in the rate of development and exploration for new oil in this country.
We are all too well aware of the fact that pro duction from our main oil producing wells in Bass Strait will start to taper off by 1985. If we do not develop more oil resources in this country, we place ourselves in the position of being totally in the hands of the Middle East oil producers; and we place in jeopardy all our industries and

1 256 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Excise TarifAf mendment Bill

transport systems. The Government has encouraged exploration companies to find new oil in this country so that we can retain our self sufficiency. I find it difficult to understand why any honourable member in this place could argue against that policy. Also implicit in this legislation is that, as a means of conserving our scarce petroleum products, the Government is continuing with its policy to encourage motorists and others to convert their vehicles to liquid petroleum gas.
Mr GoodluckHear, hear! That is a good move.
Mr BURRI note the comments of my friend from Franklin (Mr Good luck) . He has been a staunch advocate of such oil policies and he has highlighted some of the inequities which have oc curred in the oil industry. Since he has been in this place he has pursued those matters vigorously. The Government is legislating to decrease the excise on liquid petroleum gas from $43.48 per kilolitre to $36.67 per kilolitre. That effectively reduces the price of liquid petroleum gas as against other petroleum products and acts as an incentive and an encouragement to motorists to convert their vehicles to liquid petroleum gas.
One of the things in the Bill that is before us now that I find extremely encouraging is that the Government has decided that it will be Government policy that the ethanol components. in petroleum products or in petroleum mixtures will not be subject to excise duty. 1 see that as a very posi tive and encouraging move. In Tasmania, there has been and still is a very strong move to develop a sugar beet industry for the purpose of producing ethanol as a blend mixture for petroleum prod ucts. I see this move by the Government to allow the ethanol component to be sold duty free, as one of the most positive contributions that it can make to help in the development of the sugar beet and ethanol industry in Tasmania.
Mr GoodluckHear, hear! Mr BURRI thank my friend from Franklin. He too has been pushing this matter very strongly with the Tasmanian Government. In Tasmania, we have the potential to develop agricultural crops which can provide quite a substantial com ponent for our petroleum products. I think we should adopl any contribution that can be made on the basis of producing petroleum products from sources other than crude oil which is extracted from the ground. We have tremendous potential in this country, from all of our agricul tural crops, to produce fuel resources from other than our crude oil reserves; but we need to de velop the ethanol component industry, if ! can use that terminology, far more than we are doing at

the moment. I think that this move by the Government is a very positive contribution. It will certainly help those interests in Tasmania which are trying to develop an ethanol industry. I con gratulate the Government on this move and I give the Bill my full support.
Sitting suspended from 1 to 2.15 p.m. Mr KEATING (Bhixland) (2. 1 5) -The purpose of the Excise Tariff Amendment Bill is to enact the changes in excise payable on oil and liquefied petroleum gas which came into oper ation in line with new import parity prices for oil on 1 January this year. As we all know, the Fraser Government's policy is to increase the priye of Australian oil every six months in line with increases in the world oil priceimport parity pricing, as it has come to be known. The Opposition's view on this policy also is well known. We are opposed to import parity pricing. We do not believe Australians should be forced to pay through the nose for their own oil. The Opposition is opposed also to the use of the crude oil levy as a mechanism for taxing oil producers. It is inefficient and inequitable and should be removed and replaced by a properly designed resources rent tax which is neutral in its effect, efficient, and a better mechanism to divide this wealth between the companies and the community. The Opposition is opposed also to the Government's policies on LPG, particularly its policy of increasing the Australian LPG price in line with the oil price. For those reasons, the Opposition opposes this legislation. Under Government policy, Australian oil prices keep rising in line with the world price. Australians now pay $30.23 a barrel for local oil. When the Fraser Government was elected in 1 975 the price was only $4.3 3 a barrel, so it has risen from $4.3 3 to $30.23. There is no reason why we should pay for our own oil the high prices that are being charged by other countries. We are 70 per cent self-sufficient. This should protect Australians from high overseas prices. Why should Australians pay a high price for petrol when they do not pay high prices for gas, coal or electricity? The price of gas in Melbourne is around $3 a bar rel oil equivalent. The price of gas in Sydney is slightly higher. The price of electricity does not reflect ruling steaming coal prices in the world market. As a nation we have decided to give consumers the benefit of having our own resources, yet the same policy does not apply to oil. The doubling of petrol prices under the Fraser Government has been unnecessary. It has been a major contributor to inflation at a time when the Government

Excise TariffAmendment Bill

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 257

claims to be fighting inflation. On the other hand, through the conservation effect of high prices.

the Australian Labor Party has a policy on oil Given the fact that Australia has a burgeoning

which will protect Australian consumers from the primary export sector, the problem of paying for

full inflationary effects of continued price in imports does not seem to be a particularly onerous

creases by the Organisation of Petroleum Export problem at this stage. Yet the whole pattern of

ing Countries, a policy which will return to the our energy pricing policies has been distorted

public a fair share of revenues gained by pro simply by the Government's quest for revenue

ducers and encourage the fullest possible develop which comes from the crude oil levy.

ment of Australia's petroleum resources. The cost of producing local oil is about $ 1 a barrel, yet we are now paying over $30 a barrel for the privilege of using it. Of course, the bulk of the difference goes to the Government by way of the crude oil levy or the petrol tax as it has come to be known.

The other justification that the Government uses is that a high price is needed to encourage ex ploration. This is also a furphy and it is used against the Australian Labor Party. In fact, the Labor Government of Prime Minister Whitlam introduced the policy of paying the world price

The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) con tinues with the charade of ruling over an alleged low tax government, yet under the Prime Minister oil taxes have increased more than tenfold. We have a sleight-of-hand policy, a tax by stealth lev ied at the bowsers instead of being levied directly through the tax system or through incomes, as is done with the pay-as-you-earn system. This financial year tax receipts from the crude oil levy, the excise of LPG and the excise on petroleum productsthat is, the old pump tax-will amount to an equivalent of 30 per cent of total pay-as you-earn income tax receipts. Australians are being slugged, not just through the normal tax sys

for new discoveries of oil; that is, the promise to pay the ruling world price for oil yet to be dis covered. That policy was adopted by the coalition parties in 1 976 and has ruled since its introduction in September 1 975. This is the policy under which oil discoveries, if any, are to be made. This is the policy under which exploration in Australia con tinues. It is a policy common to both parties. The trite argument advanced by the Government that one needs to have a high price-the world price for oil discovered 1 0 years ago in order to keep ex ploration going is nonsense. What keeps explo ration running is the promise to pay the world price for new oil.

tem, but by the growing impost which is levied by way of this indirect tax through taxes on petrol. During the last election campaign the Prime Min ister said that any increase in the revenue from oil would be used to reduce personal income tax or to raise family allowances. What has happened to this promise? Admittedly, the revenue increase was not as large as expected, but it was $50m. When will the Government stand by its commit ment and return this money to the Australian

Most of the companies exploring in Australia at the moment are not oil producers. As they are not oil producers, they get no revenue from the present policy. So, regardless of what price we have for old oil, if one is simply an explorer not an oil producer-one does not get any revenue from the present policy anyway. Exploration would continue under the promise to pay the world price. The argument used by the Government that one needs to have this high price is non

public?

sense. No additional encouragement is given for

The high petrol prices are being packaged under the guise of an energy conservation program; that is, that Australian oil is to be saved. On examination we find that this is another sleight-of-hand. Any fall in energy consumption does not save one drop of Australian oil. Australia is 70 per cent self-sufficient. It keeps producing the same amount irrespective of consumption. If

exploration in the old oil pricing policy, except for the Esso and BHP companies. Those companies certainly have been substantially bankrolled by the increases in the price of oil from Bass Strait. None of the other exploration companies operat ing in Australia receives a dollar from the old oil policy-the policy which makes Australians pay $30 a barrel.

consumption rises or falls, all that changes is our The policy of offering the world price is very

level of imports. We keep using Australian oil at generous indeed. Not many countries offer to oil

the same rate. Bass Strait and the other oil pro exploration companies the import parity price as

ducing centres produce at maximum capacity. the cost of production. Honourable members may

They will continue to produce at maximum ca know that the cost of producing oil in the Middle

pacity. Nothing which the Government does by East is about 1 5c to 25c a barrel. In Australia it is

way of price or the conservation effect of price about $ 1 . I n some cases-Wapet at Barrow Island

will alter in any way the rate of production from and Moonie-the prices are higher because of the

Bass Strait, Moonie or Barrow Island. All we have small pools of oil. It is about $1 a barrel for oil

is the possibility of a reduction in imports arising from Bass Strait. It is about 65c for Halibut and

1 258 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Excise TariffAmendment Bill

Kingfish and something in excess of $ 1 for the rest. It averages out at about $ 1 . In the Middle East it is about 25c a barrel.
The only difference between the Government's policy and that the the Opposition on this matter is that the Government offers this return; that is, the payment of import parity as a cost of pro duction, free of any tax other than company tax. In other words, it says that it will offer this price free of levy so that the only tax which would apply would be simply company tax. Let us take the situation of a producer who is producing oil at around $30-odd a barrel; that is, we are paying that producer $30-odd a barrel for the oil in Australia. Let us imagine that that producer hap pens to find a modest size pool of oil, say, in 350 or 400 feet of water, which is the most likely scenario in Australia. Let us be generous and say that it costs the producer $4 to $5 a barrel to produce it, compared with the $ 1 which it costs to produce Bass Strait oil. That still leaves an excess of profit over costs ofabout $25 a barrel.
Under the Government's policy for new oil, the only tax which would be paid on that $25 is company tax, which is 47c on the dollar. In other words, the companies would pay about $ 1 0 a bar rel of the $25 and $ 1 5 over and above costs would remain with the company. That is simply too much. There is no way any government could stand by that policy. Frankly, I do not think there is anyone in the Australian exploration industry who believes that the promise of import parity without levy has any validity to it at all. I am quite certain that everyone in the industry believes that if a new oilfield were found today and production from it started within five or six years time a levy would be imposed upon it, as well there should be. The only dfference between the Government and the Opposition is that we are saying there should be now. The Government has declined to say that there should be. We are saying that a resources rent tax should be applied to all oil production in Australia so that a fair and equitable distribution of wealth is achieved on a profits related basis. That is how it ought to be, particularly when there is a Government decision changing the nature of the returns to companies. In that way we could have the best of both worlds---the benefit of lower prices from Bass Strait and yet maintain the high price for new oil, take the tax-take away from it, and put back some of that money into alternative energy or further exploration.
Another aspect of the Government's crude oil policy which needs a mention is the nature of the crude oil levy. All levies are arbitrary, inefficient and inequitable. They create distortions in investment decisions, in particular, in the bringing into

production of smaller pools of oil and in the ex traction of maximum possible levels of oil from producing fields. The levies also have to be changed frequently and arbitrarily to take into account changing prices. We have seven levies operating on Bass Strait which have to be changed every six months . This system should be replaced by a properly designed resources rent tax, which may be called a super-profits tax. A resource rent tax would only operate after a project has earned a threshold rate of return on investment sufficient to begin and maintain production. It would rep resent a sharing of profits rather than an addition to costs and would enable the economic recovery in full of Australia's oil reserves. In other words, no small pool of oil would be left wasting. It would not be too expensive. The tax system would not mitigate against secondary recovery tech niques or other things which may be expensive and may cost more than the present levy system would allow.
I now turn to the Government's policy on liquefied petroleum gas. Part of this legislation seeks to change the excise on naturally occurring LPG from $43.48 to $36.67 a kilolitre. This excise change is a further indication of the mess the Government's policy is in. On 1 January we saw the price of domestically consumed LPG go up from $227.63 to $250.23 a tonne but the excise went down by almost $7 a tonne. This is because the rate of excise is a function of the Australian price and the world price. We now have the world price falling but the Australian price increasing. The Government no longer has a credible policy in relation to LPG. The whole approach is ad hoc. Every attempt to rectify the situation only com pounds the problem. Liquefied petroleum gas is a premium fuel, particularly for automotive use. It has the potential to satisfy 10 per cent to 1 5 per cent of our liquid fuel requirements, but the con version ofcars has almost stopped. This is because the Government has created uncertainty about price, safety and fuel quality.
The Government's stated policy is to encourage automotive use and discourage houshold and industrial applications, but it works in the opposite direction. The price to industry and households is subsidised but automotive users have to pay the full price set by the Government. Confusion reigns supreme. The whole policy needs to be reviewed and rationalised. We have seen in Australia a very dramatic rise in the price of LPG. In 12 months it trebled from $88 a tonne in January 1 979 to $252 a tonne in January 1 980. This led to a halting in car conversions and com plaints from household consumers. The Government abandoned the policy and in April of last

Excise TariffAmendment Bill

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 259

year introduced the three tier pricing structure. Already we have found that we are back to the price where it was adjusted some years ago. The whole LPG policy is in serious need of review. I will be making a more lucid and more comprehensive exposition of the Government's attitude to LPG at a later opportunity. Suffice to say that the present LPG arrangements cannot continue. They needed to be changed. Because this Bill gives effect to the present policy and to the oil pricing policy, the Opposition opposes it.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (2.33)-1 will not de tain the House for too long. I wish to add to and support the remarks made by the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) and particularly the honourable member for Swan ( Mr Beazley ) . As 1 recall it the honourable member was discussing the Canadian approach and its pol icy to its oil problem. He contrasted the policies which were adopted in Canada with what I might call the bankrupt policies of this Government. A very impressive article was published in the Australian on 6 March under the heading 'Mass ive price-fixing in Canada alleged'. It dealt with an investigation which was launched in 1 973 after the Consumers Association of Canada charged that Imperial Oil Ltd, Shell Canada Ltd, BP Refinery Canada Ltd, Sun Oil Co. Ltd and Great Canadian Oil Sands Ltd were involved in fixing prices at the petrol pump and monopolising the market. The article stated:
A Federal report, which was to be released yesterday, claims massIve price-fixing by Canada's major oil companies is costing the public billions of dollars, according to newspaper reports.
Government officials declined to comment on the reports, which are said to be based on information from a seven volume study prepared after eight years of investigation by the Department ofConsumer and Corporate Affairs.
Corporate Affairs Minister, Mr Andre Ouellet, told the House of Commons on Tuesday the report would be released yesterday by the department's Bureau of Competition Policy.
I might indicate that it is badly needed in this country and is long overdue. The article continued:
The Canadian press said the 1700-page, seven-volume report contained details of collusion among the oil companies to fix prices and made specific recommendations on how the practice could be halted.
The investigation, involving the seizure of hundreds of thousands of oil company documents, showed virtually every major oil firm had been involved in the price fixing over a period of 1 0 years, the news agency said.
But Mr Ouellet said the report would be submitted to the Restrictive Trade Practices Commission for a full public air ing of corporate practices.

Mr Robert Bertrand, director of the Bureau of Competition Policy, led the investigation into the allegations and recom mended holding an inquiry rather than immediately laying criminal charges.
The restrictive trade practices hearings are -expected to begin within the next months, Mr Ouellet said.
I seriously suggest to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) that any investigation or inquiry carried out under the same terms of reference, with the same criteria, in this country would reach the same conclusions and findings as that report. Our consumers, in all fair ness to this country, have been taken to the cleaners by the collusive practices of oil companies in his country for far too long. The scandal in Australia is no different from the scan dal in Canada. It was only revealed in Canada because of the pressure by consumer organisations which led to a full-scale inquiry taking place. That inquiry has been going on since 1 973. The Minister may recall that the Labor Government insti tuted a royal commission on petroleum headed by Mr Justice Collins. If my memory serves me cor rectly, at the moment this Government came into office the commission had reached what was termed the seventh committee report.
It did not take this Government very long to have that inquiry killed off. The reason was simple. By the time the Collins Royal Commission reached the seventh report, it was dealing with two basic issues, pricing and transfer pricIng. I t has taken us a long time, firstly, to investigate the real structure of oil pricing in this country and, secondly, to overhaul section 1 36 of the Income Tax Assessment Act. I make it clear to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs that if this Government is concerned about the consumer obviously it is not because of its policies on oil at the moment-it ought to fund a fact-finding del egation to go to Canada to investigate exactly the structure of the Canadian inquiry and its findings. It should then institute exactly the same inquiry in Australia. I sincerely ask the Government to consider that suggestion because of the vast amounts of money involved and the impact that oil prices are having on consumers throughout the length and breadth of the country.
As the honourable member for Swan said this morning, one can assert only that the Government's view of the Australian Labor Party's pol icy on the establishment of hydrocarbon corpor ation is odd, to say the least. We are the only country in the world with oil reserves, with the exception of the United States of America, that has not seen fit to set up a government agency to act in competition with oil companies and inject the necessary funds for exploration. The Government, day after day, condemns the Labor Party's

1 260 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Excise TariffAmendment Bill

policy o n a hydrocarbon corporation, but when

35-HOUR WEEK

we consider the Government's foreign investment guidelines and policies we are amazed to find that

Mr PORTER (Barker) (2.4 1 ) -1 move:

a number of the corporations that it has allowed That this House-

exploration rights in this country, for instance in

( 1 ) views with concern the failure of the Conciliation and

the field of uranium, are basically statutory bodies Arbitration Commission to address themselves in their state

of governments overseas. One example is British ment in the Altona 35-hour week case to the wider public Nuclear Fuels Ltd. There was no reluctance on interest and the flow on effect,

the Government's part to allow it prospecting (2) requests the Government to intervene in all Concili

rights in Australia. It then says to the Australian public that in no circumstance can it extend the same rights to government bodies ;n this country.

ation and Arbitration hearings relating to an extension of the 35-hour week, to present a detailed case outlining the effects such moves will have on the economy, employment, investment and on our international competitiveness, and

I refer to the mining of diamonds; they will be a very vital resource in the future. Let us consider the ownership and structure of the no-liability Ashton Mining company. The Malaysia Mining Corporation Berhad owns 50. 1 4 per cent. Tanks

(3) further requests the Government in such submissions to
remind the Commission that under section 39 (2) of the Con ciliation and Arbitration Act it is bound to consider the likely effects of its decision on the economy with special reference to the likely effects on the level of employment and inflation.

Consolidated Investment Ltd of the Bahamas owns 1 0.21 per Cent. The company is 39.65 per cent Australian owned. The Malaysian Mining Corporation is 7 1 .4 per cent owned by Pernas, which is an agency of the Malaysian Government. The remaining 28.6 per cent is held by an associ ate of De Beers in South Africa. I suggest that we ought to be a little more consistent. The inconsist ency is on the Government's side. I conclude on this note: There is no doubt that an investigation of the sort to which I have referred would reveal exactly the same findings in this country as have been found in Canada and the United States in relation to anti-trust and collusive practices year after year. It is not good enough for the Govern

There is no doubt that in recent times the decision of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission involving those unions employed at Altona has brought the 35-hour week matter to a head.
J point out initially that my concern is not that we will eventually have a 35-hour week but rather the timing of the introduction of those shorter working hours. As I have said in this House before, I believe that, just as we had a reduction from a 44-hour working week to a 40-hour week, eventually we will have a reduction to a 35-hour working week. However, the crucial point to make is that such a reduction cannot be justified at this time.

ment merely to fix oil prices without a thorough investigation. An investigation v'ould reveal that the consumers in this country are being taken to the cleaners by the oil companies in the same way as they are in Canada.

It is my hope that there will be a bipartisan atti tude to this motion. I note that there is some Labor Party support. For example, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) , on 20 May last year said in this House:

Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.

I repeat that the implementation immediately or in the near future of a universal 35-hour week would have devastating consequences.

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

I believe and I trust that he does, that that statement is still true. It gives support to the Government's case. I turn firstly to the Altona decision.

Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.

It is essential that when the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission makes decisions in re-

SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS o lation to working hours, it bear in mind the overall

Motion (by Mr Moore) -by leave-agreed to:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent-

(1 )

Notice No. 1 , General moved forthwith;

Business,

being

called.

on

and

(2) the scope .of the debate on General Business Notice No. 1 being extended to cover the subject matter of Order of the Day No. 3, Government Business; and

consequences of its decisions. I make the point that I am not reflecting on the Commission per se, but rather on this particular decision. The Government has made it very clear that there is a need in the process of conciliation and arbitration for the commissioners to address themselves to the state of the economy and the effect that their decisions will have on employment. The Govern

(3) separate questions being put on each of the motions at ment has amended the Conciliation and Arbi

the conclusion of the debate.

tration Act in an endeavour to ensure that the

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 26 1

Commission takes account of the effects of its de cisions. Section 39 (2) of the Act refers to the consideration by the Commission of matters such as hours of work. It states:

. . . the Commission shall take into consideration the public interest and for that purpose shall have regard to the
state of the national economy and the likely effects on that economy of any award that might be made in the proceedings or to which the proceedings relate, with special reference to likely effects on the level of employment and on inflation.

On 24 March, the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission issued a document called a statement. The statement was nine pages long. In it, the Commission discussed the approach it had received from the unions and employers at Altona and also the approaches it has received from the National Employers' Industrial Council and the Commonwealth Government by way of inter vention. Page 4 of the statement refers to the employers and the unions at Altona. It states that they:

. . . submitted that as a result of the cost savings
agreed upon, the overall cost impact was negligible and that the other aspects referred to in the agreements, for example, the problem-solving procedures, would lead to greatly improved industrial relations in the complex. This would be in marked contrast to the position which had existed in the six years or so since 1974 when the oil companies had agreed to a 35-hour week.

On page 8 of the statement the Commission ap proved of the agreement. One of the reasons it gave was the resultant improvement in industrial relations. Those parts of the Commission's statement raise three distinct problems.

Firstly, the employers and unions have made it clear that the granting of a 3 5-hour week in some sections of an industry causes grave difficulties in other industries and increases the prospects of a flow-on. The members of the Commission, how ever, leave themselves open to the criticism that they did not address themselves to the conse quences of a flow-on to the wider economy of their decision. They say that the new agreement reached at Altona would improve industrial relations and that the employers and unions had submitted:

This would be in markedcontrast to the position which had

existed in the had agreed to

6 a

years or so since 35-hour week.

1. 974

when

the

oil

companies

In other words, the fact that one section of the industry had agreed to a 3 5 -hour week had made for a more difficult industrial relations situation which was now being solved by the granting of a 35-hour week to yet another group. Surely that decision will have the same result. It is likely to create more problems than itsolved.

The second point of concern is that at page 8 of the statement by the members of the Commission they decided to approve the agreements because

of the suggested result of an improvement in industrial relations. On the same page, they state:
The behaviour of some employees who attended the pro ceedings before us has given us some cause to question their bona fides in observing the terms of the agreements. This em phasises careful monitoring is essential.
The Commission therefore called into question the likelihood of the greatly improved industrial relations which they said was one of the reasons for the agreement.
Thirdly, I believe that their statement is wide open to abuse. The Commonwealth and the National Employers Industrial Council claimed that the agreements were the product of industrial pressures and that many of the alleged cost saving factors were gained merely by the removal of inefficient work practices, many of which had arisen from industrial disputes. The Commission's statement would then seem to be an open invi tation to those unions which are endeavouring to implement a 35-hour week to promote industrial unrest in order that they can then go to the Commission and say: 'We will give you industrial peace if you give us a 3 5-hour working week'.
The first section of the motion I have moved states:
That this House( I ) views with concern the failure of the Conciliation and
Arbitration Commission to address itself in its statement in the Altona 35-hour week case to the wider interest and the flow on effect, . . .
The matter was raised by the Commonwealth and the National Employers Industrial Council. The Commission referred to it when it stated:
It was further claimed that the increased costs which would be encountered by some companies were far from negligible and that if the Commission approved the agreements, a precedent would be established which would flow to other areas; first, no doubt, to other chemical companies and par ticularly those in areas adjacent to the 6 companies.
That is what the Commission statement said the employers and the Commonwealth put to it. Apart from that statement recounting the sub missions of the Commonwealth, the Commission did not address itself to the effects of its decision to approve the agreement. Yet, it acknowledged, as I have already outlined, that pressure for this reduction in working hours arose out of a previous agreement to reduce working hours to another section of the industry. In other words, it is clearly acknowledged that there are flow-on effects and that this case is the result of those flow-on effects. But the Commission has failed to address itself to the flow-on effects of its own decision. Further, the Commission has said that one of the reasons for approval of the agreement is that it will lead to better industrial relations. At the same time they have expressed concern at the behaviour of some

1 262 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

employees at the proceedings which led them to question whether the terms of the agreement would be upheld.

The expected boom of the 1980s would not match the bon anza of the sixties.
Later he said:

It is primarily the failure of the members of the Commission to address themselves in this case to the effects of their decision on the economy and on inflation that is my greatest concern. The para mount issue is whether the general economy can stand a reduction in working hours. We know that Australia has been through an economic re cession. We believe that we are now on the path of recovery. There are clear indications that we are returning to economic growth. It would be my de sire to ensure that all Australians benefit from that growth through an increase in their standard of living. However, it is also my earnest desire that that recovery ought not to be aborted by the early introduction of a 35-hour week. There is no doubt that the flow-on effect of the introduction of a 35-hour week in this case-the Altona case-will lead to pressure for the introduction of the same hours in other industries. Whilst it is debated that the costs to the companies in the Altona case are negligible, it is clear that these companies are capital intensive ones. The labour component is a relatively small proportion of their costs. However, the flow-on of reduced working hours will have a critical effect on the labour intensive indus tries where reduced working hours will lead to an increase in the unit labour cost. That will either lead to a reduction in the employers' profits, and so a reduction in investment and a reduction in the number of newjobs created, or it could lead to increased product prices which will result in increased inflation and again will jeopardise the improvement in the number of people finding jobs. Either way, it seems clear to me that there is a direct threat to our continued prospects of economic growth. There is a threat that we will re enter the inflationary spiral. There is a threat that those without jobs will have even less chance of obtaining them. It could put at risk some of those who currently hold jobs. These are the issues which section 39 (2) of the Conciliation and Arbi tration Act requires the Court to look at when making decisions in relation to this matter. As I have said, the members of the Commission failed to address themselves to this problem in their statement. The Opposition is in an untenable position in this matter. The Opposition has continu ally been telling us that the economy is not im proving and that the economic growth which is in prospect for this country will not eventuate. Let me take the words of the Leader of the Opposition in addressing a National Press Club luncheon on 9 October last year. He said:

On present trends and under present policies, more than half a million Australians would be out of jobs by the new year.
On 27 June last year, the Leader of the Opposition said:
My prediction is a CPI index in excess of 12 per cent for the year to December.
In fact, of course, the inflation rate that year turned out to be 9.2 per cent.
Mr Chapman-He was wrong again. Mr PORTER-He was wrong. He was just a mere 3 per cent out. Mr Chapman-A 25 per cent error. Mr PORTER-Indeed a twenty-five per cent error. However, if we were to accept the Labor Party's dismal prediction of economic recovery its members cannot with any sincerity come into this House and say: 'The economy can stand a re duction in the number of working hours. ' That re duction will further prejudice the economic growth which is in prospect for this country. The Leader of the Opposition is not by himself in these predictions of doom. The honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) on 29 September said:
Inflation willreach 12 to 1 3 per cent by the end of the year.
As I have said, inflation reached 9.2 per cent. However, I repeat that it is clear that, if we accept the Opposition's view of the economy, it is even harder to accept that the Opposition could in any way support the introduction of a 35-hour week which will prejudice our fight against inflation and our fight against unemployment. As I have said, the Leader of the Opposition has made his position quite clear when he said:
I repeat that the implementation immediately or in the near future of a universal 35-hour week would have devastating consequences.
I thoroughly agree with the Leader of the Opposition and I hope that he will come in here to support this motion.
The Opposition's spokesman for industrial relations, the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) , argued in this House last week that because the standard working hours were reduced from 44 hours to 40 hours in 1 947:
No other period in history has witnessed the dramatic changes of the last 34 years. Therefore, to the extent that the Full Bench was right in saying in 1947 that, because of changes that had taken place up to 1 947, history had not stood still and leisure could be improved, so much more true is the case that, in 198 1 , it is the height of unrealism to suggest that we have come to the end of the line.

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 263

Those are the words of the honourable member for Wills. In other words, he is arguing that because of what has happened over the last 37 years, as a result of what he calls the technological revol ution, it is now time to reduce working hours again. There is a fundamental flaw in that argument. The honourable member has conveniently forgotten that hours of work are not the only measure in judging relative prosperity or sharing with employees the wealth they have created. For example, he failed to mention that in 1 947 annual leave amounted to about two weeks but now is four weeks and in some cases more. He failed to mention that since 1 947 there has been implemented an annual leave loading under which people are paid 1 7t per cent more when they go on holidays than when they are at work. He failed to mention the general availability of long service leave. He failed to mention superan nuation entitlements, which have been improved and have been extended to many more employees.
The honourable member did not fail on just that count. He tried to promote his argument by quoting an article in the Economist of 19 July, part of which said 'hours are gradually shrinking almost everywhere in the industrialised world'. The honourable member said:
If that is the truth, and it is happening everywhere else, it is completely misrepresenting the situation to say that as it is happening in Australia our competitive position will be reduced.
I took the trouble to examine the article from which he had quoted. There is nothing like a little bit of mischievous quoting. This was selective quoting at its worst. The first paragraph of the article started by saying:
Trade unions across Europe still have a long way to go to reach their target of a 35-hour working week.
Those are the first three lines of the same article, yet the honourable member tried to give the im pression that the article was indicating that Australia was the only country that had not implemented shorter working hours. In other words, he has come in here and argued on behalf of the non-thinking union leaders who are determined to wreck this country's economy for their own self-seeking aims.
Let me add that, on the matter of wages, it is also clear that the sorts of arguments that have been used in recent times to support the introduc tion of the 3 5-hour week have also been used in recent pay negotiations. The estimate for the December quarter 1 980 is that average weekly earnings, exclusive of overtime, for adult male full time employees stood at $265 or, in seasonally adjusted terms, $254, an increase of 1 5.2 per cent over the figure for the December quarter in 1 979.

Perhaps honourable members would like to com pare that with the rate of inflation. It is quite clear that there have been increases in wages that have been way beyond the increase in the inflation rate. In other words, in real terms, employees are now better off, and further to increase production costs by a reduction in working hours at this time, in view of the effect that it would have on the economy, on inflation and on employment, can not be justified.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the motion seconded?

Mr Chapman-l my right to speak.

second

the

motion

a' nd

reserve

Mr HAWKE (Wills) (2.59)-The motion that has been moved by the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) is an extremely disturbing one, not just because of the inaccuracies and unrealities upon which it is based but because it represents one of the most insidious attacks upon the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, and the intergrity of its members, that we have ever witnessed in this country. I ask honour able members to note the composition of the bench in the Altona case: Mr Justice Williams, who was appointed to the tribunal in 1 969; Mr Justice Coldham, who was appointed to the tribunal in 1 9 7 1 ; and Mr Commissioner Neyland, who was appointed to the tribunal in 1 979. Each of those gentlemen was appointed to the tribunal by this Government or its conservative prede cessors. The presiding justice, Mr Justice Williams, is a man of very senior experience which dates back to his appointment in 1 969. I ask honourable members to appreciate just what is being said in this motion in respect of those three members who, I repeat, were appointed by this Government or previous conservative governments. I will deal with each aspect of the motion separately. First, let me examine the third part, which states:

further requests the Government in such submissions to re mind the Commission that under section 39 (2) of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act it is bound to consider the likely
effect of its decision on the economy with special reference to the likely effects on the level ofemployment and inflation.

Mr GilesHear, hear!

Mr HAWKE-The honourable members says: 'Hear, hear'. The clear implication is that these members of the Commission who were appointed by this Government or its predecessors, have not acted according to their oath of office and indeed, have been guilty of a dereliction of duty. The pro visions of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act are quite clear. Under section 1 1 , each member of the Commission is required to take an oath or affirmation of office. That section provides:

1 264 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

A member of the Commission shall, before proceeding to discharge the duties of his office, take before a Justice of the High Court or a Judge of the Supreme Court of a Stte an oath or affirmation in accordance with the form In the

This is the most contemptible motion one could imagine being put before this House. People appointed by this Government and its conserva

schedule.

tive predecessors-we can go back to an appoint

That form is quite clear and straightforward. It provides that the person concerned shall swear to be faithful and bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second and state that he 'will faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that office. So Help Me God'. That is the oath required of them under the Act. Members of the Commission are required to take that oath of office to discharge their obligations which, in turn, are laid down in the Act. Each of those members-appointed by this Government or its predecessor-has taken that oath, part of which is a requirement to act in accordance with the provisions of the statute. Yet, in this insidious motion, the mover and seconder, as supporters of the Government, are implying that Mr Justice Williams, Mr J ustice Coldham and Mr

ment of 1 969-have taken their oath of office and have handed down a decision. They have pointed out that this is merely an interim set of statements and that they will publish full reasons. Then they are SUbjected to attack in this House on the basis that they have not said X, Y and Z. But they have pointed out that they will hand down their ful l reasons later. I f the honourable member had any decency and respect he would stand up now and apologise to the members of the Commission and ask the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) to withdraw this motion. Of course, he has not such decency and nor have the honourable members around him, so we will deal in these circumstances with the facts as against their assertion. At page 2 of the decision, the judges and the commissioner stated:

Commissioner Neyland did not so act.

The parties also reported that . . . agreements had

J wish to make it clear that one may argue

been reached for a number of improved and more efficient working methods resulting in a considerable cost saving which

about the merits of a decision, as everyone is en would almost entirely offset the overall cost of introducing a

titled to do, but this motion is not directed to 35 hour week at the six companies.

merits. It goes to the very question of the failure on the part of members of the Commission to act in accordance with the requirements of the stat ute. Having said that since that forms the basis of the motion, and no more outrageous motion could be moved in respect of the integrity of the Arbitration Commission or its members, let us consider the facts of the matter against the inac curate assertions contained in paragraphs ( 1 ) and (2) of the motion. From reading the motion one would assume that the Commonwealth Government had not intervened in the Altona case. What in fact happened? The decision handed down on

The Commission then says that the parties coming before it under the properly constituted pro cedures of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act have also reached agreement on a number of matters. It then reports in regard to the shorter work ing week committee which is to solve problems which may arise, in respect of the introduction of the shorter working week, and the shorter work ing week monitoring committee which will be a continuation of the working party to monitor the implementation of the costs saving factors. The Commission continues:

24 March makes clear what happened. Honour able members will recall that in this indictment of the members of the Commission-that they had

Procedures for settling disputes and for examining techno logical change and improving industrial relations are also con tained in the agreements.

not done this or that or addressed their mind to Are these not matters which go to the question of

anything-the honourable member referred to the public interest, and have not the judges and

the pages of the decision. I wonder whether the the commissioner concerned themselves with it?

honourable member took the trouble to read the The honourable member for Barker has the tem

whole of the decision and, in particular, the last erity to accuse me of mischievous selective quo

sentence. The last sentence states:

tation which, on it face, is absurd. The point that I

We will publish full reasons for our decision at a later date. referred to--

The honourable member for Barker gets up and attacks these members. He attacks their integrity. No greater attack could be made on the members of this Commission. He says that they have not done this, they have not said that and they have not said the other thing, and yet the final sentence in their statement reads:
We will publish full reasons for our decision at a later date.

Government members-Ha, hal Mr HAWKE-Honourable members all laugh. That is the best they can do. We will see what they have to say about their inexcusable position of damning members of the Commission when that Commission has said that it has not published its full reasons and will do that later. We will see how they excuse themselves on that. Honourable

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 265 -

members should remember what the second para graph of the motion says. It states:
. . . requests the Government to intervene in all Conciliation and Arbitration hearings relating to an extension of the
35 hourweek . . . In regard to that, the two judges and the com missioner, at page 3 of their decision, state:
Details of the cost of a 35 hour week and the amount ofcost savings agreed . . . were placed before us. In addition witnesses were called from each company to explain the nature of the savings and the methods of calculation.
Then, the Commission had this to say:
These witnesses were, of. course, available for cross examination by the two interveners, namely the Commonwealth and the National Employers Industrial Council.
SO, what happened in the proceedings in terms of paragraph 2 of this motion? The Commonwealth Government did intervene in the proceedings and, as the judges and the commissioner pointed out, it had the opportunity to cross-examine the wit nesses who were talking about the cost impact of the 35-hour week and the counterbalancing sav ings and improvements in industrial relations associated with it. So, the Commonwealth Government intervened and it had the opportunity to cross-examine. What were these judges and the commissioner doing? Were they studying the racing form while this was on?
Mr Tuckey-Yes. Mr HAWKE-Mr Deputy Speaker, the honourable member for O'Connor said 'yes'. We have them nailed. The honourable member said it. That shows the quality and contempt-Mr Porter-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to raise a point of order. No one on this side of the House said 'yes'. I ask the honourable member for Wills to withdraw. Mr HAWKE-Wilson Tuckey, the honourable member for O'Connor-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman) Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. That is not a point of order. Mr Porter-I ask the honourable member to withdraw. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-If the honourable member wishes to make a personal explanation later, he may do so. Mr L1oyd-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to take a point of order. The honourable member for Wills is preventing my hearing the point of order raised by the honourable member for Barker. Mr Porter-The point of order is that the honourable member for Wills has implied that we have impugned the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. If he wishes to make a personal explanation later, he is entitled to do so. It is not a point of order.
Mr Tuckey-Mr Deputy Speaker, I request a withdrawal. I have been named by the honourable member for Wills, but I did not say 'yes'.
Mr Holding-You did so. Mr Tuckey-ldid not say 'yes'. Mr HAWKE-We heard him say 'yes'. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I did not hear him. Mr HAWKE-[ want to save time. We on this side of the House heard him say 'yes'. Mr Deputy Speaker, you have indicated to me that you did not; as you did not, I will withdraw. It is what you hear that is important. Honourable members opposite have now sufficiently condemned themselves, out of their own mouths, by the very nature of their motion. Judges hand down de cisions and say that they will give full reasons later, but honourable members who get up in this House and do what they have done-it does not matter if they say or do another thing-have sufficiently condemned themselves. The judges and the commissioner said that the Commonwealth Government had the opportunity to cross-examine. So, what have we had? There has been an arbi tral hearing with two judges and a commissioner listening to two sides. There have been inter veners, including the Commonwealth Government, arguing against the case and being told that they have the opportunity to cross-examine. These men, the judges and the commissioner, have taken an oath of office. They have listened to the arguments and heard the witnesses, and they have said that there was an opportunity of cross examination. Out of all that, what does the Commission say? It says at page 5 that it has listened to the arguments of the Commonwealth, and that that part of the argument put by the Commonwealth would establish a precedent which would flow to other areas. I t is said in the motion of the honourable member for Barker that the Commission failed to address itself to the question of a flow-on. That is what the motion says in its first section, but at page 5 of the judgment the judges and the commissioner say that this argument was put to them. Is it said that the judges say simply that the argument was put to them? Are they so derelict in their duty that all they can do is say that they have heard the argument put and that is where their duty and obligation, with the responsibility of their oath of office finishes? The

1 266 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

judges have said that they have listened to the par ties and to the witnesses and have given the op portunity for cross-examination and, at the end of that whole judicial process, they have made a decision. At page 8 of the judgment, it is stated:
. . . we have decided that we should approve the agreements.
Could there be a more contemptuous attack upon a tribunal than to say, after it has done all those things, that there will be a motion of this type in this House? I conclude by saying that in these cir cumstances it is no wonder or surprise that Mr C. P. Mills, a reader in commercial and industrial law at the University of Sydney said, when writing in the Sydney Morning Herald of last Saturday, that the real threat to the freedom of Australians lies not in the unions but in a government that tries to get its way by threats and bribery. As this is independent proof of the nature of this Government, I seek leave to have the article incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The article read as follows
CANBERRA'S BIG STICKS AND BRIBES THREATEN DEMOCRACY
The real threat to the freedom of Australians lies not in the unions, but in a Government that tries to get its way by threats and bribery, writes C. P. MILLS, reader in commer-
cial and industrial law, University of Sydney.
Recently we saw the Federal Government threatening the big stick for companies which collaborate with the Builders Labourers' Federation if and when it is deregistered. Black lists and boycotts would befall these companies.
Now there is to be a sweeter prescription, a compound of bribery and corruption, for companies which resist the unions' 35-hour working week demands.
Specifically, these companies may be given extended terms for paying their bills to the Government and its agencies (in ctilmudeifnogrtchoemirpcloetminpgaGnyovtaerxnbmilelnst),cpoenntraaltcyts-f, raenedepxrtoenmspiotn"j:sJaoYf ment of money owed by the Government.
I had thought that the Government abhorred black bans and boycotts.
I would have expected that any respectable Government would be concerned to see that all its creditors are paid promptly.
And I wonder what the Auditor-General and the Commissioner of Taxation, to say nothing of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, would have to say about ministerial direc tions that contractual and statutory obligations of companies are to be altered in favour of companies which support the Government.
The Government has taken two more steps along the road to a dictatorship form of rule.
Previous moves in that direction have been concerned mainly with securing an absolute discretion in dealing with its own employees.
Now it moves against private secto employers.
Some are to be pushed from behind to confront the BLF. In the crush, we can expect a few to be squeezed outofexistence.

Others are to get VIP treatment in their commercial deal ings with the Government, instead of standard economy class.
All this is being done without any special authority from Parliament. Mere executive decree is sufficient, without any statutory authorisation. That is the way a dictator rules.
Maybe the Government is right in trying to smash the BLF, but it is a risky business. There is no guarantee that it will succeed.
Even if it does succeed, we have no way of knowing what side-effects may follow. A divided and warring trade-union movement could easily result and this would cause incalcula ble harm to our society.
Maybe, too, the Government is right about the conse quences of the 35-hour week, although we might well ask whether the frightening predictions of economic disaster are any more valid now than when they were made 60 years ago when the Arbitration Court made the first reduction of weekly hours from 48 to 44, or 35 years ago when it brought in the 40-hour week.
Again there is a large element of risk in this part of the plan.
The 35-hour week probably does not yet have the degree of inevitability that the unions claim. On the other hand, the Government will need enormous support from private employers if its plan is to succeed, and employers are notoriously less cohesive than the trade unions.
And the more effective is the Government encouragement to resist, so the heavier will be the trade union pressure.
There is a distinct possibility that the Government strategy will increase the number and severity of work stoppages, and the productivity which will be lost has to be balanced against what might be saved by slowing the spread of the 35-hour week.
Significant numbers of blue-collar workers in the public sector are already working hours fewer than the standard 40 per week, and employers in the private sector might find this and the union pressure more persuasive than the Government lollypops.
The Government is evidently convinced that it cannot rely on too much assistance from the Arbitration Commission in winning its two present objectives.
Even if the BLF is deregistered by the Federal Court, the commission still has responsibility under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act for settling industrial disputes involving builders labourers.
The Government certainly has not welcomed the com mission's approval of the Altona 35-hour deal, and seems to be sceptical of the commission's capacity to limit reductions of hours to cases where no loss of productivity will result.
In the good old days it was easier for governments to get their way with the arbitration tribunals.
In 1920, when the president of the Arbitration Court, Mr Justice Higgins, had awarded the 44-hour week to timber workers and engineers, the. then Prime Minister W. M. Hughes, blocked any more reductions by new legislation which required such decisions to be made by a Full Bench of three judges. But there were only two judges of the court at the time and the Government delayed many months before raisingthe number ofjudges to three.
For Mr Justice Higgins, this was the high point of four years' harassment by the Prime Minister. He resigned.
About 1 0 years later there was a similar incident in New South Wales.
The Labor Government appointed one of the three judges of the State Industrial Commission to the Supreme Court when it appeared that the commission was about to order a cut in the State living wage. Left with only two judges, the

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 267

commission was unable to function, and the living wage remained untouched. Again it was many months before the Government made a new appointment to the Industrial Commission.

worth his salt would not merely loo at the his torical events but would place those events in their historical context.

For various reasons tactics of that kind cannot be used today by the Federal Government for achieving its present objectives.

Mr Barry Jones-That is what historians do. Mr CHAPMAN-That is right. Any historian

The only alternatives it sees for itself are threats and sweet eners for employers. ,
I am sufficiently old-fashioned to believe that we are en titled to be governed by clear and well-defined rules that can be enforced in the courts.

worth his salt would, but unfortunately the honourable member for Wills has completely ignored that. He has not placed the events of 1 947 in their economic, social or political context, nor did he look at the consequences of that decision.

A system in which we are ruled by an Executive wielding big sticks and dispensing lollypops as it pleases seems to me a most reprehensible way of running a government.
That is where the real threat to our freedom lies, for employers as much as for unions-indeed for all ofus.
Mr HAWKE-I thank the House.

Let me give him a few lessons in history. In 1 947 both in Australia and internationally we were be ginning the post-War economic boom. Australia was best placed to benefit from the development of that boom. European industry had been devas tated by the effects of the Second World War and,

Mr CHAPMAN (Kingston) (3. 1 4) -1 have much pleasure in seconding the motion moved by my colleague the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter), namely:
That this House-
( I ) views with concern the failure of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to address themselves in their statement in the Altona 35-hour week case to the widerpublic interest and the flow on effect,

of course, the industrial development that in recent years has been taking place in Asia, was then many years off. Australia had a very efficient primary industry which ensured that we could maxi mise the benefits to be then derived from the international economy. Indeed, that was recognised at that time by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. In that 1 947 decision the Commission stated:

(2) requests the Government to intervene 'in all Conciliation and Arbitration hearings relating to an extension of the 35-hour week, to present a detailed case outlin ing the effects such moves will have on the economy,

. . . the appropriate time to add burdens to industry or, from another angle, to give ourselves added benefits is when industry is booming an d when nature is bountiful.

employment, investment and on our international competitiveness, and

The Commission further stated in that judgment:

(3) further requests the Government in such submissions All the economists of both sides agreed that never in our his

to remind the Commission that under section 39 (2) of tory have all the factors been so favourable, nor is it easy to

the Conciliation and Arbitration Act it is bound to concieve their ever being more favourable.

consider the likely effects of its decision on the economy with special reference to the likely effects on the level ofemployment and inflation. (Noticegiven 1 April 1 (8 1 ) .

Of course, in that judgment the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission was so right because, as I pointed out, we were then beginning an economic

In speaking to that motion, I also support the boom which was unprecedented and which is un statement of the Minister for I ndustrial Relations likely ever to be repeated.

(Mr Peacock) on the 35-hour working week. This afternoon we have seen, from the histrionics of the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) that both he and, indeed, the Australian Labor Party that he represents, look very much to his tory to justify their position on the 35-hour work ing week. Whatever the competence of the honourable member for Wills as an historian, he certainly has none as an economist because he has completely ignored the economic impact of the implementation of a 35-hour working week. But beyond that, he is a bad historian. In developing his argument in this debate and in dealing with the ministerial statement, the honourable member for Wills has relied on the decision of the Full Bench of the Arbitration Court in 1 947 to reduce work ing hours from 44 a week to 40 a week. In a previous speech in this debate he quoted copiously

But now we need to recognise that the post War economic boom is over. The international economy has been in a recession for some years. Manufacturing industry, in particular, is in a much more competitive economic environment. To compare 1 947 with the position now, far from re-enforcing the Australian Labor Party's case and that of the trade unions in favour of a 35-hour working week, in fact re-affirms the case against a 3 5-hour working week. We also need to look at the consequences of that decision made in 1 947. As a result of the decision, the rate of inflation of 3.8 per cent in 1 947 went up to 9 per cent in 1 948. In 1 949 it went up to 9.3 per cent; in 1 950, 1 0.3 per cent and in 1 9 5 7 it went up to a massive 20.7 per cent.
Mr Hawke-Did it have anything to do with

from that judgment. Of course, any historian the Korean war boom?

1 268 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

Mr CHAPMAN- -I acknowledge that other

the rate at which hours of work are reduced and

factors were involved in that rate of inflation.

other benefits made available should remain well below the rate of growth of production.

Mr Hawke W - ell, what are you relating it for? That is what the International Labour Organis

Mr CHAPMAN-I relate it because there is no doubt that a shorter working week made some contribution to those inflationary factors. The second piece of bad reasoning from history in the case put by the honourable member for WiIIs is his claim that in the 34 years since 1 947 there have not been any further reductions in the length of the working week and therefore it is now appro priate to reduce it further. Of course, he completely ignores the fact that a number of benefits have been given to workers over that 34 year period. True, the national standard working week of 40 hours remains, but there have been major re ductions in working time through increased annual leave, extra specific holidays, increased long service leave, reduced qualifying periods for long service leave, increased sick leave and so on. There has been a significant reduction in working hours in the 34 years since 1 947. It also needs to be remembered that although many people attend their place of work for 40 hours of the week, it is very doubtful whether in many instances they ac tually work for a full 40 hours.

ation has to say. It clearly acknowledges that the impact of a shorter working week on the economy must be taken into account. Of course we all know that the economic impact of a shorter work ing week in Australia would be disastrous. The increased costs have been well documented in this debate. If employers were forced to take on extra labour to cover the reduced working hours, it would result in a labour cost increase of 1 4 per cent. If they took the second option, of increasing overtime, it would result in an increased labour cost of 2 1 per cent. If, on the other hand, they reduced output to cover the costs of reduced working hours, the cost increase would be 1 2 per cent. It is very true, as has been claimed by the Opposition, that as a result of the policies of the Fraser Government, the Australian economy is the healthiest that it has been for some time. Infla tion has been significantly reduced, investment has increased and, of course, we are on the brink of a resources boom and the profits of many companies have shown improvement. However, it needs to be recognised that improved profitability is only such when it is measured against the disas

The Opposition, and in particular the honour trous situation that transpired for those

able member for Wills, claim that working hours companies during the period of the Whitlam

are being reduced throughout the industrialised Labor Government. If honourable members look world. But nowhere in the industrialised world are at profitability across the board they will see that

standard hours of work less than 40 a week. Of it is still significantly below the long run norm that

course, in many countries those standard hours of was in existence. prior to the advent of that

work are much higher. Even the International Government. Furthermore, the resources boom

Labour Organisation, which the honourable which Australia can share in during the 1 980s, is

member for Wills is so fond of quoting, acknowl very much dependent upon a responsible attitude

edges the fact that the economic impact must be being adopted by the trade union movement. Ir taken into account in the move to shorter working responsibility on its part would place in severe

hours.

jeopardy Australia's capacity to benefit from the

Mr Birney-What are they?

wealth that we have in resources and the potential for them to be developed. Certainly the 3 5-hour

Mr CHAPMAN-I will quote exactly what working week is j u s t such a piece of that organisation states in relation to a shorter irresponsibility.

working week:

Mr Hawke-It is responsible to attackjudges?

Such measures should take into account-
(a) the level of economic development attained and the extent to which the country is in a position to bring about a reduction in hours of work without reducing total production or productivity, endangering its economic growth, the development of new industries or its competitive position in international trade, and without creating inflationary pressures which would ultimately reduce the real in c o m e of the workers . . .
That is what the International Labour Organisation states in one part of its comments with regard to reduced working hours. It also states:

Mr CHAPMAN-I have not mentioned judges. The call for a 3 5-hour working week totaJIy disregards the plight of the unemployed. The impact of the increased cost of our economy of the 35-hour working week would result in further destruction of employment opportunities. This is recognised in a paper prepared by I ler Majesty's T reasury in England. Treasury Working Paper No. 1 4, published in June 1 980, states:
The essential weakness of the argument that shorter hours are an effective way of promoting

35-Hour Week

2 April 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 269

work sharing is that weekly wage rates would probably not be reduced and that any increase in output per man would be insufficient to prevent a significant rise in unit labour costs of production. Under these circumstances additional inflation would be generated and this in turn would over a period set forces in motion that wholly, or largely, offset any first round gain in employment.
So there we have it. There would be no benefit to the unemployed through the introduction of a 35-hour working week. Indeed, perhaps it could be said that the only benefit for unemployed people of a shorter working week would be that they would be unemployed for only 35 hours in stead of 40 hours. A shorter working week would of course accelerate the replacement of men by machines, which the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) is so fond of talking about.
Mr Good luck-He is a talking machine. Mr CHAPMAN-He is certainly a talking ma chine. But improved technology will result in a lower requirement for labour input as against capital input into production. Mr Barry Jones-It is happening anyway. Mr CHAPMAN-Of course it is happening anyway. But any significant increase in labour costs will rapidly accelerate that occurrence and ensure that more and more jobs are destroyed which need not' be destroyed. It is futile to claim that the increased costs of a shorter working week can be covered by improved productivity when, over the last few years, Australia's productivity improvement has ranged between 1 per cent to 1 .7 per cent. That is no where near the level of productivity improvement required if the extra costs of a 35-hour working week are to be maintained. Of course the judges referred to improved pro ductivity in their judgment on the Altona case. They indicated that the-Mr Campbell-I take a point of order. The motion before the House clearly deals with the failure of the judges and commissioners. The motion is clearly about the dereliction of judges and commissioners. The honourable member has spoken about the 35-hour working week and he has not referred to the dereliction of the judges, which he claims to be the case. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)-I rule that the honourable member for Kingston is in order. Mr CHAPMAN-I thank you for your support, Mr Deputy Speaker. When some new honourable members such as the honourable

member for Kalgoorlie learn something about the Standing Orders they will realise what a cognate debate is. The parties in the Altona situation agreed that the cost would be something like $34,000 or 0. 1 8 per cent of total wages of the cur rent award employees. But they also acknowled ged that what they regard as a minimal extra cost arises because they have agreed to undertake to work normally in accordance with existing awards. So in effect the argument for the intro duction of the 35-hour working week is on the basis that the employees are being rewarded for getting rid of past inefficiencies. For example, the introduction of correct timekeeping will save $ 1 6,250. The correct use of job and work cards will save $40,000. Restricting tea breaks to the existing allocated time will save $30,700.
Mr Porter-Blackmail. Mr CHAPMAN-As the honourable member for Barker says, it is blackmail. The unions have been engaged in activity above and beyond their awards. They have not been working effectively and efficiently in that situation as they ought to be and now, as a reward for returning to the way in which they ought to work to ensure that pro ductivity is maintained, they are to be given a re ward of an extra five hours leisure a week. That demonstrates the nonsense of this determination. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Mr CUNNINGHAM ( McMillan) (3.29) This cognate debate embraces the statement made by the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) and a motion moved by the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) and seconded by the honourable member for Kingston ( Mr Chapman) . I believe that the motion has been very well dealt with by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) . Mr N. A. Brown-You could sit down. Mr CUNNINGHAM-The motion is a dis graceful attack on the judges concerned. As far as debate on this motion is concerned, one could sit down because that is all the motion is worth. I refer to the statement made by the Minister for Industrial Relations. Perhaps the honourable member for Barker and the honourable member for Kingston brought forward their motion as a tactic to divert attention from the weakness of the statement put out by the Minister. The Minister in his statement said:
The Government is aware that an estimated 36-per cent of all full-time non-managerial employees are currently working less than 40 hours per week.
He went on to say:

1 270 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

"I t does not follow, however, that the economy can stand an across the board application of a 35 or even a 37t hour week to the total work force.

1 do not think anybody on this side of the House or anybody in the union movement has said that. No one has said that tomorrow a 3 5-hour working week should be introduced right across the board. In fact we can go back to 1958-60 to look at how this principle developed over the years. At that time, the first moves were made in some industries to bring down working hours.

I refer to recent decisions that have been made in this matter. I will quote from one decision which was made in the Postal Telecommuni cations Technicians Association case on 3 March 1 976. The decision was made by Justices Isaacs and Sharp and Commissioner Cohen. They said:

After reviewing the circumstances and the submissions in

the case, the Commission said it faced the following question:

'Should the Commission deny a claim for shorter hours to

workers seeking the hours of work of the majority in the in

dustry, when the granting of the claim would lead to closer

and more constructive relations between labour and manage

ment, both immediately and in the long run; and when the

necessary increase in productivity arises directly from such re

lations with no inroad on the normal trend of productivity

thus making the shorter hours possible with virtually no cost

to the consumer and no reduction in the standard of ser

vice . did not

.. grant

we would be failing in our statutory duty, if this application and applaud the new spirit in

we
in

dustrial relations which it reflects.

This is the sort of statement that was made in 1 976. In 1 970, decisions were made in respect of the waterfront, oil, coal and container industries. All of these decisions have been made over a period of years, yet all of a sudden this Government has come into the House with a statement and has tried to stop history. It expects that the world will stop immediately so that it can govern for three years in peace. But these things have been happening. The world will change and can keep changing. There is nothing the Government can do about it except make funny noises as it is doing at present.

The Minister in his statement also said:

Wage restraint is crucial in meeting primary anti-inflation objectives.

He went on to say:

Every worker knows from experience that a wage increase means a price increase.

Any wage increase that I have seen comes after the wage earner has justified it in the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. Therefore he has to prove that there has been price increases before he gets a wage increase. So that statement is back to front. The Minister later in his statement went on to say:

The most recent statistics available indicate that in the December quarter last year, the series for average weekly or dinary time earnings for full-time non-managerial employees showed a 5.2 per ccnt increase over the corresponding quarter in the previous year.
The Minister went on to say:
I am concerned that these labour cost pressures are in the system.
One would think that the Government was not running the country. This Governmentthose who sit on the other side of the Houseare run ning the country. It is this country that has created those pressures in the system. The Australian Council of Trade Unions advocate, Mrs Marsh, in her opening submission to the last wage case, said:
The combined effects of increased profitability and short age of skilled labour means that some groups, with consider able ease, are able to successfully bargain in the field . . .
That is the way this Government operates. It op erates by supply and demand. By mismanagement it has created a serious shortage of tradesmen. Now that that serious shortage of tradesmen is starting to be reflected with the demand in re source development, it wants the world to stop. It wants everybody to hold their horses so that it can do something for three years to try to make up for what it has done. It has had six years to run this country. But we have had six years of mismanage ment which has created a situation under which pressures have been exerted. It is no wonder the Minister comes into this House and says he is concerned. He is concerned because of decisions made by his own Cabinet. I turn from page 5 of the statement to page 7, which reads:
The effects, both direct and indirect, of the shorter hours campaign have now been felt in all States and many sectors of the economy.
The Minister refers on this page to power gener ation. Anyone who is involved in the power gener ation area, as I am in my electorate and in the Latrobe Valley, has only to look at the history of the claim for a 35-hour week. That claim has been pursued by workers at the State Electricity Commission of Victoria since 1957, which is a long time, and a decision on that was brought into effect on 1 January 1981 . So it cannot be said that a claim put in tomorrow for a 35-hour week will have great ramifications the day after, as seems to be the case put forward by this Government. The campaign gained greater strength in 1 960 when the Australian Council of Trade Unions convened a conference of federal unions in Sydney from 5 to 7 May and said:
. . . increasing productivity, further extension of mech anisation and introduction of automated processes emphasises the urgencyfor the demand for a shorter working week.

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 27 1

That was in 1 960. I n the early 1 970s the campaign was reactivated. If we look at the history of it we will see that it continued until a decision was reached in 1 980. Let us look at some of the state ments that were made at the time that decision was taken. An article in the Age of 24 December 1 980 reads:
'The acceptance of responsibility by employees for improv ing efficiency is an integral part of this agreement', Mrs Marsh said.
Mrs Marsh was the ACTU advocate. The article continues:
Productivity agreements, by their very nature, are not capable offlowing-on.
In other words, they have to be negotiated between workers and employers, and there is no possibility in that case of a flow-on. The article continues:
. . . an SEC official said the agreement would create an improved industrial relations climate in the power industry and result in a more efficientuse ofworkinghours.
The SEC area administration manager in the Latrobe Val ley, Mr George Bates, said an estimated 294,900 man hours a year were expected to be saved by employees taking their
morning and afternoon tea breaks onjob sites . . . Government spokesmen attack any approach by the employer and the employee to get together for discussions. Why is it that discussions are considered to be such a terrible thing as far as the Government is concerned? Another statement that emanates from the other side of the House is that the introduction of a 35-hour week will cost people their jobs. It is said that, if employers and employees get together for discussions and come to these agreements, it will cost people their jobs. The article goes on to quote Mr Bates, the administration manager of the SEC in the Latrobe Valley. The article reads:
Mr Bates said the initial cost of introducing shorter hours would include overtime payments to existing staff while. new employees were trained. It was expected to take three years for 600 vacancies to be filled. The main cost after that period would be the wages bill for the extra staff.
Six hundred jobs will be created by that agreement. Let us look at that cost situation. An article in the Age of 1 January 1981 reads:
The advocate for the Government of Victoria and the SEC, Mr Ian Douglas, said shorter hours would cost the SEC $6.8m in the first year, $ 10.2m in thesecondyear, $ 1 3.8m in the third year and $ l l .5m each year after that.
That is a lot of money, and that relates to the cost side. The article continued:
The agreement provided savings to the SEC of $8.5m a year . . .
Is that the sort of negotiation that the Government says cannot take place? Are employers and employees not allowed to get together and reach agreement to improve productivity and lower

costs? The Government seems to believe that this is wrong, that these people are not allowed to do this sort of thing. The Minister for Industrial Relations went on to say at page 16 of his statement:
The Government expects employers to resist industrial pressures for increased wages and reduced hours. We intend to ask employers collectively and individually to resist such claims. I have written this week to three firms which are reported to have conceded shorter working hours.
We know what has happened since that statement was made. We have seen headlines in newspapers all over the country about ICI Australia Ltd say ing that it had decided that it would have to stop its planned program because of threats made by the Government. The Minister went on to say:
I have asked for details of any concessions they may have
made and will be making a report to the Government on ap propriate responses.
We all saw what the appropriate response was. The Chairman of ICI quickly sought to defend himself by going to the Premier of New South Wales, seeking the support of the Labor Government there to put pressure on this Government, which was trying to blackmail people into not talking. The greatest thing that any country can do for industrial relations is to encourage employers and workers to get together and talk out their problems, to find out where they can im prove productivity and the cost structures of industry. This is the only way in which we will get better industrial relations.
Let us look at what industrial relations arc all about. The Conciliation and Arbitration Act pro vides, in relation to certified agreements and con sent awards, that where the parties to an industrial dispute have been able to reconcile their differences and-reach agreement they may make a memorandum of the terms agreed upon and re quest a member of the Conciliation and Arbi tration Commission to certify the memorandum or request a member of the Commission to make an award or order giving effect to the agreement. The Act goes on to say that awards or orders made under section 28 have the same force and effect as any award or order of the Commission. They are binding in the same way as awards or orders resulting from a decision of a member of the Commission are binding. There is further pro vision that a memorandum certified under section 28 is to have the same effect as and is to be deemed an award of the Commission for all pur poses of the Act. Memorandums of agreement, or orders or awards made under section 28 must be certified by a member of the Commission unless any of the following factors are present: The terms of the memorandum, award or order are not in settlement of an industrial dispute; any of the terms are beyond the Commission's power to

1 272 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

include in an award; or it is not in the public interest that the memorandum should be certified or the order or award made.

This Government has repeatedly argued a case in the Arbitration Commission as to why the public interest should be protected. When it puts for ward its case, the evidence that the judges look at clearly shows that those arguments do not stand up. As has been stated very clearly this afternoon by the honourable member for Wills about the attack of the honourable member for Barker on the Commission, it is the job of the Commission to look at the evidence and weigh it, and it is the job of the Government, if it wishes, to cross-examine witnesses. The Government does not seem to be able to justify its case. Its argument is so poor that it cannot seem to come up with a winning situation. Its method to overcome that is to come into this House and make statements about it seeking Press coverage. In fact, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) came out and sought Press coverage before the relevant Minister had a chance to report in this House on what would happen. As the Government cannot win its case in the Commission, it has decided to use scare tac tics. It is trying to stop the force of history. We have to stop for three years, halt the whole works
so that the Government can get its act in order. i
would say that it would be better for this Government if it got its act in order and encouraged people to talk. We might then find that we have a better industrial relations scene. [t should do that instead of adopting the confrontation tactics that we are seeing from the Prime Minister of this country.

Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (3.44)-The issue which is before us today is one of great national importance and one which affects the future prosperity of all of us, and that is whether the norm should be a 35-hour week. That is the issue. No matter how much the Opposition seeks
o try to avoid it, it is the issue and it remains the
Issue.

Opposition members interjecting-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)

Order! The honourable member for McMillan

was heard in a reasonable amount ofsilence. I feel

tshhaotultdhebehgO!ivlOeunrathbelesammeemboeprpofrotrunNitoyrttho

Sydney put his

case.

Mr SPENDER-That amounts to a reduction of about one-eighth of the working time for the majority. When I listened to the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) last week and again today I was rather reminded of one of those Sherlock Holmes stories about the dog that did

not bark in the night. Honourable members might

have heard it. Watson asked Holmes: 'Holmes,

what about that dog?' Holmes said: 'Do you

notice anything about the dog Watson? '. Watson

said: 'No, I did not notice anything about it at all'. olmes said: 'That is precisely it, because the dog

dId not bark'. What was significant about the per

formance of the honourable member for Wills

was the questions to which he did not address

himself. What were the questions he did not face

and what were the questions that he could not

face? Firstly, there was the cost of a 3 5-hour week

and, secondly, who controls the flow-on? Will it

be the honourable member for Wills acting as a

latter day King Canute holding back the flow-on?

There will be very little chance of that. Let us

look at the way in which the honourable member

went about avoiding these issues. Whatever may

be said about his arguments he has a talent ap

proaching genius for avoiding dealing with the

questions before the House. Firstly, he said that

the proposed 3 5-hour week would not be across

the board. He seems to have forgotten the Aus

tralian Council of Trade Unions resolution in

1 979. I believe that is an organisation with which

he had some sort of attachment in 1 979. When the

honourable member for Diamond Valley (Mr N.

A. Brown) referred to that resolution the honour

able member for Wills said: 'What is your source?

How do we know you have been accurate?' The

hqounotmurgabfrloemmaermesboelrutfioorn

Diamond Valley passed at the time

was that

the honourable member for Wills was President of

the ACTU. What did the honourable member for

Wills do then ? He referred to Mrs Marsh. Poor

Mrs Marsh is brought in and somehow she is

meant to justify the proposition that this will not

be an across-the-board application or that there

will not be fl ow-on. The honourable member for

t Wills would have us believe is that somehow bit
by bit, when the time is right various indus ries

will be accommodated to a 3 5-hour week. What

puerile nonsense. He knows that that is not true

and that is the reason he could not meet it. Let us

look--

Mr Hawke - -At the motion.

Mr SPENDER-Let us look at what Mr Dolan said, recently as reported in the Age of 1 April.

Mr Holding-The motion you are going to vote for.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)-  Order! The honourable member should be heard in silence.

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 273

Mr SPENDER-Mr Deputy Speaker, it does not matter. The interjections just reveal the fra gility of the case the Opposition is trying to put. Mr Dolan said: 'The role of the ACTU was often misunderstood'. There can be no doubt about that. He also said: 'It was a purely voluntary as sociation and under its rules could not control the action of its affiliates'. There is no doubt about that either. What was the next avoidance mech anism adopted by the honourable member? He delved, like a law student in a mock trial with a bad case and no knowledge of the facts, into the decisions of yesteryear. He started off trying to put things on a philosophical basis with the 1 947 decision of the standard hours inquiry. He quoted from parts of that court's decision and left out other parts. I just remind him of two of the things that were said. [ refer him to page 599 of thc rc port, under the heading 'Time for Introduction' where we find the following statement:
All criteria of an active virile progressive economy are present today. Our popUlation has increased and all are work ing. Our sources of power are taxed to their limit and that limit is higher than ever before. Business is showing a continu ous unsatisfied demand for products of all kinds. Orders sufficient to maintain activity at the highest levels are booked for years ahead over a wide range of industry.
Could that be said to be the case today notwith standing that we have climbed out of a world de pression far better than most industrialised countries? It most certainly could not. That was one of the major factors operating in the minds of the court when it reached its decision in 1 947. I wish to make one quote further from page 601 of the same report. It states:
There is . . . another factor the value of which is not yet appreciated, but it will be. For the first time in the history of capitalism we have 'full employment', and what is more important, the promise that it will be continued indefinitely.
Those were the bright, happy days, no doubt when that was thought to be the case. It illustrates just how fragile the human mind is when it tries to grapple with the future. The simple fact is that judges err. Everybody in this chamber has erred in judgment on many occasions. Every judge sitting in every court has also errcd. We are human. Sometimes it is worthwhile bearing that in mind. I wish to deal now with the Altona case and to mention one or two of the things that were said in the statement which was made. I am well aware that the reasons have not been handed down. I look forward with great interest to the reasons when they are handed down.

rabble that they are or can be. Let us have a look at some of the facts of that case which are to be found on page 4. What were these cost savings? This is the information which was put before the Commission:
Over the six companies as a group the gross cost of implementing a 35-hour week was stated to be $3,871 ,000, the agreed offsets were $3,837,000 leaving a net increased cost of $34,000 which is 0. 1 8 per cent of tota! wages of current award employees.
That is a very coincidental figure. It just so happened that the employers on one side, who have been bludgeoned for the last six to eight weeks by continual industrial unrest, sat down with the employees, did their sums, and came up with a difference of $34,000 when they were talking about figures of close to $4m. That was then pre sented in evidence to the Commission. We all know what takes place in a lot of these cases.
Mr Hawke-You are saying that thejudges are liars. You ought to be ashamed of yourself.
Mr SPENDER-Mr Deputy Speaker, unlike the honourable member for Wills--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman) Order! The honourable member will withdraw that remark.
Mr Hawke-I said that is what the honourable member is saying.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER The honourable member will withdraw the word liar.
Mr Hawke-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I did not say that the honourable member was a liar. I am saying that what he is say ing is that the judges are liars.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER The word liar is unparliamentary in this House, and has always been regarded as such. It should not be used.
Mr Hawke-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I offer an explanation.
Mr SPENDER-Just to consume time. Mr Hawke-What did you do? Mr Deputy Speaker, I ask you to direct your attention to page 7 of the judgment. This goes right to the heart of what the honourable member is speaking about. M r DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Is the honourable member taking a point of order? Mr Hawke-Yes, it is a point of order.

Mr Hawke-What a lawyer you are. Fancy at tackingjudges on an interim judgment. You ought to be ashamed of yourself.
Mr SPENDER--Mr Deputy Speaker, listen to honourable members opposite going on like the

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I ask you to be brief.
Mr Hawke-I will make my point of order as quickly as I can. At the bottom of page 7 of the judgment the judge said--

1 274 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

M r SPENDER-Mr Deputy Speaker, J take a those which existed in 1 947? The answer most

point of order.

certainly is that we do not. Secondly, does anyone

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-It is not a point of order.
Mr Hawke-It is a point of order.

here seriously believe that there will not be a flow-on effect? Does anyone here seriously believe that other unions will say: 'Oh well, of course, that was productivity bargaining. That

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-J ruled that it is does not concern us. We are perfectly happy for

not a point of order. The honourable member for the fellows over the road to work a 3 5-hour week.

Wills will resume his seat. I call the honourable We will continue to work a 40-hour week '. What

member for North Sydney.

nonsense. Nobody in this House believes that.

Mr SPENDER-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. Unlike the honourable member for Wills I do not and never have impugned the i ntegrity of courts. For example, I would not categorise the judgment of a court--

That is one reason it has never bcen put forward by the Opposition. Does anyone seriously believe there will be no cost as a result of the introduction of a 35-hour week? Not a soul believes there will not be a cost attached to it. Who will pay that cost? It will be paid by those who can least afford

Mr Holding-Well, what are you doing now? it, not by the unions which are represented by the

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Wills was heard in com
parative silence. I think in fairness he should
a low anyone else to put forward his points of VIew.
Mr SPENDER-I have said that I do not and never have impugned the integrity of our courts. They err from time to time but that is a different matter. For example, I would not categorise the judgment of a court as an obscenity. To do that would be to bring a court into disrepute. To im

honourable member for Wills and those who support him here. It will be paid by the old, the needy and those in our society who cannot look after themselves as well as others, those who do not have strong unions to push their interests to the disadvantage of the interests of the whole of the country.
Let me remind honourable members of the last way in which the honourable member for Wills sought to avoid the issue. Today he conducted a lesson in English reading which would, I imagine,

pugn the integrity of its members is not a course of have shamed a three-year-old child. He put it for

action which I would adopt. It is a course which is not foreign to the honourable member for Wills. If we look at what was said in the Altona case we have this odd quid pro quo: It just so happens that things will balance out and cost almost nothing at all. The companies were bludgeoned into accept ing the proposal that was put to them. Quite often that takes place in so-called productivity deals.

ward that this was an attack on the integrity of the commissioners, who were a party to the Altona statement. That is not so. What it amounts to is a direction, a reminder to this Parliament and to the the tribunal that there are matters which have to be considered, matters that it does not appear to have considered on the basis of the statement that was made. There is not one word of censure or

The option is to say: 'Look fellows, you should criticism. I refer honourable members to the rel agree to this productivity deal. You should go evant part which states:

along with us and present the best possible evi Further requests the Government . . . to remind the dence in support of us in relation to future fore Commission . . .

casts because if you do not you will go to the wall'. We all know that sort of an option that is. We all know the sort of answers which would be given to such an option. The next way of avoiding the issue, apart from delving through old judgments and thereby seeking to hang an argument on them, was for the honourable member for Wills to say that he refused to resort to abstruse economic theorising. That simply meant that he refused at any time to come to grips with the argument. This lamentable performance was put forward by somebody who holds the position of Opposition

What we have been faced with today in this gamble with the future prosperity of this country indulged in by the honourable member for Wills and others is an attempt once more to divert the country's attention from the main issue-that is, who will pay, what will be the cost and who will stop the flow-on? Will it be Canute Wills? Not l ikely!
Mr HAWKE (Wills)-Mr Deputy Speaker, J wish to make a personal explanation in respect of what transpired a while ago.

shadow Minister for Industrial Relations.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)

I now return to the fundamental questions: Firstly, does anybody seriously believe that the

Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?

conditions that presently exist in any way parallel Mr HAWKE-Yes.

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 275

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-He may proceed. Mr HAWKE-A suggestion was made that I was saying that an honourable member opposite had lied. My interjection was that what was being put was that thejudges were liars. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I did not interrupt the honourable member for North Sydney because of any misunderstanding. The word 'liar' is regarded as unparliamentary. Mr HAWKE-J appreciate that. The passages contained in the judgment will make it quite clear in respect of what the honourable member was saying that he was deliberately-perhaps it was not deliberate if he had not read the judgment making a direct misrepresentation of what the judges had done. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member has made his point. Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) -Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation. Most certainly I did not engage in misrepresentation. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honour able member claim to have been misrepresented? Mr SPENDER-Yes, by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) . I did not in any way misrepresent what was said. The Hansard record will show that. Mr PORTER (Barker) -Mr Deputy Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member may proceed. Mr PORTER-The honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) and the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) have constantly suggested throughout their speeches, as have some honourable members in interjections since those two honourable members have spoken, that my speech and the motion I moved in some way impugned the integrity of the members of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. I refer to one sentence of my speech in which I stated:
I make the point that I am notreflectingon the Commission per se but rather this particular decision.
Mr Hawke-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The honourable member has con demned himself. The point is that a: judgment is made by some--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member is debating the point.
Mr Hawke-It was made by three members of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member is debating the point. He will resume his seat.

Mr KENT ( Hatham) (5. 1 ) -My friend the legal eagle, the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) who preceded me in the de bate, had an unenviable task to attack the Aus talian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission's judgment. He was saying that judges do err. Let me tell him that workers sometimes make mis takes too but they are never wrong.

Mr Ruddock-That gets it into some perspec tive too, doesn't it?

Mr KENT-Yes, it does. The honourable member will hear the perspective in a minute. I enjoyed listening to honourable members opposite who have never clocked on or off in a fac tory and yet they love to preach to the workers. I also enjoyed the little story of the honourable member for North Sydney about barking. The motion which has been moved today by the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) , as well as the statement made by the Minister for In dustrial Relations (Mr Peacock) last week, were calculated to frighten the workers and the Con ciliation and Arbitration Commission into sub mission. But the barking of the honourable member for Barker will not scare anyone. As a matter of fact, this debate brought on by the Government to intimidate the people has had a contrary effect. It has demonstrated beyond any doubt that the Fraser Government represents only a sectional interest, the interest of the rich.

The statement by the Minister for Industrial

Relations indicates the Government's alarm,

almost panic, that workers in Australia may

achieve better working Minister introduced his

scpoenedcihtiboynsstaantdingp'tahya. tTthhee

Australian economy is poised to enter a period of

considerable growth. He and his colleagues have

been forecasting economic recovery for five years

now, and so far their forecasts have been about as

accurate as those of the Weather Bureau in

Melbourne. However, now that the Minister for

Industrial Relations has joined his boss, the Prime

Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) , in forecasting the

boom around the corner, let us, for arguments

sake, accept that his forecast is correct. Would it

not be reasonable to expect that wage and salary

earners, the great majority of Australians, should

benefit from the projected boom, that they should

work a shorter week? Of course it would be

reasonable!

However, this does not make sense to the Min ister. He believes that the introduction of the 3 5-hour week will harm industry and threaten the

1 276 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 198 1

35-Hour Week

benefits of this period of growth. But the Minister is one-eyed and sees the benefits as accruing only to large companies in the form of increased profits, a large percentage of which will go overseas. The Minister for Industrial Relations would like to see the worker back in Dickensian times, in the era of unlimited working hours and unlimited exploitation of workers. This Government appears to be obsessed with the alleged costs that the introduction of the 3 5-hour week will im pose on industry and the economy. However, it has been seen time and again that the better con ditions given to the workers, the higher pro ductivity will be. It is not the other way around that the longer hours people work, the better their productivity, as the Minister for Industrial Relations implied.
The Government's reaction against the struggle of wage and salary earners in Australia for better living standards is predictable. Whenever a disputation occurs it comes down, invariably, on the side of the employers, on the side of its rich friends. Is this because they believe that the boss is always right and the worker is always wrong.
In the historical struggle for a shorter working week, the workers have been proved right time and again, yet honourable gentlemen opposite worry only about the profits of their rich friends, neglecting their duty to look after the well-being of the majority of the people. Whenever they talk about the worker, they always emphasise, as the Minister has done in his statement, that it is cru cial that restraint be exercised or they argue along the lines of the well known cliche that workers are pricing themselves out of the market.
We have never heard them preaching restraint on the astronomic profits of transnational companies, of which an increasing share is taken out of the country. Only a week or so ago we heard the Prime Minister approving the conces sional rates of electricity given to Alcoa of Australia Ltd by the Hamer Liberal Government. Yet when it comes to concessions to workers, salary earners and Australian families they object.
Let us have another look at the arguments of honourable gentlemen opposite. They accuse the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) of quoting only from the Conciliation and Arbi tration Commission's decisions and not mention ing what is happening on the factory floor. I can tell honourable members opposite what is going on at the work place. I worked as a storeman, an ironworker and a railwayman for many years before I entered this House. I can tell honourable members opposite that, no matter how much they try to frighten the workers into submission, the

workers will not be bluffed. They will stand up and fight for their just share of the cake. At the work place, it is well known that the Government is not sincere in calling for restraint, as that call is only ever directed at the workers.
The Minister for I ndustrial Relations argues . that increases in labour costs inevitably lead to price increases. But why has he never yet issued one call to his wealthy friends to reduce or re strain their prices? The large companies continue to make record profits each year and yet honour able gentlemen opposite claim that the workers are the ones who must exercise restraint. Well, for one, I am not ashamed to stand up for the ordinary wage and salary earners and their families in their fight for a better life. The Minister's statement claims that the 35-hour week will create un employment by burdening his rich friends with higher labour costs. But he forgets that, unless the worker takes home a reasonable pay, he will not be able to spend and industry will not be able to sell its produce.
Well before the mention of the 35-hour week campaign, this Government had created half a million unemployed in this country. As well as that, it reduced the real income of the wage and salary earner through increasing taxation, through the exorbitant tax at the petrol pump and through increased interest rates. What can it show for its misguided action? The only result of the Liberal-National Country Party Government's policy of reducing real wages has been to boost the employers' profits without raising job numbers. While jobs have become more scarce, the employers have directed parts of their exorbitant profits into an orgy of takeovers and mergers. A sizable chunk of the profits is also used to keep the wealthy in outstanding luxury with Rolls Royces, overseas trips, yachts, private jets, mansions, chil dren at the best private schools, et cetera. What is left is supposed to go into new investment. This new investment is supposed to create new jobs. But over the last few years employers have been buying labour replacing equipment, with the help of the Government's special investment tax allowance. To add insult to injury this taxation allowance to the bosses has been financed by heavier taxes on wage and salary earners, whose jobs have been placed in jeopardy as a result. In other words, the worker is being forced to pay for his own execution. Mr Deputy Speaker, as you can see it is not the 35-hour working week that is placing jobs in jeopardy, but the very policies of this Government. If this Government is worried about unemployment, it should show more con cern at the abysmal situation that its economic policies have brought aQout.

35-Hour Week

2 April 1 981 REPRESENTATIVES 1277

For five years this Government has done nothing about our growing unemployment. The only thing it could recommend was to float the idea that young unemployed people should not get unemployment benefit. Whenever this Government finds itself in difficulties, it attempts to blame the worker, the wage earner, for its problems. The Minister for Industrial Relations in his statement said:
1 am concerned that these labour cost pressures are in the system.
Is he concerned that the ordinary Australian fam ily man will earn an extra quid or two a week or work shorter hours? He has never expressed his concern about the income and wealth of his opu lent racehorse owner friends. The Minister did not even mention the tax free profits of $ 1 6.5m earned by the Bell group of companies overnight. But then why should he mention profits when he considers them sacred? He begrudges only the few dollars in the pay packet of the worker.
The pious pontification of the Minister and honourable members opposite in connection with the 35-hour week campaign is not surprising if one looks at what the Minister himself is advertising. In the centre page of the Australian Financial Review I recently found a supplement advertising Rydges magazine. This magazine is advertising its books entitled 'Tax Planning for Executives', 'How to Win from Real Estate' and other perks for the rich. Whose handsome face appeared on the back of the advertisement? It was none other than the smiling face of the Minister for Industrial Relations himself. He did not seem to be worried by the text of the advertisement. He was smiling. The pamphlet stated:
A small amount of money can be 'geared up.' It can return you both an income and tax-free capital gain.
That is what the Minister was advertising. The ad vertisement continued:
Whether you are interested in the purchase of a rural prop erty, units at Surfers Paradise, a terrace house, a single unit or a shopping complex . . . this excellent book will show you how to obtain maximum returns.
Mr Fisher-What is wrong with that? Mr KENT-There is nothing wrong with that but what is wrong with working 35 hours a week so that others may have jobs too, not only the honourable member? It is not surprising that the ordinary people will strongly question the sin cerity of this Minister when he talks about re straint. He does not advocate restraint on tax free capital gains; he advertises them. Mr Lloyd-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The honourable member referred to the honourable member for MalIee and the 3 5-hour

week. As I understand it, the honourable member for Mallee works a 70-hour week.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins) Order! There is no point of order. I will not accept frivolous points of order.
Mr KENT-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, for your protection but the honourable member's flippant point of order did not disturb me whatso ever. The Minister and honourable gentlemen opposite preach one sort of morality to the wage and salary earners and reserve another kind of code for themselves. It is this duplicity that the honour able member for Wills and speakers on this side of the House are exposing today. It is this duplicity that will bring down this Government tomorrow.
Mr LLOYD ( Murray) (4. 1 4)-The different tactic employed by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) in the debate today compared with his tactics in the debate last week on basi cally the same subject-today we are having a cognate debate incorporating both matters-is very interesting. The honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) made the point very well that, when a debater has a factual case, the facts are presented as the basis of his argument. When there are no facts or when the alleged facts have been exposed, as were those of the honour able member for Wills in the debate last week, the usual response-I think this happens to all of us-is either attempted character assassination or horrified righteousness that anyone could challenge the validity of any decision-making tribunal or the basis of the debator's own opinion or argument. I believe that the speech today by the honourable member for Wills is a perfect example of the response in a debate of a person whose argument is blown. I am also interested in what ac tually is the Australian Labor Party's policy on the 35-hour week. I have before me an article from the Canberra Times of 9 May 1 980 which quotes the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Hayden. The article states:
'1 have got to say frankly that as an economist, not only in terms of academic qualification but experience as an administrator  a Treasurer of this country-and recognising as a Government we have to administer the affairs of this country with economic sense, 1 would not support a 35-hour week at this point', Mr Hayden said.
'In my view it would have damaging consequences on many industries which would be cost-disadvantaged-especially in the export market'.
That is a clear and specific statement from the Leader of the Opposition, the leader of the Australian Labor Party, that he is opposed to a general 35-hour week. But the honourable member for Wills is obviously speaking for a different part of the Labor Party. Perhaps he is speaking for a section of the Labor Party that is challenging the

1 278 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

leadership o fMr Hayden at the present time. I believe that before members of the Opposition say anything else they should at least tell us what is the policy of the Labor Party in reference to the 3 5-hour week, because somebody sitting on this side of the House who reads what Mr Hayden, the leader of the Labor Party, has to say--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)-  Order! The honourable member should refer to members of the House by their electorate or title, not by their name.
Mr LLOYD-What the Leader of the. Opposition has to say and what the honourable member for Wills has to say are completely different. Perhaps the next speaker from the Opposition can enlighten us on what actually is the view of the Labor Party on this issue.
The point has been made by several Labor apologists that the granting of a 35-hour week in a specific industry would not flow on to the general work force. I shall make two points to dispose of this argument. The first is that one of the major points made by Opposition speakers in favour of the granting of a 35-hour week is that 40 per cent of the workers of this country already have it, and that, by itself, is a major reason why the granting of a 35-hour week should flow on. That is completely contrary to one of the major points that some Labor spokesmen have put, including the honourable member for Wills. They said that it would not flow on. The Legislative Research Ser vice of the Department of the Parliamentary Li brary, in its paper on the 35-hour week, confirmed the point that it would !low on. As final proof that the Labor Party, contrary to what its members are saying here and to what they said last week, be lieves the 35-hour week would flow on, I shall quote from a Nationwide interview of 26 March 1981 . The transcript of that program reads:
CARLTON
I think the argument, Ml' Hawke, is that using M r Peacock's figures that, whilst 3 6 per cent of the community are working less than 40 hours a week there is strong support in other parts of the community for those who are working 40 to reduce their hours. Now if we get 50 per cent working less than 40 hours a week there will be even stronger support to reduce everyone's hours
HAWKE
Of course therewill.
So much for the argument that what has happened and has been raised by the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) today will be an isolated case and will not be the vanguard of a general push for a shorter working week. Members of the Labor Party, by their arguments, have exposed the falsity of that argument. Be cause of those differences, onecould raise again

the issue ofwho speaks for the Labor Party on this issue and what is its actual policy on this issue.
Several other contradictory statements were made by Labor Party members in this debate. They said that if we have a 35-hour week it will bring increased productivity, and with that we will have more, including more employment. Members of the Labor Party cannot have it both ways because that is a contradictory series of ar guments. If there is increased productivity, obviously there will not be more employment. It has to be one way or the other. The fact is that by agree ing to the general introduction of a 3 5-hour week this country would be getting the worst of both worlds. It would be not be getting increased pro ductivity. The falsity of the claims about pro ductivity bargaining and productivity arrange ments has already been exposed. To say that workers, by agreeing to work as they should have been working in the first place-by clocking in on time and sticking to the standard time off for tea breaksand by coming back to the correct work ing procedures means productivity is absolute rot. This should be exposed to everybody in this country as that.
Mr Hawke-Are thejudges talking rot? Mr LLOYD When one refers to rot one is referring to the members of the Labor Party. Enough of that rot. Mr Hawke-The judges said it. Mr LLOYD-If the honourable member said the judges said it that is his business. I have not said it. I am not going to say it. The next contra dictory argument concerns whether the economy is improving according to the Labor Party. We hear it said by the Labor Party day after day in Parliament House that the economy is not im proving, that it is in terrible shape, that unemployment is increasing, that we are going from bad to worse. The honourable member for McMillan is trying to interject. If he believes that the economy is not improving, that is fine. Yet one of the major reasons why the Opposition is saying that the country can afford a 35-hour week is that the economy is improving. Once again, the Labor Party cannot have it both ways. Its members should make up their minds as to what position they want to take and adhere to it. It should stop trying to ride two horses which are going in different directions at the same time. This is a cognate debate. I want to refer to the major points made for the Government by the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) , in his statement to Parliament last week, against the general introduction of a 35-hour week and against the way in which the unions are

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 279

endeavouring to obtain at this time a 3 5-hour week. First of all, the campaign threatens the economic recovery of this country. This is now ap parent to all, even the honourable member for Wills, who, on 26 March in the PM program, said:
The second point in regard to the factual economic situation is that while these things have been going on, Australia's competitive position has in fact been improving as evidenced by our growth in export manufactured goods.
Everybody agrees that the economy is improving. But surely that improvement is gravely threatened by the campaign that is under way at present. The campaign itself is threatening the improvement of the situation. I f it actually came about, one could only believe that the worst would happen, that not only would there be no improvement but also there would be a regression into a worse economic situation: We will lose international competitiveness, which is an import ant matter.
The second point is that this campaign comes on top of a dangerous wages drifta 1 5.2 per cent increase last year-which is already threatening the hard fought recovery that has come about under this Government. The third point is that increased costs would inevitably flow on. This has been documented time and again. Depending on whom one wants to listen to, the increase is some where between 1 4 per cent and 2 1 per cent. If these costs can be recovered in the economy that means one thing-inflation-because employers will pass on the increased costs to other people in the community.
What will happen to the poor pensioners whom everybody on the other side thinks they are the champions of? What will happen to the people on fixed incomes who cannot get their share of this 1 4 per cent to 2 1 per cent increased return? If those costs cannot be recovered, that must mean reduced employment opportunities in this country because of the reduced competitiveness of this country in the world. The Legislative Re search Service's paper on the 35-hour week confirms this when it quotes Mr A. Powell's article entitled 'Hours of Work' in the Australian Bulletin ofLabor, March 1 980 and then makes a commentary on that article. The point is that employment opportunities will be reduced, not increased, if the 3 5-hour week comes in.
In the 1 980s Australia will be facing a most competitive international situation, particularly for traditional manufacturing goods. It will be a fight for survival for many of our manufacturing industries and employment therein in this country. The honourable member for Wills implied that Australia was just following the indus trialised world in providing shorter working

hours; that therefore there was nothing to worry about as we were all on the same path. The honourable member neglected two points. He did not mention the reduction in total working hours in Australia, the longer annual holidays, the long service leave and so on which already make Australia a lower total working-hour country than most, if not all, other countries.
The second and more important point is the fact that competition for jobs in secondary industry in the 1 980s, particularly in the traditional sec tor as distinct from infrastructure manufacturing as the result of the resources boomif Labor lets it boom-will not come from Western Europe and North America, in respect of which some of these figures are quoted. With the exception of the fields of aerospace and computers Japan and South-East Asia generally are now more efficient than is any part of Western Europe or North America. When one reads of Western German television teams and others going to Japan to see how the Japanese can do it one is given an indi cation of where the real thrust of competition will come from in the 1 980s.
What are the workinghours of those countries? They are not about to go to a 35-hour week. Some of them will be lucky to get a 44-hour week. Japan works longer and harder. It is not likely to go to a 35-hour week. What is also of interest is that Japan accepts technology probably more quickly and completely than does any other industrialised country. With its combination' of real work and technology it has an unemployment rate of two per cent. How about that as knocking out all of the Opposition's arguments on the level of unemployment, technology and working hours.
In conclusion, one can say that the points that Labor has put on the matter of the 35-hour week have been, firstly, contradictory. I refer to the statement on the subject by the Leader of the Op position, which was in contrast to the statements of Labor speakers during this debate. Secondly, we have the internally contradictory arguments put by the Opposition on the question of pro ductivity, employment, wages costs and so forth. Finally, the point made by the honourable member for Barker was that there was a correct way to proceed if this matter was to be debated, argued or resolved in this country. As is usually the case the Labor Party is not supporting the correct procedure in this instance.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (4.28)-1 enter this debate by referring to the very last premise of the argument of the honour able member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) . He refers to the procedures that we should be supporting.

1 280 REPRESENTATIVES - 2 April 1981

35-Hoilr Week

Labor is supporting the procedure of conciliation and arbitration. As the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) has said, the honourable member and other speakers for the Government, have done nothing but berate the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission because it made a certain decision in accordance with evidence submitted. Whilst we cannot take much notice of what the honourable member for Murray may have said, he had better face the fact that he represents one seg ment of the Government with a policy on taxation that is completely different from that of the Government itself. It is about time that the National Country Party contested enough seats in Australia to try to be a government and not merely come in and make suggestions as to what is wrongwith the Opposition policy.
Let us consider the matter from the point of view of defending the Conciliation and Arbi tration Commission. What facts and evidence were submitted? Why do not the good lawyers from the Government side who have spoken ad dresstheir minds to the decision made pursuant to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. One sees there the statement which has caused so much concern that the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) had to rush in and make a ridicu lous statement to the House. Then we had today this motion which expresses concern and requests intervention . The laUer is unnecessary because intervention has already occurred. The motion then reminds the Commission ofwhat it should do, as if that alone were not an indictment of it. What right has a back bencher of the Government to suggest that the Commission ought to be reminded of its duty? I suggest that this back bencher is merely espousing the words of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and those of the Minister for Industrial Relations. We have on record the fact that for some years now the Government has done nothing but make addresses to the nation concerning what is wrong with the trade union movement, which it berates all the time. Trade unionists happen to be people who work hard for long hours to produce the wealth which Government supporters enjoy by way of dividends.
From the statement of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission one notes that working parties were set up. Some 45 meetings of the sub. committees took place, so evidence was given. What was that evidence? At the hearing, the Australian Council of Trade Unions and each of the unions concerned were represented. They explained the developments. The request was supported by Mr Douglas, QC., who appeared for the companies. Do honourable members

suggest that Mr Douglas just lay down because he was afraid of what was going to happen? Again, witnesses were available for cross-examination. Why was that not taken advantage of? The Commonwealth appeared, as did the National Employers Industrial Council.
The cost in the Altona case was a mere $34,000 or 0 . 1 8 per cent of total wages of current award employees, after offsetting the gains made. What does the Commission say it was doing? It was applying the principlc of true productivity bargain ing, as they have been applied since 1 978 under what have been known as the wage fixing prin ciples. These are the facts. Has anyone on the Government side addressed his mind to that? Again, the results were not contrived arrange ments but will in fact lead to cost savings which, the statement says, would not otherwise have been achieved. Finally, there is to be monitoring of the implementation of the arrangement, under the chairmanship of Commissioner Brown, who will report in September or December. If the cost saving factors are not being applied, the agreements will have to be re-examined. Where has there been any injustice? Why is it that workers in this area of activity are so berated? Why cannot honourable members following the lead given in the evidence say: 'Let us look at the number of people who work under awards, both Commonwealth and State, less than 40 hours a week'? This information is set out in detail today in the Sydney Morning Herald. The details occupy two full columns. The employees of Government sup porters themselves work 3M hours and receive overtime if they exceed that number.
Mr Ruddock-Don't you beiieve it. Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I would imagine that if they worked for the honourable member he would want them to work 80 hours; that is under standable. I n regard to working arrangements, this morning I asked the Minister for the details of the savings. All he could talk about was that a few lazy workers were likely to get a shorter tea break. That was a slander on the workers and on the companies that employ them. l do not believe that the Minister has ever been in a factory except per haps as a manager receiving dividends. He has never been down on the shop floor. Mr Porter-Have you? Mr LIONEL BOWEN-No. I am happy to stay out of it. The honourable member would not want to get into it either because he knows that his life would be shortened if he did. Let us consider the matter from the point of view of savings. In that regard J will refer to only one company, B. F. Goodrich. The Minister would have known of

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1281

these details. Because of changes in work practices-more efficient and flexible shift rosters and so on-the savings to the company amount to a total of $240,000 a year. From changes in man ning practices-being able more flexibly to move workers from one part of production to another the savings to the company amount to $ 370,000 a year. Therefore that company alone would surely not be so unwise and incompetent as to fail to re alise that it could effect savings. For that company alone savings of $694,000 have resulted.
Is it not clear that when we are talking about private enterprise and the ability to negotiate, since section 28 of the Conciliation and Arbi tration Act provides for these matters to be considered, and evidence is given as to savings, such matters ought to be recognised and admitted. What evidence was given by the Minister or by anybody else in the debate today to suggest that the Commission's decision was incorrect or contrived? It was nothing of the sort. Benefits obviously can flow on, when one sees productivity and profits increasing. For example, it can be shown that the reported pre-tax profits of the companies under study last year amounted to 33 per cent. That leaves a bit of room to give some benefit to the employees. Also, I am reminded that the Altona agreement will lead to the employment of 1 60 additional people. This is worthwhile and tangible and ought to be placed on record.
If it is a question of the ability to pay, I read into the record evidence relating to profitability right across the board. A Reserve Bank survey of 235 companies released in February 1 980 showed an average profit rise of 36.2 per cent over the previous year. There was mention of the oil companies and the fact that there had not been much industrial peace. In the oil industry, for example, the Shell, Caltex, BP and Amoco companies all doubled their profits between 1 978 and 1 979. Mobil, Total and Ampol all tripled their profits in the same period. A PA Consulting Services survey shows that in 1 969-70 companies paid 37 per cent of their gross profits in tax but now they pay only 30 per cent in tax. That all relates to the benefits accruing to those companies. Does anyone think those - profits go to Australians? Not at all. It should be noted that, according to income distribution statistics, 92 per cent of dividend income from profits goes to only 10 per cent of Australians. Why is this? It is because we are foreign owned and controlled. Let me provide honourable members with the evidence for that statement. The petroleum refining industry and cosmetic industries are 9 1 per cent foreign owned, the non-ferrous metals industry is

7 9 per cent foreign owned, the pharmaceutical industry is 78 per cent foreignowned and the chemi cal industry is 66 per cent foreign owned. The Government is talking about an inability to meet the demands of its own workers. It should look at the profits, as a percentage of total company income after tax, remitted overseas. Tn 1974-75 the figure was 25.8 per cent. I n 1 977-78, it had risen to 3 5.6 per cent. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) is on record as saying that the percentage appears to have been rising. That level of profits remitted overseas must go in the Guinness Book oj Records.
How do the companies stand from the point of view of foreign investment and ownership? It is very difficult to find any major company in this nation with a majority Australian equity. Most of them are 1 00 per cent overseas owned. For example, Australian Oil Refining Pty r _td and Caltex Oil (Aust.) Pty Ltd are 1 00 per cent United States owned, Cadbury Schweppes Australia Pty Ltd is 61 per cent United Kingdom owned and ICI Australia Ltd is 62 per cent United Kingdom owned. M obil Oil Australia Ltd, General Motors-Holden's Ltd and Standard Tele phones and Cables Pty Ltd are all 1 00 per cent United States owned. The Government says it is worried about Australia. It is about time we bought it back. That is the important part. What is the Government doing about foreign investment and control? The price of investment in our companies and in our nation is costing us $2 billion a year to service. We now have the silly situation that every man, woman and child in Australia remits overseas by way of interest $ 1 30. Why cannot we afford to keep some of that fat? This is the point the Opposition wants to make when we discuss these matters from the point of view of arbitration. It is important that workers, if they can make gains in product!Yity, should get the benefit of shorter hours.
I refer to the statement of the Minister for In dustrial Relations and what he referred to as the cost factor of introducing a 35-hour working week. He used three . figures, in a three-way proposition1 2t per cent, 1 4 per cent and 2 1 per cent. We can take our pick. Firstly, the figure of 21 per cent assumes that all reductions in working hours will be translated into overtime. That is nonsense. Only one-third of workers in the manufacturing industry work an average of eight hours overtime a week. If the figure of 21 per cent is correct, these people would have to work 23 hours of overtime every week. Nobody in his right mind suggests that that will be the situation. Secondly, the figure of 12t per cent cannot be correct he cause it assumes employers will cut production

1 282 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

commensurate with reduced working hours. O f workers, and does not want to give them any

course, n o employer has ever taken a reduction o n benefit at all in regard to productivity. There was

that basis. Thirdly, i f the Minister chooses 1 4 per never any substance in the Minister's statement

cent, the assumption is that employers have to and their is no substance in the motion that has

employ more people. That figure could not been moved today.

possibly be an actual reflection of costs because it ignores the fact that if all employers put on more workers, consumption would increase overall de mand and therefore profits. The Minister has pre sented to this House a fantasy world of what the costs will be.

Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (4.42) -Before I discuss the 35-hour working week, [ wish to state that it seems to me that the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) has been very keen to question the right of members of this Parliament to question a determination of the Conciliation

This year some efforts were made by employers and Arbitration Commission which affects this to try to bring in longer working hours. They tried nation. I ask: What right has the secretary of the

to suggest that there would have to be an 80-hour Australian Council of Trade Unions to walk out

fortnight. There was a suggestion made by the of a Metal Trades Industry Association hearing

unions that we could have working parties look and what right do workers have to stay away from

into the matter. Those working parties got under work one day a fortnight while that case is in way and their discussions would have been of sub progress?

stantial benefit. The working parties were to con duct a three-month investigation during which time all industrial action would be halted. Obviously there could then have been some discussion. As soon as that was likely to come to fruition, against the claim that there had to be an 80-hour fortnight, and it appeared that the talks were likely to lead to a reduction in working hours, what happened? The Prime Minister (Mr Mal colm Fraser) and the Minister for Industrial Relations stood over the companies, suggesting that they ought to be taken to the Prices Justification Tribunal. That immediately, prevented the employers from continuing the negotiations. Surely any sane person would regard it as important from the point of view of industrial relations that parties be able to get together. Once they started to do that, and particularly when in the metal industry employers were prepared to discuss the matter on the basis of productivity bargaining, they were stood over again by the Prime Minister and the Minister for Industrial Relations. Yester day we saw the debacle involving the ICI company. The general manager pleaded with the Premier of New South Wales, saying he was being threatened and that he would stop $900m worth of capital works-$400m of which was to be spnt in my electorate. Understandably, that develop ment is causing some concern because of pollution and other matters but, after every advantage has been given to that company, again there is the threat that if it dares reduce the hours, the Government will not be able to give it tariff pro tection. By the way, that company was able to make substantial profits and has experienced a 40 per cent increase in productivity.
These are the matters that the Opposition

I commend the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) for bringing this import ant matter of the 35-hour working week before the House. On a previous day the honourable member for Wills, in opening the case for the Australian Council of Trade Unions, quoted from the 1 947 40-hour working week judgment of the Conciliation lJ.nd Arbitration Commission. The 40-hour week was to the average worker in Australia much more a matter of a five-day week than an eight-hour day. It removed the need to get up early on Saturdays. It could be argued that we are now talking about a nine-day fortnight, but this is not the case to most of the 36 per cent of the work force who already enjoy working less than 40 hours a week. It has been said that the employment climate was good in 1 947 and that prosperity abounded. In terms of trade, Australia stood almost totally unscathed in a world recently ravaged by a world war. Asia was in the throes of departing colonialism and our only substantial imports were refugees. The global economy, as we recognise it today, did not exist. The principal Australian history book we read in school included a drawing of Australia riding on the sheep's back. At that time Australia had no fears of world competition and no obligation to balance trade with its neighbours. Most were desperate for our production. Opposition members con stantly tell us that we must not accept the industrial standard of a by-gone era but they con veniently return to it when it suits them.
The circumstances of urbanisation and indus trialisation that exist in Australia today bear no comparison with 1 947 and the honourable member for Wills should accept that as an economic fact. Australia cannot continue to rape its

wants to put before the Parliament. This Govern natural and farm resources to finance its leisure

ment hates the trade union movement and the spree. The future of our children will rely on this

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 283

generation's ability to industrialise and to export. I mention exports because, even within the next half century, Australia will not have the home consumption market necessary to supply that other great influence on cost, economy of scale. Economy of scale will only be achieved for Australia by substantial export of manufactured goods. Our primary producers have managed to demonstrate and achieve economy of scale and stand as our present salvation. Their efforts to achieve economy of scale, considering the finite availability of our arable land resource, have resulted in a population shift to the cities and to the seeking of employment in manufacturing industries. Australia must therefore become a competitive exporter of manufactured goods to create that employment.
The importers of this world, )lnlike many union members, ar susceptible neither to the silver tongue and histrionics of the honourable member for Wills nor to the heavy hand of Norm Gallagher. They have some simple questions to ask, like: How good, how soon, and how much? They are not interested in shoddy workmanship which is the result of labour cost-induced under staffing of a production line. They are not interested in delays caused by industrial disruption associated with the 3 5-hour week campaign; and, above all, they are not interested if they can purchase the same product elsewhere for less. Might I add, our inflated costs do not stop on the production line.
I spoke with an Australian manufacturer the other day whose company also owns Asian sub sidiaries producing the same product. He told me that, due to technology, his works has the lowest cost of production of any of its factories. His prod uct is, however, not competitive in the booming Asian market due to wharfage and the freight pre mium that shipping companies place on operating into Australia-a premium placed to cover industrial stoppages and the industrial and bureau cratic interference they experience in Australian ports. His factory currently operates three days a week. Now it may or may not be significant in that case that a previous speaker has boasted that the wharf workers already have a 3 5-hour week. That speaker did not tell us, as I just have, of the price in jobs that that 35-hour week decision has already cost less fortunate Australians. There is nothing wrong with a 3 5-hour week if one is involved in a completely closed economy and is prepared to accept less goods or a reduced standard of service for one's plastic dollar. The value of that service may be best measured by the house wife of today as she humps her groceries from the

supermarket and compares herself to the poor un fortunate housewife of a 44-hour week worker who sent one of the kids round to the corner store with the shopping order on Friday and got it delivered-a shopping order, by the way, which adequately met the needs of her family. As the son of a motor mechanic in that era, I well remember what  5 a week would purchase.
There has been a suggestion and a quoting of Australian Conciliation and Arbitration court judges to prove that jobs are not lost by wage pushes or leisure related unit wage increases. Only an arbitration court judge, or someone with the security of a senior union position, could make such a statement. A job is a job. When it disap pears it disappears for good. The person who lost that job may find other employment. The job which someone else could fill is gone. If one wishes to measure the jobs lost due to the increased cost of labour in recent years, look at the transition from corner grocer to supermarket, from local owner service station to self-serve, from typing pool to word processor.
Let us get away from the closed economy and back into the reality of today's global economy. The global economy requires us to be competitive in a global sense. However, in the case of the Altona Complex, we would not even be competi tive if a 50-hour week were worked. The products that that complex produces are based on a petroleum feedstock manufactured from a relatively cheap crude. Yet we find that the scale of tariff duty afforded to their products is as follows: Manufacturer No. 1 , Australian Synthetic Rub ber Co. Ltd produces polybutadiene and styrenebutadiene which are both covered and protected by a 30 per cent rate of duty. Manufac turer No. 2, Hoechst Australia Ltd produces high density polyethelene that is only protected at 45 per ' cent, and polypropylene at 22,5 per cent. Manufacturer 3, B. F. Goodrich Australia Ltd, produces polyvinylchloride, or PVC, protected at 30 per cent. Manufacturer 4, Union Carbide Australia Ltd, produces low and high density polyethelene at a protection rate of 45 per cent. Manufacturer No. 5, Dow Chemical (Aust) Ltd, produces styrene, which is protected to 30 per cent and then it sells it to manufacturer No. 6, which is HASF Australia Ltd which gets a further 30 per cent when it turns it into poly styrene. These figures can prove only one thing: That is that by global standards, these industries-set upon by the ACTU and speakers from the other side of the house-and classified by them as wealthy and able to afford a 35-hour week, have a degee of competitive productivity equal only to that of a seagull. If these industries

1 284 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 198 1

35-Hour Week

were wealthy, they were wealthy because of the this because it believed that it had the umbrella of

generosity of the Australian consumer, the massive tariff protection. Why now is ICI so largest proportion of whom, are the workers, and frightened of an lAC inquiry? If the tariff protec

this protectionist Government. The members of tion is necessary, surely lAC will recommend its

the Opposition who support this agreement have continuation. Or does ICI know that the inquiry

demonstrated to me that they suffer from the will unearth another flock of featherbedding,

present decline in numeracy. They think that two inefficiencies and gross profit abuse? If that is

plus two equals fine.

. ICI's fear, I say we can do without its $900m in

The Altona case was not about productivity; it was about featherbedding-$3.8m worth of featherbedding which the ACTU had the nerve to trade off for a 3 5-hour week. Had the arbitration court been interested in anything but artificial industrial action, it might have inquired about the effect on the end consumers of the products at

vestment. It will not take very long for the Australian public to recoup that money in cost savings and spend it elsewhere with efficient Australian industry and workers prepared to do a day's work for a day's pay. The present proposal really re quires Australians to make a free gift of these proposed extensions to ICI.

Altona, that is, the balance of the Australian work force.

Let us look at another objection to the 35-hour working week. The Opposition complains of tax

The plastic industry's own magazine Plastic evasion. It might be interested in the comments of

Digest, Volume 4, No. I has this to say about con Dr Chris Trengrove, a research fellow at the

sumption by market of its members' products: It Monash Centre of Policy Studies, quoted in the I

indicates that of a total consumption of 699.3 April issue of the Australian. When he spoke of

thousand tonnes, agriculture consumes 23.9 the 'black economy' he included in his possible

thousand tonnes; appliances, 22.4 thousand causes 'increased leisure time to engage in the

tonnes; building and construction 90.5 thousand black economy'. Most of us know of workers who

tonnes; electrical and electronic, 47.9 thousand enjoy the benefit of a shorter working week and

tonnes; footwear and clothing, 9.2 thousand who use their leisure time to steal jobs from the

tonnes; furniture and bedding, 55.9 thousand less fortunate and gain tax free cash. The reasons

tonnes; housewares, 4 1 . 2 thousand tonnes; mar given for a 35-hour working week are equally con

ine, 1 1 .6 thousand tonnes; materials handling, vincing for a 30-hour working week or a 10-hour

50.3 thousand tonnes; packaging-that is only working week. My concern is that, having run out

the stuff honourable members find in the of other reasons for industrial disruption and

supermarket-1 24.9 thousand tonnes; plumbing executive aggrandisement, the union movement

and other household, 69.9 thousand tonnes; toys might just follow that policy. The only solution is

and sporting goods-that is what is needed for to ask Australian labour first to meet its obli

that wonderful period of recreation we are going gations in the area of global competition. It is

to get for everybody-8 . l thousand tonnes; further necessary for unionists to recognise that

transportation-the thing that really controls the strike weapon is a sword with no handle and

Australia-33.8 thousand tonnes; and other the wielder must get hurt.

which honourable members can bet are all con

sumer productsI 09.7 thousand tonnes.

Mr HOLDING ( Melbourne Ports)

It is clear to see that there are very few areas of expenditure by Australian consumers that can avoid the pressure of costs on the plastic industry. Even that leisure essential, the 'Esky', is affected. Altona did not need an arbitration court hearing. It needed an Industries Assistance Commission inquiry.

(4.57)-The House is debating two matters, namely, a statement by the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) on the 35-hour working week and a motion moved by the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) . This motion must be construed on any reasonable view of it as one of the most unprincipled and dishonest attacks upon a segment of our judicial system ever

What a sham were the statements of ICI launched in any parliament, Commonwealth or

Australia Ltd that it would curtail its capital State. I do not really get surprised when I see the

expansion program as it was threatened with an honourable member for Barker sponsor such a

lAC inquiry. This is a company that offered no motion. I do not really get excited when I see it

help to its competitor, B.F. Goodrich, when being supported by the honourable member for

Goodrich suffered a 1 6-week strike. It gleefully O'Connor (Mr Tuckey) . After all, why should he

serviced Goodrich clients and, to guarantee con support our judicial system? He does not have a

tinued supply, commenced secret sweetheart very high regard for courts. His only experience of

negotiations for a shorter working week. It did all them was in respect of an unfortunate incident

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1285

which involved the brutal bashing of an Aborigine. I will notsithere and be--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins) Order! 1 ask the honourable member to return to the subject under discussion.
Mr HOLDING-All I want to say-I do not put it any more highly than this-is that what we have had is an attack----
Mr Porter Personal abuse. , Mr HOLDINGl was merely referring to the honourable gentleman's knowledge of the judicial process. Let us see what the attack is in terms of the motion. The motion was drafted by the honourable member for Barker. He may have consulted his friend the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender). Paragraph ( 1 ) of the motion states that this House:
views with concern the failure of the Conciliation and Arbi tration Commission to address themselves in their statement in the Altona 35-hour week case to the wider public interest and the flow-on effect
Paragraph (3) states:
further requests the Government . . , to remind the
Commission . , . There is no way on any fair and proper reading of those words that that does not constitute an indictment of the decision of the Commission.
To use the words of the honourable member for North Sydney, judges err. Let us look at the judg ment and let us look at the basis of the evidence as it has thus far been presented to the House in respect of this judgment. The honourable member for Barker hardly addressed the issue in respect of the courts. As I say, the honourable member for O'Connor's judgment in respect of the courts really cannot be relied upon. But we are entitled to expect a better performance from the honourable member for North Sydney. After all, he is not merely a member of the legal pro fession; he is the son of a distinguished judge. He assures us that he would not be party to attacking the courts. I say to the honourable gentleman that I do not believe, if one endeavours to reconcile his statements to this Parliament with the decisions that were made by the court, that he has read the decision of the court. Let me quote this dis tinguished member of the Sydney bar. He suggested to the House that the employers produced false evidence to the court; that the employers, under duress from the trade union movement, produced a set of figures to the court and that was the basis upon which the court made its findings. I fail to see how the honourable gentleman can reach that conclusion.
Mr Spender-Try reading the statement.

Mr HOLDING-The honourable gentleman

might try to crawl away from it. The import of his

statements was clear and the thrust of his argu

ment was clear. To use his own terms, the court

had erred. court had

If this erred,

motion was there might

obnelyasnayairnggumtheanttthine

his own terms._ But that is not what the motion

says. The motion is a very damning indictment of

an individual decision made by the court. If OJ)e

goes to page 3 of the court's judgment one can see

that the coilrt made it perfectly clear that both

the Commonwealth and the National Employers

Industrial Council were represented.

Mr Ruddock-What line?

Mr HOLDING-I am referring to the bottom paragraph of page 3 . Witnesses were available for cross-examination. The honourable member for North Sydney gave a dramatic account of the employers, being under duress from the trade unions, concocting these figures. The trade union witness and the employers' representative gave evidence. The Commonwealth's counsel was present. Representatives of the National Employers Industrial Council were present and were able to cross-examine, but a conspiracy was not discovered by the advocate of the Commonwealth or the advocate of the national employers. It certainly was not discovered by the Commission, and that is why the honourable gentle man thinks the court is in error. The only person who discovered the conspiracy is the honourable member for North Sydney, aided by his able jun ior, the honourable member for O'Connor. The honourable member for North Sydney ought to watch his company. He could go off for consort ing i f he keeps that sort of company.

What did the court say? The court, at page 7 of its judgement, looked at the way in which these agreements were reached and said:

. , , the results are not contrived arrangements but will, in fact, lead to cost savings which would not otherwise have been achieved,

Mr Hawke-'We are satisfied'.

Mr H OLDING-I am reminded by the honourable member for Wills that the court said that it was satisfied. Can any court do more? What do we expect of our industrial tribunals and the men who are given the responsibility to make judgments?

Mr TuckeyWhat are you--

Mr HOIJDING-I do not want to be interrupted by someone with the honourable member's record in our courts, thank you very much.

Mr Tuckey-Oh, you are worried about that, are you?

1 286 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

Mr HOLDING-I a m worried about any man who is contemptible enough to thump an Aborigine who is being held by other people. That is a contemptible assault. I am worried about any one who would walk into this House and boa:,( about that kind of activity. I suggest that the honourable member should confine his Aborigi nal bashing and his trade union bashing to another place.
Mr Ruddock-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The honourable member is making very disparaging remarks about an honourable member of this House which, if they are to be made as allegations in the form of debate, ought to be put in a substantive motion. I would ask that they be withdrawn unqualifiedly until he wants to raise them in a proper manner.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)- If the honourable member feels slighted in any way, he has the opportunity to ask for a withdrawal. He is quite capable of doing that himself.
Mr HOLDING-What more can this Parliament do in terms of industrial relations? In the House yesterday the Minister for Industrial Relations said that the unions must go to arbitration. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) , when it suits him, says that the unions must go to arbi tration. When we look at the findings of the court, we need to ask: Could any group of men, on the basis of material that they had before them, on the basis of the evidence that was given to them evidence which was the subject of cross examinationfind in any other way? Let me read it again:
We are also satisfied, having regard to the history of the matter, the examinations by the working party including the various sub-committees and the terms of the agreements themselves, that the results are not contrived arrangements but will, in fact, lead to cost savings which would not other wise have been achieved.
They then do what is normal for any judicial tribunal operating in this situation. They say: 'We will publish full reasons for our decision at a later date'. I find it an extraordinary and contemptible exercise for any practising member of the legal profession, who understands the way in which our system works, to walk into this Parliament and urge members of this Parliament to support a motion in these terms which condemns judges honestly endeavouring to reach a conclusion on the evidence before them, and in so doing deliberately misconstrue the evidence which was put to the Commission.
Mr Spender-That's nonsense.
Mr HOLDING-The honourable gentleman alluded to a set of circumstances which he knows,

as a practising lawyer experienced in these matters, was not the scenario at all. If he has any evidence, let him bring it forward when he talks about the way in which the poor employer had to produce false evidence. That is the allegation. I say this, that I believe if that is going to be the standard set for this House by a member of the legal profession when the judicial system is under attack, then it would be far better if the honour able gentleman went back to his practice, rather than shame the reputation of his father who was a judge of some standing.
I believe that this motion must be treated very seriously by the Parliament. I believe the reason the Minister for Industrial Relations has not been present in the House today is that he does believe in the arbitration system. I will say this for the Minister: I believe that when he says the unions ought to go to arbitration, he not only believes that but also he has some respect for the way in which the system operates, and the difficult task which is entrusted to the members of the ju diciary, who have to make difficult and complex decisions on the evidence before them. That is why I believe this contemptible motion has been brought into the House and mounted by the Third 1 8, with a new boy, a Queen's Counsel, to try to provide some legal rectitude and argument on their behalf.
Mr Ruddock -Come on; argue on the merits. Mr HOLDING-We can join issue on any arguments the honourable gentleman wants to have about the 35-hour week. But I do not believe that it is proper to introduce a motion in these terms. It does not matter in which way that motion is put, it is tantamount to an attack upon the integrity, the honour and the legal capacity of the men who composed the bench and tried to give a judgment on the basis of the evidence before them. It is even more contemptible when it is considered that the full arguments, which will be printed and made available, are not available to this House. That is the issue. I would have thought that if honourable gentlemen opposite wanted to attack the court and the Commission, they should at least have had the integrity or the honesty to wait until all the reasons were published. That would be the appropriate way in Which to do it. This is an iII-contrived motion. It is a dishonest motion, and it ought to be firmly rejected by this Parliament . Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (5. 1 O) -This statement of the Australian Conciliation and Arbi tration Commission to which we are directing ourselves and to which this motion directs itself has been carefully read by myself and by other

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 287

honourable members on this side of the House. I have searched that document to see whether the court has in any respect directed itself to the matters' which section 39 (2) of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act requires. On a perusal of that document and an examination of each paragraph, I can find no words which would indicate that the court had directed itself to those matters.
Mr Hawke-What do you say about the last sentence?
Mr RUDDOCK-The last sentence deals with an expansion on the statement that the court will make at a later date. It says that it will give full reasons. What I am saying is that the statement of its decision indicates that it has not given any attention whatever to section 39 (2) of the Con ciliation and Arbitration Act. We have only to read the document to see that there is not even a hint that any wider matters of public interest were to be considered, other than the agreement that was reached in this particular case.
This motion seeks to state that we view with concern the failure of the Commission to address itself in that statement to the wider public interest and to the flow-on effect of its decision. What is wrong with that? We go on to say that we think the Government should intervene in those matters, to present a detailed case outlining the effects of such moves on those broader matters.
Mr Hawke-And did the Government interevene in this case?
Mr RUDDOCK-We have suggested that the Government intervene to ensure that those matters are'before the Commission.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman) Order! Throughout this whole debate there has been a continual barrage of interjections from the honourable member for Melbourne Ports and the honourable member for Wills. I suggest that they cease, otherwise I shall have to take some action.
Mr RUDDOCK-As I have said, point two of the motion clearly requires from this Parliament a resolution that the Government should inter vene, because this matter has not been taken into account in the statement of the court. I was not in the court every day to know what was being raised by the Commonwealth when it intervened in these proceedings, or to know what matters were raised by the other interveners who were involved. But it is clear from the published statement of reasons, although not the full reasons admittedly at this time, that the court did not direct itself to those matters. Further we request that the Government in its submissions remind the Commission-I do not think it ought to be

reminded, but it appears that if it has not directed its mind to these matters then it needs to be reminded-that section 39 (2) of the Act requires the Commission to take into account the likely effects of its decisions on the economy, with special reference to the effects of its decisions on the levels of employment and of inflation. I do not believe there is anything unreasonable about that.
Every day in our court system actions are brought which are called appeals. They are brought because in a particular case a judge has failed to give full attention to all the matters that might have been relevant for him to consider to reach a correct decision. There are procedures for these matters to be looked at because courts make mistakes, judges make mistakes and, on occasions, some matters are not always taken into account. This can happen for a variety of reasons. Some times it can be because of a misconstruction or a number of other reasons. In the case before us, we have a statement which does not direct itself in any way whatsoever to the wider public interest. It is a simple enough matter, without all these his trionics we have heard today, to draw those matters to the attention of the Conciliation and Arbi tration Commission. We are seeking to draw those matters to the attention of the Commision.
It is implied by honourable members opposite -some of them have had a very active practice in this jurisdiction-that they have come into this place with clean hands. I must admit that I did not have time today to extract all.of the criticisms that have been made from time 'to time by those honourable members of Parliament opposite or by spokesmen for the Australian Council of Trade Unions in relation to the Conciliation and Arbi tration Commission. I am sure that it would not be done in the same polite terms in which it has been done in this case, when it has occurred. As an opposition member is to follow me in this debate, I ask honourable members opposite: What will be their attitude if the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission upholds the case of the Metal Trades Industry Association of Australia to establish for three years a 40-hour working week and makes such an award? Having regard to what honour able members opposite have said to date, would that decision be free from comment? If the Commission in its wisdom supported the views of the MTIA, would honourable members opposite fail to make some remarks in this regard in this House? Or do they support the coercion of the ACTU when its principal spokesman walked out of the hearing and left the Commission without putting forward the views of the ACTU? As part of its technique, it wants to be able to say: 'We

1 288 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

really did not have an opportunity to put arguments before the Commission', presumably because the arguments of the MTIA are so persuas ive. One would think if the ACTU had the answers it would be quite prepared to remain in court and to see it out. The fact of the matter is that it is not.
In this debate we are directing our attention also to the wider issues affecting the Australian community and the ultimate cost to Australia the wider economic consequences to all Australians. This is an important matter of which the courts and all Australians should be aware. This was the reason for the statement by the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) . The fact of the matter isl think it is irrefutable no matter what is said by honourable members opposite that if people work for fewer hours and expect to receive the same amount of money for the fewer hours worked, the cost to industry and to employers will rise. We cannot get the same sort of productivity out of fewer hours worked simply by decreasing the number of hours worked if people are doing a fair day's work for their pay now.
In fact, what is expected by the unions that are bringing this case is that somehow there will not be any additional cost, that somehow out of some profits that have been hidden away or out of some productivity gains there might be a capacity to pay for these additional costs. Nobody really knows what productivity gains are. If they are like those in the Altona case, it might well be that productivity gains are arrived at because the unions will forgo striking to the extent that they have struck before. It seems to me that may be the type of productivity gain referred to when they speak about levels of industrial disputation. In my view those additional costs to industry will be passed on in additional charges by the companies concerned, if they are to stay in business.
The Confederation of Industry and the MTIA have said that costs will be in the order bf an additional 2 1 per cent and, because of inflation, those costs will continue to increase. Inflation has an effect not only upon the worker but also upon many people in the Australian community who are not able to protect themselves from its ravages. The honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) mentioned these and I would like to reiterate them. When we have these additional costs, who will explain to the pensioners why they are not able to make ends meet? Who will explain to those people on superannuation whose incomes are provided from their own savings-the result of their personal exertions of the past-that their

savings will be frittered away as a result of inflation and that they will .not be able to make ends meet? More importantly, I would like to ask: Who will explain it to the workers who will be without jobs?
It is difficult to recount discussions, particularly where there is a likelihood of coercion. I had a significant employer approach me in the last few weeks. He said that people in his industry were being subjected to a 35-hour week campaign with all of the tactics which we know are associated with it. This employer said: 'We are appreciative of your arguments. We would have to save significantly in terms of costs because there is no way that we will be able to pass them on. It will mean that some people in our industry will have to lose their jobs. We will have to put on more equipment and more machinery and be come more efficient in producing our products'. The union officials involved said: 'So what? ' They were concerned-in the context of the 3 5-hour week discussion-only with those people who would remain in jobs, those people who would be participating in decisions in relation to that union and with those people who would be able to continue to re-elect them.
Mr Hawke-Will you name them? Mr RUDDOCKI will not name them in this place. I may well do so at some future time. The point I wish to make in this debate-a point which is well made and has been well made over a long period-is that unions are not concerned about the consequences facing those people who lose their jobs. They are concerned only about those who continue to remain in employment who are members of those unions. I would like to suggest-the bona fides of this suggestion would be taken up if the honourable member for Wills would join me in advocating this course of action-that all unions be required to keep all their former members who have lost their jobs as members without the payment of additional cost or fees, so that they can continue to play a role in making decisions in those unions. I challenge the honourable member for Wills to join me in ap proaching all unions to ensure that their rules are amended to provide that when a man loses his job he can remain a member of that union and not be required to pay any fees while he is out of work. It was not so long ago-only in 1 979-that a member of the Builders Labourers Federation who had been unemployed for two years was told that before he could accept a job in Canberra he would have to pay two years' union membership fees to be allowed back on a building site for a three week job. Where is the compassion of

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 289

honourable members opposite for the plight of those people who are unemployed and those people who will become unemployed as a result of this campaign? I ask that because I am concerned for those people. They will be looking to government to make it up to them, without recognising that the real culprits are those who advocate shorter working hours and less productivity, those who are acting callously against the national interest and also against the interest of those who support them and maintain them in a job. That is the reality. I would hope that those opposite and those outside of this place who want to sabotage the national interest will think again and rethink their imposition on this important matter.
Mr LES McMAHON (Sydney) (S.26)-To hear the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) supporting the Government's approach to the introduction of a 3 S-hour work ing week-suggesting that the Australian community, the working class and the worker are not entitled to it reminded me of the hypocritical approach by the Government implying that we are not ready for the change.
Mr N. A. Brown-It is not just implying it. Mr LES McMAHON-It is. The time has come for that change. The Australian Labor Party's philosophy and my philosophy on the 3 S-hour working week is that we do not argue for the introduction of a 3S-hour week across the board at this stage. The Opposition is arguing that there should be discussion where appropriate in connection with industry to see whether and how, by industry agreement, shorter working hours can be most properly introduced for all concerned. Mr N. A. Brown-With a sledgehammer. Mr LES McMAHON-No. The Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) , in his statement, told us:
The Australian economy is poised to enter a period of con siderable growth. The Organisation for Economic Co operation and Development has forecast that economic growth in Australia in 1981 will be the highest of all developed economies.
The statement went on to say:
The Government is aware that an estimated 36 per cent of all full time non-managerial employees are currently working less than 40 hours a week.
I would say that the figure is most likely 40 per cent. The statement continued:
It does not follow, however, that the economy can stand an across the board application of a 35 or even a 37t hour work ing week to the total work force.
Although the Australian economy has achieved some stab ility over the past six years . . .

The Minister and Government members have conceded during the debate today that approxi mately 40 per cent of the work force is working less than 40 hours a week.
Mr Young-A lot more than that. Look at those who have part time jobs.
Mr LES McMAHON-That is right. I am pleased to say that the discussion which was held last night between the Minister and members of the Australian Coiuicil of Trade Unions indicated that there was some way of working out a compromise. For some reason or other, this Government, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Minister for Industrial Relations-I must say that I am disgusted with the National Country Party for trying to cause havoc inside industry-will not discuss these matters with the trade union movement. When, because of technology changes, an employer agrees that he will pay more wages or offer justice in working conditions to his employees, the Government steps in and says 'No'. I can see that the employers, because of the stand6ver tactics which the Government applies, will break away from the Government.
Mr Tuckey-They will break all right. Mr LES McMAHON-No; break from the Government and go on their own. The Government, from the Prime Minister down, is looking for some chaotic idea to wreck the system. It blames the trade union movement. The 40-hour working week was introduced in 1947 by the arbi tration court. Today we see the Government at tacking the commissioners of the Australian Con ciliation and Arbitration Commission when they made a fair decision. Mr N. A. Brown-Don't look at me. I did not say a word. Mr LES McMAHON-Every speaker has attacked the commissioners. I have no idea why they attacked the decision which seeks to improve the working conditions of the working class of Australia. The time for change is now. Only yesterday when one read the newspapers, one found it hard to believe that this is happening. J refer to the heading published in the Australian of I April which stated: 'Second big union setback in fight for 3S-hour week'. The article sought to stir the pot by indicating that the unions were looking for industrial trouble. In the Sydney Morning Herald of yesterday's date an article appeared under the heading 'leI meets Fraser head on'. Again a deal was mde with the Government. At this stage ICI Australia Ltd is frightened. An article under the heading 'Metal-industry strikes threat' appeared in yesterday's Canberra Times.

1 290 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

T n that article, the Press stated that u p to 600,000 average Australian family is statistically and

metal workers are threatening to hold national undoubtedly in fact worse off as a result of this

strikes. Is that action trying to get the country Government's policies than it was previously. It is

alive on this issue? Is it intended to make people at least $ 1 6 to $ 1 8 a week worse off-paying

fight with each other? This is the tactic of more in real terms in taxation. For those on

Government and the Prime Minister is involved. I incomes over $700 a week, income tax has fallen;

refer to an article which was published in the but, for all those below that income, taxation has

Australian Financial Review under the heading risen. The burden on pay-as-you-earn taxpayers

'ACTU walkout leaves MTIA in the box seat'. has increased under the present Government. The

Who is causing all this trouble? It is the Government has failed to index the family allow

Government.

ance, which has resulted again in an erosion of

The National Country Party, from the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) down to all its Ministers, over the past two or three weeks has stirred up the trade union movement. It has tried to get union members to take direct action. The way things are going they will take direct action. Whose fault will that be? The trade union move

family disposable incomes by $3.70 a week. The introduction of family allowance was a great achievement-the only one that comes to mind-of the Fraser Government. But in terms of living standards five years later, it has become something of a meaningless initiative.
The fact that the average family now has to pay

ment is only trying to achieve wage justice and $7 a week more in health insurance payments

lower hours. I refer again to the Canberra Times than in 1 975 to get some level of cover again rep

of 1 April in which a headline states: 'ICI resents a substantial erosion of the standard of suspends its Botany project'. The working class, living of every Australian. Nearly every member

the employers and the average chap on the job, on the Government side who participated in this

are confused about this matter. The public debate talked about the pensioners and the needy

relations effort of this Government has not and whether the Opposition was worried about

achieved what the Government seeks. Speaking them. Certainly we are worried about them. r

as an ex-trade union official, I must say that I do agree with the 35-hour week concept. It will bring

not think any honourable member opposite has employment. What chance do we have of achiev

been employed on a job where there are 200 or ing extra employment with the introduction of a

300 or 2,000 or 3,000 people involved and has had 35-hour week when, as I have said, approximately

to explain what that type of employment is all 40 per cent of the work force is working less than

about. Ifthey did, they would be different types of a 40-hour week? What chance have we got if the

persons. They would not have a clue about the Government will not come to the party and

feelings of a person who, as a result of direct become involved in negotiations with the trade action, had been on strike for two or three weeks union movement? What chance have we got if the

because of some anomaly in their job or con employers say: 'We will not talk to you' because

ditions. Such a person may be on the breadline the Government has told them not to do so. We

and then someone says: 'That is not what you will lose the case before we start. The Govern

should be doing. You have to go back to work'. If ment is looking for direct action. It is doing every

the employers went out and spoke to their thing it can to cause anarchy in Australia. I put

employees, they would understand the situation. the blame on the Government for the trouble that

They have not done this when they should. We will occur in 1981 . I repeat that the implemen

. are talking about industrial peace and concili tation of the 35-hour week will take more than 1 2

ation. The 3 5-hour working week will come in months. A head-on collision will occur because of

gradually. I have alluded already to the policy of the attitude of the front bench members of the

the Australian Labor Party.

Government taking on the trade union move

I wish to make the point about the hypocritical way in which honourable members opposite talk

ment. How can we then increase productivity. Dr Jenkins-It is totally unreasonable.

about the pensioners and the needy. The standard Mr LES McMAHON-It is unreasonable.

of living of every member of the Australian com Government members have attacked the unions

munity depends, for example, on housing. The today, as they did last week during the debate on

Government has an extraordinarily bad record in the 35-hour week. Why will the Government not

relation to housing, which is now developing as a negotiate with the trade union movement? Why

crisis situation in Australia. The standard of liv has the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser)

ing of the Australian community is dependent intervened and caused such trouble? I would like

upon the disposable income available to families. the next Government speaker to explain to me

Let me just say very briefly on that score that the why many people have been told that the amount

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 29 1

of overtime worked will drop? Not only will for Wills (Mr Hawke) , has been the President of

overtime drop but also people's living standards the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the

will drop. That is what we have to discuss. I asked Australian Labor Party. I believe that he entered

the Prime Minister about two years ago whether the Parliament not only to lead the Labor Party

under the arbitration system the employers, the but also to lead the campaign for a 3S-hour week

unions and the Government could work as a within Australia. If this is achieved by the Oppo

team, on a non-political basis, to determine ways sition he will go down as the person who achieved

and means of getting the country going. Do it. Undoubtedly that is why he is here. In the

honourable members opposite think that the Aus years to come Australia and its working popu

tralian people do not know that there is trouble lation will regret what has occurred. I wish the

ahead? Do honourable members opposite think honourable member for Wills all the best. He

that they do not know that their jobs are in jeop may be assured that, as the representative of a

ardy? Do honourable members opposite think country electorate, I will fight him tooth and nail.

that they do not understand technology changes? When the honourable member spoke on this mat

This Government is looking for a fight. It will not ter this afternoon and last week he talked in leave politics out of it and work down the line to generalities. He referred to what other people had

save the people of Australia.

said. He did not address himself to the real effect,

There are approximately four million people in the work force. About $ 1 0 billion is being paid in social security benefits for the needy in this country. If we do not get together and work out a plan we all know where we will end up-right down in the gutter. I hope there will be some liaison between the trade union movement and the Government. I was pleased to see that some compromise was reached last night with the Australian Council of Trade Unions. I think that a lit

technological or otherwise, that a shorter working week would have upon the Australian population. If I usually work 40 hours a week and I am forced to work a 3S-hour week instead, is it not natural for five hours of the week I will be less productive than I am if I work a 40-hour week? It necessarily follows that productivity must fall. It has to fall whether technology is introduced or not. Every honourable member in this chamber has to recognise that very principle.

tle latitude should be given in the future. Mr COWAN (Lyne) (S.38) -Let me say from
the outset that I am sure in my own mind that the effect of a 3S-hour week upon the Australian economy would be to reduce production. It would affect every other field in this country. My re marks this afternoon will be based entirely upon that belief. In answer to the honourable member for Sydney (Mr Les McMahon) , for whom I have the greatest respect, I say that undoubtedly the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) ap proached ICI Australia Ltd because he believed he had a very great responsibility to Australia to talk to that company as well as other major indus tries in this country concerning the problems that would follow the introduction of a 3S-hour week. Undoubtedly, he placed his opinion before ICI in

Somebody said this afternoon that we have to buy back Australia. The New South Wales Labor Government and the Federal Labor Government, when it was in office, were forced to bring in over seas capital to help develop the natural resources of Australia. Overseas experts also had to be brought in. I am not saying that we do not have the expertise but in many fields it is not extensive enough to develop the natural resources of Australia. There is no way that we can buy back Australia unless the working class population is sufficiently well off to buy shares and interests in various developments. If a 3S-hour week comes into being in Australia the worker will be poorly off. He will not have sufficient funds to invest in Australian industries.

the knowledge that the major companies and manufacturers within Australia have been har assed over the past year or so by the militant unions with which we have to contend. Unless this Government-not only the Prime Minister and other Ministers but also the back benchers and the people outside who support it, are prepared to tell the nation of the dangers of a 3S-hour week, I am sure that problems will arise.

As the Prime Minister said the other evening, not only is this campaign an attack by the Opposition upon industry within Australia but also it is a move to enrich the coffers of the unions which are trying to force the issue. To me that is cer tainly the case. Opposition members are the people who fought for arbitration and conciliation. As many speakers have said, why do we not recognise the conciliation and arbitration system

I will not cite any figures. I will refer to and resolve such matters in the proper manner? If

common-sense issues that I believe are the crux of a 3S-hour week were achieved, who is to say that

the entire problem. The Opposition's spokesman in two or three years the unions that are presently

on industrial relations, the honourable member trying to reduce the 40-hour week would not lead

1 292 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

35-Hour Week

the campaigns-Opposition members would support them-for a shorter working week. Such action is irresponsible. In my electorate the other day I received a telephone call from a builder. He advised me that a union representative had threatened that if certain people did not join the union the job would be blackbanned and they would have to walk off the job. That is typical of what is occurring today. That is why the Prime Minister and the Government are so determined to advise industries and workers of the problems that will arise.
I will refer to the effect of a 3 5-hour week upon the primary industries of Australia. They are responsible for at least 50 per cent of Australian exports and over 1 2 per cent of employment throughout Australia. These industries are the crux of the economy. Honourable members can not tell me that people in these industries, whether they be wheat farmers, graziers, dairy farmers, fruit growers or small crop growers, will not be seriously affected by a 35-hour week. I said earlier that I am convinced, in the same way as the Government, that this must mean a rise in wages. It must mean unemployment. It must mean rising costs on the farm. 1 am a farmer my self. When a farmer pays his accounts at the end of the month, and starts to look at what he has to pay for repairs to equipment, for power for his property and for freight to transport his produce away from the farm, he finds that increasing amounts are involved. Honourable members know that in many cases the primary producer does not have any means of actually getting those extra costs back.
If we look at exports, we see that the farmer has a market on which he gets certain prices for the goods he has contracted to produce. It is only from what he obtains for what he sells for food consumption within Australia that he may have a possibility of recouping his costs of production. This is the only field.-But as with most of the over all production from the farm today, we are dependent upon exports. It has been said over and over again on the Government side that we are pricing ourselves out of the markets of the world. I say that we are pricing out of the market not only our manufactured goods but also our goods from the farm. I appeal to everybody to give serious consideration to the effects of this.
Mr Braithwaite-The Labor Party never had an interest in primary industry.
Mr COWAN-We know their leader once said: 'They have never had it so good'. I know that the Opposition will never be allowed to forget it. At this time, without a 35-hour week, the primary

producer works in order to invest in the farm and he works [or hours. He is not a - 40-hour man. Most of the primary producers are not 60-hour men, and neither are the families, that is the wives and the children who are also involved in producing on the farm seven days a week. Where would this country be without this type of person who makes such a contribution? This is what we were founded on and this is what we will continue to be foundcd on. Whether or not we have natual resources, what is important is what an acre of soil produces. We should never look past that. It is what the soil produces that we feed the country on and that we export. I know that members of the Opposition are interjecting. They are the people who, in most compassionate ways, come into this chamber time and time again and say that we have a responsibility to give funds to countries that are war-torn, that have floods and everything else. I tell the House that we have a responsibility to feed the Third WorId, the people who need the products that we produce on the farm. We have a responsibility. Today, the Australian primary producer is prepared to accept the responsibility to do that if he has a fair basis for production, if his economy is sound and if he is receiving a reasonable return for the work that he does.
Mr Braithwaite-Labor doesn't understand that.
Mr COWAN-I do not think it does. Labor certainly does not understand the problem today. ] mentioned the rising cost on the farm and its effect upon freight, upon maintenance, and upon the prices that we pay. Members of the Opposition do not want to see home prices rise. They do not want to see land prices rise if they want their 20 acres or 1 0 acres of land. They want to be able to build a home. With a 3 5-hour week land prices in the country will skyrocket. The average work ing man will not be able to purchase a home of his own. He is the one the Opposition should think about.
Opposition members interjecting Mr COWAN-I agree with honourable members opposite. The working man is the base of the nation. We should look after him. Do not put him out of work. Half, or more than half, of the working people who belong to unions do not want to see a 3 5-hour week. If honourable members had closely followed the speech of the honourable member for Sydney (Mr Les McMahon) a while ago they would have seen that he did not want that either. He is a sensible man. A lot of the people here actually do not want it and they are not looking forward to it. What an

35-Hour Week

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 29 3

opportunity this great country has. At this point in our lifetime we are developing natural resources, feeding the world, and achieving and im proving a standard of living to maintain what we have. We can forget about a 3 5-hour week, a 38-hour or even a 40-hour week. We should get that out of out minds and accept responsibility for the gooc( of this country. We are going to need that sense of responsibility over the years to come. We are basically an under-developed land in a great global atmosphere. What will happen if we do not accept our responsibility and the working hours that are acceptable to Australia? If we look at the rest of the world -at Japan and West Germany-we will see that we have practically the lowest working hours in the world.
I have some figures here. 1 took them out the other day. Out of the 365 days in a year, 1 04 days are taken up as weekends, there are four weeks annual leave throughout the year, 1 1 public holidays and eight days sick leave. I do not think that .one worker in this nation, if he sat down and thought, would not agree that things are pretty good the way they are. The other day a chap who had had a look at our figures informed me that at the present time we are not working an average of even 35 hours a week. We are working about only 34.9 hours a week. That has been said before. If we have a 35-hour week the average workers of this country will be working under 30 hours a week. Let us take our minds back to New South Wales in 1 947. The consumer price index in 1 947 went up 3 per cent, in 1 948 it went up 6 per cent, in 1 949 it went up 9 per cent, in 1 950 it went up 1 0 per cent, and in 1 952 it went u p 20 per cent.
Mr Hawke-Was that because of the 40-hour week?
Mr COWAN-It was not entirely because of the 40-hour week. But do not tell me that that did not affect it. It must have done. I give great credit to this Government because it has tackled the economy and inft.ation in a sensible way. Is it not right to expect that if a 3 5-hour week comes in, this will be the pattern that we will see throughout Australia? There will be a rise in the CPI every year. Then we will hear the catcalls and the moan ings that will come from members of the Opposition. They will say that because we were in government we were the people responsible for killing the economy. They will say: 'You know you must be responsible'. As I said earlier, this is common sense. It is not a matter of figures. It is not a matter of what is said perhaps before the courts, or what a judge or anybody else says. They will look at the facts placed before them.

The fact of the matter is that as Australians we have a great responsibility to cover the things that I have spoken about this afternoon. I feel that that responsibility is shared today by the great majority of the people of Australia. The effect of this upon the primary producer-as I said earlier, the man responsible for the bulk of our exports, and the backbone of this country-will be tremendous. We will not get younger men to enter primary industries. We will have the older part of the population within the community wanting to leave primary industries. The younger men will not be able to get into the industry because of costs. They will be frightened to attempt it. These are the facts and the House may be assured that we will strongly oppose the 35-hour week proposal.

Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (5.58) -We have before us the statement made by the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Pe.acock) which was heralded by the Government as the policy for dealing with the unions' claims for a shorter working week. We had 1 9 pages telling us that the economy was going great and that the future was looking great. However, the Minister then went on to give us a tale of woe as to what would happen to the economy if the unions were success ful in gaining shorter working hours. This has been said before but I think it bears repeating. The same arguments, in fact, were put by the employers in 1 947. At that time the Arbitration Commission stated:

It has been the historic role of employers to oppose the workers' claim for increased leisure. They have, as is well known, opposed in Parliament and elsewhere every step in that direction, and this case is no exception. The argument has not changed much in 1 00 years. Employers have feared such changes as a threat to profits, an added obstacle to pro duction, a limitation on industrial expansion and a threat to international trade relations.

We have heard it all repeated here.

Motion (by Mr Bourchier) agreed to:

That the question be now put.

Original question put:

That the motion (Mr Porter's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-- Rt lion. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

59

Noes

45

Majority

14

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, 1. D. Baume,M. E. Birney, R. 1.
Bourchier, J. W.

AYES

Hunt, R. 1. D. Jarman, A. W. Killen, D. l.
Lloyd, B.
Lusher, S. A.

1 294 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

AYES
Bradfield,J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N.A. Bungcy, M. H. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Tan Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H, G. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean, A.G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P.D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Groom, R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C . (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

MacKellar, M. J. R . MacKenzie, A . J. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T: Macphee, I. M. Millar, P.C. Moorc,J. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P, J. Peacock, A:S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinc1air, 1. McC. Spender, J, M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N . D. Wilson, L B. C.

NOES
Armitage, I. L. Beazley, K, C. Blewett, N. Bowen. Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Cass, M. H. Charies, D. E, Child,J. Cross, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M. J. Everingham, D. N. Frec, R. V. Fry, K. I;. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A, C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Jacobi, R.

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R. J. Kent, L. Kerin, J.C. McLeay. Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. WaUIs, L. G. West, S. J. WiIIi', R. Young, M. J.

PAIR

Thomson, D. S.

Jones, Barry

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS Ministerial Statement
Consideration resumed from 26 March, on the following paper presented by Mr Peacock:
Industrial Relations-Ministerial Statement, 26 March 1981-
and on motion by Mr Wilson:
That the House take note of the paper.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Sitting suspended from 6.2 to 8 p.m.
(Quorum formed) .

GOVERNOR-GENERAVS SPEECH
Address-in-Reply Debate resumed from 3 1 March, on motion by Mr Spender:
The the following Address-in-Reply to the Speech of His Excellency the Governor-General be agreed to:
May it please Your Excellency:
We, the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled, desire to express our loyalty to Our Most Gracious Sovereign, and to thank Your Ex cellency for the Speech which you have been pleased to address to Parliament.
Upon which Mr Kent had moved by way of amendment:
That the following words be added to the Address: " but note that the Government:
( I ) has failed to adequately respond to (a) record unemployment; (b) a high and worsening level of inflation; (c) reduced and falling family living standards, and (d) the highest taxation burden in the nation's history;
(2) allows unsatisfactory administration of foreign investment guidelines which permit an uncritical and open-door policy to the takeover of Australian industry and resources to continue, and
(3) makes no long-term provision for assistance to manufacturing industry and farming industries, which are likely to be severely disadvantaged as a result of successive exchange rate revaluations and substantially increased imports in the context of resources development'.
Mr FALCONER ( Casey ) ( 8 .4) -The Governor-General's Speech made reference to Australian foreign policy attitudes, to the position we have in the world and to the part we ought to play in the American alliance. In a speech that I made in this House last week, in another debate, I referred to one of the problems which I believe have occurred in United States attitudes towards the Soviet Union in recent years in that there has tended to be a swing from one unreal view to another. I mentioned that on the one side there was sometimes a tendency amongst liberal aca demic circles in the United States to believe that, if only the United States and its allies took a more understanding view of the Soviet Union, all the problems would fade away and we could be friends with each other. When that attitude does not seem to work one gets a swing to the other ex treme in which spokesmen for the United States are encouraged to make very strong statements and to indulge in sabre rattling which is not necessarily realistic and does not necessarily con vey a proper understanding of the issues. I then indicated that we must not become carried away by our own rhetoric or by adopting foreign policy attitudes that we cannot support, and that we have to understand the essential differences between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and

Governor-General's Speech

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 295

Western systems of Government, the essential conflict that exists - between them, and be prepared to play our part in the Western alliance. I n other words, our foreign policy and the strength with which we express it must be matched by our real diplomatic, military and economic strength. We should not merely take an attitude in diplo matic terms which we cannot support by our own real contribution to the Western alliance.
I believe we should examine some of the achievements of American foreign policy under former President Nixon. In retrospect I think it is fair to say that it is a pity that rightful contempt for the Watergate affair led to a disregard for or even outright rejection of everything that Richard Nixon stood for. It is time that we ack nowledged that some of the major achievements of the Nixon Administration were in the area of foreign policy. That was probably the major pol icy area of the Nixon years with which the Ford Administration was happy to be associated. The reaction against the Watergate affair no doubt contributed to the development of unrealistic ex pectations of President Jimmy Carter. It also led to a paralysis of the United States leadership at executive level when leadership and decision making capacity was badly needed in the United States. (Quorum /ormed). I thank the honourable member for La Trobe (Mr Milton) for trying to ensure that a greater number of his Opposition colleagues are in the House to hear me. Unfortu nately there are very few members of the Opposition even at this stage on the Opposition benches whereas, of course, the Government's benches are packed. I was referring to developments in the United States and the attitude which affected the Carter Administration when it came to office. As time went on, it appeared that President Carter did not have the real power to act in foreign policy and defence matters, either diplomatically or militarily, when faced with challenges in, for example, Iran and Afghanistan at the same time.
The public perception of his foreign policy was that it became a policy of confusion, uncertainty and vacillation. There is no doubt that this diluted the nation's will when positive initiatives were called for. Foreign policy should be based on a hard-headed assessment of the realities of the international situation with which one is dealing and the cementing of agreements and relation ships in a manner that makes them difficult for one or the other party to break. Such agreements must be based on common interests and hard headed assessments of both sides, not on some ill defined, sentimental good will. That is the danger

we face in talking about international relation ships, particularly those affecting the fundamen tal balance between the United States and the USSR. I believe that a reading in full of some of the statements by Alexander Haig, the new Secretary of State of the United States Administra tion, indicates that he is making that broad hard headed assessment despite some of the rhetoric in which he indulges. I think that that is something from which we can take heart.
Quite apart from that overall global balance and our position in it, there is a need for Australia to develop its own regional network of bilateral and multilateral relationships. We have devel oped as a nation practical working relationships with certain Middle Eastern countries, particularly in the Persian Gulf area. That development has occurred despite our strong diplomatic support for Israel in international forums. We have seen the growth of a very substantial trading rela tionship with Japan, a relationship which is now developing into a broader range of consultations on other issues, not just trading matters, through the medium of regular ministerial meetings. It is not difficult to foresee that we may have some common defence interests with Japan in future in that any maritime threat will present us with a common interest in protecting our sea lanes. Wartime suspicions still exist, of course, but the reality of our growing relationship gives us certain common interests. Australia and New Zealand must grow closer together, no matter what parochial considerations intervene from either side of the Tasman from time to time in the way of underarm tactics on the cricket field.
Of great significance, of course, is .our relation ship with the Association of South East Asian N ations. In some instances this will be expressed in consultations and agreements with the Association of South East Asian Nations as a group. On other occasions we will seek separate arrange ments and agreements with one or more of the ASEAN countries. I believe that this is an important aspect of the nature of the ASEAN relationship which we should keep in mind. ASEAN is not just a monolithic grouping of countries in South East Asia. Rather, it should be seen as an interlocking network or web of bilat eral and multilateral relationships between various combinations of the ASEAN countries. I think that there is a mistaken view sometimes in Australian quarters, particularly in Australian commercial quarters, that ASEAN ought to be seen as some sort of South East Asian version of the European Economic Community. It is not a unified trading bloc in quite that sense. Certainly

1 296 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

there is a growing commonality of viewpoints between the ASEAN countries but we still have to look at it in terms of a network of relationships between those countries. In that respect we have not only to develop relationships with ASEAN as a group but also to consider the importance of individual issues, whether they be trading issues, cultural issues or matters concerning the security of the area, in a bilateral sense or with particular groupings of ASEAN countries as well as by con sulting with ASEAN as a whole.
In some quarters there has been floated a rather loosely defined idea of some form of grand Pacific alliance involving Australia and other countries on the Pacific rim. The problem with such a concept is that the interests of countries around the Pacific are so diverse that it would be difficult to keep them in harness together. Indeed, any major problem causing one or two significant partners in such an alliance to withdraw would almost certainly result in the collapse of the alliance. In my view we should seek to strengthen bilateral and multilateral relationships in the re gion to a far greater extent before we seriously discuss the formation of some grand Pacific alliance.
Another factor in world affairs that has influ enced Australian attitudes recently has been the evidence of the resurgence of Islam, particularly in Iran. I do not believe that we should react to the Islamic countries out of some sense of cultural xenophobia. In some of the attitudes that have been expressed on the emergence of Islamic rad icalism there is an implied assumption that Islamic nationalism is a monolithic force which will confront the rest of the world on a global scale. A closer look must surely indicate that there are as many tensions within Islam as there are between Islamic countries and the rest of the world.
Indeed, our own substantial cultural, religious and political differences with the Arab states have not prevented Australia from developing a modus vivendi with several Arab countries. This has been achieved, as I said earlier, in spite of our strong diplomatic support for Israel in international fo rums. In several instances it is a highly profitable relationship to Australia in terms of commodity trading and the employment of Australian con sulting firms on Middle Eastern projects. Given the tensions within Islamic countries, such as the .;uspicions that exist in many places between Sunni Moslems and Shi'ite Moslems, it is quite likely that there will be other flare-ups of Islamic nationalism within the next few years.
I believe that we must not be carried away by these developments and look at the development

of Islamic nationalism as some sort of monolithic force but seek to understand the cultural bases for particular developments in particular countries. The violent statements by some extreme Islamic groups will inevitably hit the headlines, but once the mullahs start executing some of their own countrymen for religious or political offences, and start putting educated young Women behind veils,
it is likely that the population at large in those
countries will tire of such excesses and demand more moderation in national policy. Without having to agree on each other's social structures, I believe that Australia and other Western countries can reach a perfectly satisfactory working arrangement with Islamic countries. Of course, it is of importance to us in that two of the ASEAN countries, Indonesia and Malaysia, are basically Islamic. The brand of Islam which is practised in those countries is strongly influenced by the tra ditional and cultural attitudes of people on various islands within those countries. These are factors that we must take account of when considering the significance of Islam in any re lationships that we may have with those countries.
I want to turn from the matter of foreign affairs to one matter of debate about defence in this country which has received a great deal of pub licity recently. The Chief of Defence Force Staff appeared recently before the Sub-committee on Defence Matters of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence. That Sub committee is better known, of course, as the Katter Committee. Some of the remarks which Sir Anthony Synnot, the Chief of Defence Force Staff, made received a great deal of publicity. I want to draw the attention of the House to the extent to which he was selectively quoted by most of the news media, to the extent of being misleadingly quoted. Indeed, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) seems to have been sucked in by some of the misleading reports when he quoted the Chief of Defence Force Staff in a speech that he made to the House of Representa tives on 26 March-only a few days ago. He quoted a statement in which Sir Anthony said:
We do not identify one single threat . . . To my mind the Leader of the Opposition spoke in a way which implied that the Chief of Defence Force Staff-(Quorum formed) . The misquo tation of the Chief of Defence Force Staff was particularly evident in a report on the Australian Broadcasting Commission program AM of 1 8 March 1981 in which Mr John Highfield made the following statement:
The Chief of the Defence - Force Staff told the Sub Committee that there was no threat against Australia other

Governor-General's Speech

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 297

than that which could be mounted by the super powers in the foreseeable future.

That is a most incredible statement for anyone

who was following the public hearings of the

defence sub-committee on that occasion because what the Chief of Defence Force Staff said was

tAhuastt-rtahleiarebuwt aths enreowseinrgelae

identifiable threat to number of threats that

we ought to be taking account of our defence

planning. I am pleased to say that the Melbourne

Age was, to my knowledge and from my reading

of Press reports, the only newspaper which gave a

reasonably full account of what the Chief of

Defence Force Staff had to say on that occasion.

An article written by Mr Lorenzo Boccabella in

the Melbourne Age reports Sir Anthony Synnot

as saying:

Australia could be brought to heel in many other ways.

The article continued:

Sea trade routes could be blocked, offshore resources attacked or harbours mined. Other threats included raids on Australia's hinterland and international terrorist attack.

That indicates that what the Chief of Defence Force Staff was speaking about was that Australia faces a number of potential threats, not of immediate invasion by a major power but cer tainly a number of lower level threats which we ought to be considering seriously when planning our defence effort. It was with that background that he went on to answer a number of questions from members of the defence sub-committee on the way in which our defence forces ought to be structured.

I raise this matter because I want to complain very strongly about the way in which defence matters are often publicised in the media. Often I get the impression from the way in which media reports present defence matters that the Press wants us to say one of two things-either that we are to be bombed tomorrow or there is no threat whatsoever. Apparently any range of threats in between those two extremes is just not news worthy, will not get any publicity and therefore is not worth paying any attention to. I believe we deserve a better coverage on defence matters from the Press of this country.

Mr Kent-Mr Deputy Speaker--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar) -Is a quorum required?

Mr Kent-I move an extension of time, Mr Deputy Speaker.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hotham drew the attention of the Chair to the state of the House?

Mr Kent-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wanted to move that an extension of time be given to the honourable member because no one has listened .to him.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hotham is being a little mischievous. If he had a sincere desire to achieve that result the appropriate time to do so would have been at the conclusion of the remarks of the honourable member for Casey. The hono:.trable member for Casey's time has expired.
(Extension oftime granted) . M r FALCONER-Mr Deputy speaker, I had just managed to conclude my remarks. I thank the honourable member for his courtesy and' for the compliment he paid me in wanting to hear more of what I had to say. But I think I have made the major point. Debate interrupted.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE AIR CONDITIONING
Dr JENKINS (ScuIlin)- Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek your indulgence to raise a matter of ur gency to those working in this building. This matter requires an answer either from you or from Mr Speaker. I draw your attention to media re ports this evening suggesting that the legionnaires disease bacterium has been isolated from the cooling tower of the air conditioning unit of the Prime Minister's suite. I think honourable members are well aware of the danger and viru lence of this bacteria. I am sure that honourable members would like some answer from you or Mr Speaker before we adjourn this evening. Is there any suggestion or have tests been carried out for the legionnaires disease bacterium in other air conditioning units of the building? What have been the results? If those tests have not been carried out in other areas, why not? As you know, Mr Deputy Speaker, air conditioning has been shown as a source of this bacterium in some of the rather drastic occurrences of legionnaires disease in other countries.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-J shall have the honourable member's question conveyed to Mr Speaker for his immediate attention.
GOVERNOR-GENERAL'S SPEECH Address-in-Reply
Debate resumed. Dr CASS (Maribyrnong) (8.28) - 1 must con fess that I do not really feel like making a speech for a variety of reasons, not the least being that this evening I saw a film on El Salvador. I want to make some remarks about that because I found

1 298 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

the film quite sickening. I would like to quote from a release dated 2 February put out by Am nesty International. It states:
The human rights situation in El Salvador has deteriorated sharply in recent months. Amnesty International is seriously concerned and fears a further increase in summary execution, torture and abduction by government forces as civil conflict continues between guerrillas and the government. Of some 8,000 Salvadorians estimated to have been killed during the past year, many are known to have been the victims of extra judicial execution by the armed forces. Peasants and young people appear to be particular targets. Sources in the country say that nearly 3,000 peasants were among those killed for political reasons in 1 980.
Of course, that was the situation on 2 February. Practically every day there are reports in the newspapers of the continual killing in that country. I do not wish to dwell on the details of that. I will .just perhaps recall to the minds of honourable members a report in the Melbourne Age of 26 March 1981 . Under the heading: 'Guns stop in memory of archbishop' the Age reports:
Salvordoran Catholics flocked to their churches today the first ceasefire to be call in the country's 1 8-month-old 'rebellion'.
Salvadoran rebels stopped military action for a day in memory of Archbishop Oscor Arnulfo Romero, the fiery de fender of the poor, who was gunned down at his altar exactly a year ago.
The article concluded:
While the rebels were quiet today, the Rightest death squads continued their grizzly terror campaign. Five mutilated bodies were found this morning in the outer suburb of Soyapango . . .
That is what we saw in the film. It is depressing. I do not understand the reasoning or the lack of understanding of the Liberal Government in unquestioningly following the line being taken by President Reagan and the American Administra tion at the moment. It was quite clear that under Jimmy Carter some efforts were being made nowhere near as much as I would have liked-to bring about a moderation of the terror in that sad country and to try to get some meaningful land re form. For reasons which I hope to go into in a moment Reagan changed his tack. I find it distressing that all these reports are coming out in hardly communist publications like the Melbourne Age, the National Times and the Sydney Morning He rald. When a person like Archbishop Romero is gunned down and is accused by a spokesman of the junta as being a communist and when the Catholic church is being accused of being commu nist, I would like to think that a government of this country would take more serious heed of what is going on and not blindly follow the Americans. I want to try to understand why Presi dent Reagan is switching his policy as he is, for example, in the case of South Africa. He is seeking to ignore the impact of aparthied and the action

that most civilised countries are taking in trying to impress upon the South Africans that that is a hardly reasonable form of behaviour. He is turn ing the clock back, as it were, in his relations with many of the central American countries. What is the reason for this? It can hardly be that he sees a military threat. After seeing the film tonight and reading these reports, he can hardly see EI Sal vador as a military threat to the United States. Once again, of course, it is hard to see any of these countries as an external economic threat. After all, we are told that the main product of EI Sal vador is coffee and the main market is the United States. Whatever happens in that country whether it falls to the leftists or rightists-I can not see it being a threat to America when its main export is going to the American market.
Having said that [ do not see an economic threat in those terms, I wonder whether, in fact, the problems may not be economic insecurity, doubts and confusion in one of the major powers of the world today. I put it that way. I will deal with the Soviet Union later. It strikes me that the Americans are in fact feeling enormously insecure for a variety of reasons. I quote from the Age of 1 2 March, a n article headed 'The big redistribution':
The Reagan Administration says the Budget it presented yesterday is a means of fighting inflation while stimulating economic growth-and in the long run it might well do these things.
But in the short term its most obvious effect would be of a very different kind: to redistribute income in this country. The money would go from poor to rich . . .
The Budget would alter incomes by giving tax breaks to the better off while significantly reducing programs aimed primar ily at the poorest people-
The article then mentions that the three largest welfare programs, Medicaid, food stamps and housing assistance-the non-cash or in kind programs that help the poor-will be dramati cally slashed by the Reagan Budget. The headline above an article in the Sydney Morning Herald of 3 1 March reads: 'Reagan's razor gang shaves the poor to help the rich'. The article states:
The Reagan philosophy is to help the rich to help America. But as the President's razor gang goes to work, it's the poor who will pay.
The point is that I think there are ideological blinkers on the planners in America, as I will suggest if I have time, is the case in this country. The proposition they are working on is that by cutting public expenditure, this will somehow stimulate economic growth. It will increase de mand and do all of those things necessary to re vive the economy. Is this, in fact, what will hap pen?- Is this approach to curing our economic

Governor-General's Speech

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 299

problems a wise one, or is it only feeding and ag gravating the sense of insecurity that the whole country is feeling?
I should like to quote from an article which was quoted by the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) and incorporated on page 1 69 of Hansard of 25 February. The article is by Emma Rothschild on the subject, 'Reagan and the real America'. In commenting on his economic approach and on growth she says:
But such accelerated growth seems unlikely. The United States exports more than 10 per cent of its gross national product, and the countries with which it trades are sickly. In dustrial production turned down in the secondquarter of 1980 in each of the five largest capital economies. The number of people looking for jobs in the European Community has increased by 20 per cent in one year. The world economy may be moving, as Mr Reagan takes office, towards the synchron ous recession of 1981 -82.
Quite clearly there is not much hope in that re vival for the increase in American production being exported. Who is going to be able to afford to buy it? The article continues:
The expectation of economic growth thus depends in turn on a further assumption: that some unknown Republican in spiration, some elixir of indigenous capitalist expansion-
It is almost the sort of faith we were treated to by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in, I guess, each of the last three elections. What is happening? This article states Reagan has com mented that:
The 'strategy' is based on solid economic principles and basic experience in both government and the marketplace. It has worked before, and will work again.
There have been two great surges in recent economic growth, according to Rothschild, one from 1 950 to 1 95 3 and another from 1 962 to 1 966. These were accompanied with rapid increases in manufacturing output. But-this is the point that I want to emphasise because I think it is relevant to what we are talking about-each was also a period of rapid expansion in the military economy. So we have increasing reports in the Press about the increase in military preparedness in the United States. An article in the Age of 1 1 March 1981 under the heading 'Reagan bid to lift mili tary aid', talked about sending much more aid to El Salvador. The article states:
Despite President Reagan's determination to make big budget cuts in domestic programmes and non-military foreign aid, informed sources said yesterday that the security assistance programme to be presented to Congress would call for outlays greater than those in President Carter's proposed budget.
Some figures are then given. For El Salvador alone, there is a request to Congress to appropri ate $21 .5m in credits for the purchase of weapons and military equipment and $34m in economic support. That followed a promise of $21 . 5m for

emergency military aid just the week before. These are massive sums of money for military purposes. Of course, that is only part of it. Total foreign military sales credits that the Administra tion hopes to provide in 1 982 will amount to $3,400m. That would certainly give a fillip to the flagging American economy. In other words, what I am fearful of is that in this time of, one could almost suggest, world depression in economic terms, the economic system that we know is responding in a way that it has done historically. As Emma Rothschild mentioned, on two previous occasions since the Second World War, when there has been a dramatic economic pick-up, it has been associated with an acceleration in the arms race. Of course, historically we must recall that the world pullcd out of the great depression only when the arms race started leading up to the Second World War. I am not arguing the pros and cons of whether we should have armed. I am simply pointing out that that is what helped the economy of the world to revive. It was not that capitalism had found new frontiers and was able to regenerate itself. It had to resort to the pro duction of arms to do so.
Is there really any significant increase in the communist threat around the world? Is it really possible that one day President Carter could feel that all was secure and he tried to impress upon the El Salvadorians that they should be more reasonable and less paranoid about communist subversion and so on, and the next day, with the election of a new President, Reagan, suddenly communism threatens to take over the whole world. Surely that is hardly likely.
An article in the Age of 1 0 March under the headline, 'US wants bases in the Persian Gulf', indicates that the United States is seeking to spread its military buildup everywhere. That report in the Age expresses the attitude of the West Germans in the following terms:
In Bonn, the West German Chancellor, Mr Schmidt said yesterday that he would urge President Reagan to accepl President Brezhnev's call for a United Stales-Soviet summit meeting.
It was acknowledged on 1 1 March-a day later than this article from which I have quoted concerning the Reagan bid to lift military aid-that Brezhnev had written to President Reagan elabor ating on his proposals to improve East-West relations, including the proposal for a summit meet ing. The official commentary was to the effect that the tone of the letter was matter of fact, cer tainly not a hostile communication, devoid of polemics. President Brezhnev called it a review of Soviet proposals in the area of East-West relations. With the evidence around suggesting that

1 300 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

really no one wants to get pugnacious and threateningit seems hardly likely, in the short time between the exit of Carter and the incoming of Reagan, that the communists should have ral lied themselves so dramatically to justify all of thiswhat really is the reason for the sudden dra matic build-up? I fear that it is not the communist threat but the incapacity of the economic system to adjust to peace in peacetime. [ fear that it is the only real stimulus available.
I n case honourable members think I am just seeking to rubbish the United States of America and the Western side of this equation, let me turn now to the Soviet Union where again we have an example of one of the two largest and most powerful nations in the world behaving in the same bullying, insecure fashion. My feeling is that there is enormous insecurity within the Soviet Union and, therefore, it too embarks upon foreign adventures as a means to try to maintain some sort of cohesion within that country. Maybe that is the best explanation of its expedition into Afghanistan. Of course, the source of the insecur ity there was, no doubt, the fear of changes in that country stemming from what was going on in neighbouring Moslem countries. After all, the Soviet Union has a very large Moslem population.
One of the things which worries me and exer cises my concern is the reason for the Soviet Union's feeling of insecurity. Why is it so unsure of its Moslem population or, indeed, of its whole population? It seems to me that State capitalism in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has not succeeded in winning the confidence and loyalty of its population. I wish to quote from an inter view published in the Washington Post, which appeared also in the Guardian on 16 March 1 980, with Sakharov, the communist Soviet scientist who has been exiled. He was asked:
. What is the future of the human rights movement in the Soviet Union ' . . .
Among other things, he replied:
Exploiting a period of general aggravation of the international situation, the authorities have made a mighty attempt to eliminate any display of dissidence, both in Mos cow and the provinces.
Sakharov was then asked:
How do you assess the human rights movement of the 1970s and its influence on the internal affairs of the Soviet Union?
He said that there are:
Dangerous illusions about the essence of our system which used to be almost universal among the Western
intelligentsia . . . He was then asked:
What changes will .take place in the structure of Soviet so ciety in the 1980s?
His reply was:

International security, the preservation of world peace, the welfare and the spiritual freedom of the people of our country demand changes in the structure of our society in the direction of greater pluralism in economic, ideological and cultural areas.
I think it unlikely that such changes will take place in the near future. Our totalitarian society, with its caste and bu reaucratic structure, its complete lack of freedom of ex pression or democratic mechanisms for decision-making, is extraordinarily inert.
So the article continues. In answer to a question pushing him on what fundamental changes may take place in the 1 980s, he lists a lot of problems and I think the one which I am about to quote is significant. He said:
Our country faces serious economic difficulties. Among these are shortages of goods, especially foodstuffs, rural and urban manpower shortages, deteriorating workplace disci pline, growing alcoholism, pay-scale inequalities, shortages of fuel . . .
He lists a number of other things. He then says:
All these problems encourage the continuing militarization of the eonomy. The basic necessity for economic reform . . . appears incontravertible.
It is interesting to observe that, at the recent con gress, Brezhnev made those sorts of comments on the Soviet Union. I note that if anyone else had made those sorts of comments they could be thrown into gaol. He, at last, has to face up to the fact that these things have to be acknowledged. So we see that the Soviet Union is the same as the United States of America in the sense that both are feeling insecure and, in my view, both countries are retreating to militarism as-a means of try ing to gloss over the crises facing the countries in ternally in the hope that the community can be lulled into a sense of security. [ would guess that probably the events in Poland are further evidence of this crucial struggle to try to democratise the situation in that country.
Of course, we are not doing very well in these countries either. In Britain, there has been a reliance on the monetary policy that has doubled the unemployment rate, and where the inflation rate is higher than is in the best interests of the country. Of course, as a result production has gone down. Australia has been told to embrace, as have the British, increased export earnings. Bri tain has coal and we have our resources; yet if we look into the matter we find that that is a contra diction. Increased income leads to the manufac turing base of Britainand the same problems would arise in Australiabeing unable to com pete in markets overseas. I n such a situation we would be forced to import more goods with the re sult that conditions in the country would get worse and not better.

Governor-General's Speech

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 301

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar) their wants are always in excess of a government'8

Order! The honourable member's time has ability to fulfill those expectations'.

expired.

The second point covered in the Governor

Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (8.47)-I rise to respond to the Governor-General's address at the opening of the Thirty-second Parliament. In so doing 1 wish to pay my tribute and that of my constituents to His Excellency Sir Zelman Cowan

General's address is under the title: 'caring for people'. It is my greatest concern that any Australian government, now and in the future, must as a priority be able to care for its aged. Yet if the present policy is continued, by the 1 990s it may be

not only for his address but also for the manner in an impossible priority to honour. In fact, whilst

which he performed the functions of his office. 1 our present welfare schemes and the manner in have no doubt that his Excellency will be which they are financed through current expendi

recorded in history as one of Australia's most dis tinguished Governors-General. Mr Deputy Speaker, I congratulate you on you appointment

ture are an almost impossible burden for the Government to provide, if carried on under the same policies, by 1 990 they will bleed the nation

to your position as Chairman of Committees and entirely. Some may say that this is an alarmist atti Deputy Speaker of this House and Mr Speaker on tude but let us examine some statistics provided

his reappointment. I respond to certain passages over the 10 years from 1970 to 1 979 and those

in the Governor-General's address. I mention first from the last budget.

the establishment of a committee of senior Minis ters to review the functions of allCommonwealth

Firstly, I turn to the Budget for every $1 raised in taxation revenue

. 1980-8 1 . Of by the Com

departments and associated agencies. It is of im monwealth from every source, 3 1 c was spent on

mense importance to appreciate that the Fraser social security and welfare. That amounted to

Government, this conservative Government, has $9,890m, or 27.4 per cent of all government been able to reduce Public Service staff by 1 0,000 expenditure. During the 1 0 years from 1969-70 to

at a time when States have increased staff-in 1 978-79 the number of welfare recipients grew by

some States, quite considerably. There has to be 1 2 5 per cent but the number of taxpayers grew by

an appreciation by the States that the problem of only 22 per cent. In the group of welfare recipi

inflation and excess public expenditure is as much ents, age pensioner numbers increased by about

in their hands to control as it is in the hands of the 75 per cent. The alarming fact is that the number

Commonwealth.

entitled to age benefits will not decrease or stabil

Some honourable members have made sugges, tions to this Committee of review. I am pleased that I was able to make my own contribution to demonstrate a member's personal concern to the Committee for the expanded public sector expenditure where the 1970s, under a Labor government, saw the excesses of government in this regard and expenditure the intention of which was to centralise Canberra control and influence, but unfortunately saw also the duplication of services with the States-Aborigines, education, health, environmental matters, roads and many others whereby billions of dollars have been unnecess arily spent and continue to be spent and unfortunately wasted. Much of this waste can be accounted for just in personnel. If we as a

ise; it will continue to increase. Australia, with a zero population growth, will become an aging population to be serviced by a declining taxpayer population. Also, government policy on removing gift tax and adopting an income test as against an asset test allows a person a more certain entitlement to the pension than was the situation five years ago. No-one would deny-I certainly would not-aged persons an entitlement to a pen sion. What alarms me is that this entitlement is quickly growing and no policy, apart from pay ment from current revenue, has been formulated to meet this growing commitment in the future. This Government must plan immediately to for mulate for the future new policies in this regard alone.

Government, are to achieve worthwhile re In caring for people, no one should forget that

ductions in taxation rates and collections, this 1981 is the International Year of Disabled Per

Government, all State governments, and all sons. Each of us should be asking the question:

authorities must have realised that a reduction has What can we do? Earlier in the Address-in-Reply

to be matched with comparable reductions in debate the honourable member for Fisher (Mr

puplic expenditure. If Australians as a people are Adermann) made a special plea for consideration

overtaxed, their expectations from the public for those afflicted through deafness. Two weeks

purse have to be diminished before relief can be ago I met with representatives of the Proserpine

given on the taxation problem It is an unfortunate Activity and Therapy Centre for the Handi

fact that people's expectations of governments to capped, which is in my electorate. A program

provide for their needs and, in some instances, jointly funded by the Federal Government and

1 302 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 198 1

Governor-General 's Speech

the community of Proserpine is doing an immense amount ofgood for those people who attend there and for those people who contribute their time and talent to this work. I pay tribute to them all. This program must be continued. What is required though is an awareness that these people are in the community and need help, an aware ness that they wish to remain in or get into the mainstream of the community and an awareness that they can be helped and trained so that they can lead useful lives. It is a short step from aware ness to action and concern. However, there are means by which the Commonwealth can extend its concern, particularly in regard to the impo sition of tariffs on specialist equipment from over seas, such as wheelchairs, for the handicapped. Also, I understand that sales tax in some in stances adds to the cost of specialised equipment. I believe that the Government should give a lead in the I nternational Year of Disabled Persons in seeing what relief can be given to those who carry this massive burden ofincapacity.
I wish to refer now to the exciting future Australia has in the way of resource development, particularly in my own State of Queensland. What was 20 years ago an unexplored and probably unappreciated resource, coal, is today developing the central Queensland and central highlands area and attracting many people to the newly-developing towns. Just on present proposals, development of the N ewlands lease, Riv erside, Winchester South, Dainia and German Creek will mean the construction of new towns at Middlemount and Glenden and massive exten sions to the town of Moranbah.
Mr Lloyd-In which electorates are these? Mr BRAITHWAITEThe electorate of Dawson, which supplies 7 per cent of Australia's national exports. (Quorum formed) . However, I do feel that there is a need to reappraise the whole situation concerning this development and other resource development throughout Australia. The matter of foreign and Australian ownership has long been debated in this House and I do not intend to pursue that matter. Honourable members know my feelings in that regard. The question that must be asked is: Who should contribute to the infrastructure of these new developments and who should gain from it? The further question that must be asked is: Is the coal or are the minerals being sold at a sufficiently high figure to give a return both to the miner and to the country? For instance, it is established that a company should build the town, the houses, the railway, the port facilities and so on and that if it is not paid for them a sufficient charge should be

made at a later date to recover those costs at a profit. Airport, sporting and recreation facilities are also normally absorbed by the company as part of the infrastructure. This Government allows a write-off of capital assets over a period and direct deductions for expenses for taxation purposes, so the Government makes a contribution in that regard. I question whether the developer or government should provide the services. The abnormal and immediate requirements for telecommunications, for instance, come out of the capital budget of a Telecom district, thus denying others that immediate service, although this is recouped at a later date through charges to the developing towns. There is also the provision of health and educational services and the pro vision of police and welfare services and all the other services normally available elsewhere to Australian citizens. The cost of providing access developmental roads and services not only to the residents but also to the product itself must be questioned.

1t will be argued that these services, being nor mal government services, should be provided by government, but it would be rational to suggest, firstly, that the employees normally move away from centres where these services have always been available and are available more cheaply. Their departure leaves these services in surplus at the point of their departure and their arrival at the new centres creates a need for those services to be available. Secondly, roads linking these de velopments are as much a necessary link as are the railways, particularly when a project is getting under way. Too often the construction of and funding for access roads are seldom part of the in frastructure arrangements and local government authorities are expected to take up this responsibility and the financial burden, and they are sub jected to criticism if they are not provided or they are not up to standard.

Who should be responsible, the developer or

the taxpayer? I believe that the eventual government share, through taxes and royalties or what- ,

ever, has to be reviewed just to see whether the revenue covers sufficiently the capital cost of the

'

supply of services and the recurrent expenditure

associated with those services. The suggestion is

that there be a review of the total situation-a

company's profit expectation, its servicing of

capital, government revenue and what is to be

provided, and the taxation cost to government of

the granting of deductibility for special infrastruc

ture costs. The review may well indicate that no

one is benefiting from development, that the price

of the product is too low and the only beneficiary

is the buyer. For these reasons, governments need

Govenor-General's Speech

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 303

to know exactly what is the position, particularly when products are subject to special transfer prices between international corporations and their subsidiaries.
While dealing with these new developments, the question of resource taxes must also be faced. As far as I am concerned, the States had constitu tionality well before the Commonwealth and I would believe the resources belong to the States. Commonwealth shouldshare only to the extent of the taxes paid by the corporations and the employees engaged in those developments. Be cause there has been no review of the type suggested earlier, there is a real area of contention as to who should provide and maintain the roads system-local government, the State Government or the Federal Government. Unfortunately, at the moment the developers are not held responsible. 1 believe it to be an unfair argument for the States to contend that the responsibility rests with the Commonwealth. Our record of increased payments to local government and to the States should evidence this.
One has to say that State resource taxes are already being paid. A major mining company in the coal mining and export business indicates that for the two years ending 3 1 December 1 979 and 3 1 December 1 980 total State taxes of $74m and $80m respectively were paid. These included an estimated profit on rail freights derived by the company of $47,488,000 and $53,890,000 respectively. Royalties in both years amounted to $23m.
If profits on rail freights are subject to a resource tax, which is then available to use for the benefit of all State residents, one must question the use to which the profits are put. The accounts of the Queensland railways to 30 June for the three years 1 977-78, 1 978-79 and 1 979-80 show the following breakdown: in 1 977-78 the net over all result was a loss of $63,45 1 ,000. In [ 978-79 the loss dropped to $54,65 1 ,000. In 1 979-80 it rose to $69,802,000. In the central Queensland division profits are made from the rail freight services. Those profits of $38m, $49m and $60m respectively were used in reducing the overall loss, as I said before. This means that the total profits are being used entirely to cover southern losses on the freight and passenger services, and no benefit is given to the producing areas. The central division subsidises the other areas.

update rail services and charges to try to make them a little more viable.
Secondly, other transport systems should receive the benefit of profits from the rail freight prior to anything else. If the developers are not to contribute to the road systems-I believe they should-the State has the opportunity of using its rail profits for that purpose.
We are often told by our State colleagues how we should use Commonwealth oil levies and petrol excise duties to improve roads and many other things. Surely the use of rail profits for road con struction is in keeping with those suggestions. I would find it difficult to find a more appropriate use.
Overall I am firmly of the view that there is a need for a Commonwealth/State review of all our developmental policies. If it is found that there has been little advantage to Australians from these developments, we will have a reason to seek price increases for our resources in line with oil prices. We need to ensure that profits are not exported internationally through excessively low transfer prices. (Quorum formed). I think it is a pity that a speaker's time should be reduced by the actions of the Opposition in calling quorums. It does not show the respect to His Excellency, the Governor-General, that he deserves. I am very sorry that the Opposition has seen fit to in terrupt Government members when it leaves its own members undisturbed. For that reason, my time is almost at an end. I repeat that I support the Address-in-Reply to the Governor-General's Speech. I commend the comments I have made for the consideration of the appropriate Ministers.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.6)-1 wish to raise a number of matters in this Address-in-Reply de bate. Some things that have been said in the de bate by honourable members cannot pass un noticed. Much has been said both in this debate and in another debate, which has now concluded, about the conditions of employment and the problems for industry that would be created by significant changes in those conditions. For the benefit of the House I will read a statement. I wonder whether honourable members opposite will agree with it. It reads:
Those misguided individuals, some unfortunately in high positions, who propose this disastrous change in working con ditions are proposing the destruction of the prosperity we all enjoy,

Two things are in evidence. Firstly, the State , I wonder how many honourable members op authorities must get their own services producing posite would have supported those remarks. I more economically. I fear that the offsetting of think most of them would have. In this generation coal freight profits has hidden the real need to they would have applied them to the 35-hour

1 304 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

week. They were said in opposition to the abolition of child labour in the mines in Britain in the 1 830s and 1 840s. There is never a change in the words ofthose who believe that people who work for wages escaped from their proper position when slavery was abolished. I am the Opposition spokesman on defence. Earlier in the night the honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer) indicated that certain remarks which were reported in the Press as being given in evidence before the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence were not, in fact, made in that fashion. For the record I make it clear that if the Government's defence policy means anything, the words of Sir Anthony Synnot-I will refer later to what the present Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) said- - -have to be right; otherwise we will be in grave danger. The Chairman of the Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee asked Sir Anthony Synnot, the Chief of Defence Force Staff, the following question:
r refer you to evidence that you gave previously to' this Committee on 25 July 1979 when you said: 'We have also looked at the requirements of an enemy which planned a mass attack on Australia to try to capture the country, or subjugate the country. Every look we have had from every point of view indicates this is a most unlikely event? Does that analysis still hold?
That evidence was confirmed by Sir Arthur Tange who was also present on 25 July 1 979. The answer given by the Chief of Defence Force Staff on 1 8 March 1981 , which the honourable member for Casey suggested was not given, stated:
Absolutely. I think it is addressed to some extent, under item two--
that relates to th Minister's statement to which I will refer later-
which I think we have moved on to at this stage. I do not believe, and I think anyone who has looked at it from a mili tary point of view would agree with me, that any country in the world at the moment is capable of launching a mass armed invasion of Australia. Even the super powers at this time have quite inadequate amphibious force, and only the United States has sufficient aircraft carriers to get an ad equate degree of air superiority over the sort of the area where they might launch an invasion. The Soviet Union and the United States are certainly capable of building up those forces but it would be a different world if one or the other were to attackAustralia while other countries sat back.
I quote from that answer because it is a keystone of the current Australian defence policy. It is not only wrong but also irresponsible for honourable members to come into this House and to suggest that anything other than that is the case. I think it is important that we understand that a major threat is not what the preparation of our defence forces is all about at present. So that no one will suggest that I am trying to drive divisions between the Minister for Defence and the Chief of Defence Force Staff I quote what the Minister

said in a written answer to the question on which the Admiral was commenting. He stated:
At the present time, and for the foreseeable future, only the two Superpowers could marshal the range of necessary capa bilities. Leaving aside questions of motive and likelihood, consideration of how either Superpower might use their forces against Australia is pure conjecture.
Therefore, a major armed invasion of Australia is not regarded as a credible contingency for the Defence force structure planning.
It is not regarded as a credible contingency. Again I quote the Minister. He stated:
There can be no single concept of operations for the defence of Australia and its vital interests because there is no tangible identifiable threat.
I think those two quotes identify the basis of defence planning in Australia. I hope that they do because during the whole of this Government's time in office the capabilities of the Australian Defence Force have been in decline. They are in decline because equipment is aging and the pro curement programs of the Government are con tinually being deferred in a manner which creates a situation whereby every year our defence forces' capabilities, relative to those defence forces which are keeping up with modern technology, become less able to deal with a major situation on their own.
There are some serious problems, I believe, in the defence debate in Australia. The first is that there is a two level defence debate. There is that level of defence debate which honourable members opposite engage in to try to create a situation where political advantage is gained by making claims of threats that even the Minister admits do not exist and by making statements which propose defence initiatives which are not met. I think the most disgraceful exercise in recent years was that of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) before the Olympic Committee when he suggested Australia had three years to prepare for a world war. Since that time nothing new in the manner of absolute committed initiat ives has taken place in the defence area in Australia. There has been some increase in the numbers of persons recruited to the reserves but no increase in the capabilities which are being provided for training-the equipment being provided-nor the basic ability of the reserve forces to fill a role. More seriously, if the Army Reserve where the recruiting is taking place is a significant part of the defence forces, then the Army itself must also have a key role to play. It is being denuded of any forms of capacity by the Government's total neglect of its equipment needs.
A couple ofweeks ago we had the Prime Minister's entourage at Amberley going around to the

Governor-General's Speech

2 April 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 305

Press of Australia advising them that backfire this House and talk about defence, those honour

bombers could fly over Australia and carry out a able members opposite who tell Our young people

raid on Australia. It has subsequently been found that they should be prepared to defend Australia,

that the backfire bombers were not, in fact, should hang their heads in shame and also be

located where it was being suggested they were. shameful because they are part of an organisation

But if that were true, then it might be a good idea which exalts trust in people when that trust is

if some honourable members opposite who keep something to which they are not entitled.

talking about the Government's ability to defend the country looked at the realities. The backfire bomber not only outfiies all of our aircraft but also it outfiies all of our current missiles. So there is nothing in Australia. I mention one other matter which I think is ironical in the extreme considering that it is about the defence capacities of a government which only two weeks ago was ' trying to whip up a scare about backfire bombers. It also deals with the denuding of the Army. The honourable member for Eden-Monaro who is try ing to interject does not care about defence. He wants votes out of it but does nothing about it. He would send people out to fight with broomsticks. That is the problem with this Government. It did that in 1 940 and it is doing that now. I refer again to the Chief of Defence Force Staff when he was speaking about some of our equipment capacities. I hope that some honourable members opposite will listen to this quote.

I want to speak also about one or two other matters in the few moments that I have left. Since the last election especially, the Government has been making a lot of noise about cutbacks in the public sector. It seems to be a supplement to the Bible that if your cut back the public sector you ultimately improve the lifestyle of those people who profit from it. I make that qualification because the Government says that everyone profits. But the unemployed just do not profit. We have also had claims made in Budget Speeches and on other occasions about the manner in which the Government has been able to reduce the deficit. I think we ought to look seriously at what the Government has done. Firstly, when it was in Op position it made the claim, fairly regularly, that an increased deficit-increased expenditures without increased revenue-was dangerous to the economy. It voted in the Senate to prevent the levy which it ultimately placed on the national health

Mr Dawkins Sainsbury wouldn't listen to anything.

scheme Medibank. It voted in the Senate to pre vent that levy being collected. It would have added to the Consolidated Revenue bill the sum

Mr SCHOLES-Well, the honourable member may one day; otherwise he will not get many questions asked. The Chief of Defence Force Staff stated:

of $800m. That was totally and absolutely an economically irresponsible act perpetrated for one reason only-for politics. It was a case of damn the national economy; damn the conse quences. Politics were all that was important.

Where are our fine modern anti-tank weapons? We have the Carl Gustav and that is about it. Where are our wonderful

We also had a situation in which Telecom

surface-top-air missiles? We have Rapier, which is a low level, Australia borrowings were transferred out of the

surface-to-air Army missile. We have the hand-held Redeye, which is almost completely finished. It has another couple of years to run. So we are lacking air support for the Army in its close air support role. We have no long range surface-te-air missiles at all. The Air Force used to have one at Darwin and

Budget and replaced by private borrowings. That was then said to represent a reduction in public expenditure or in the deficits on the expenditure side of the Budget. It was a book-keeping entry.

we gave that to the Singapore Government. So there are many Telecom still borrows its money and competes in

areas in which we have notgotthings.

the money market. It just pays a slightly higher

That is the understatement of the year. The Prime rate of interest than it would have paid.

Minister is worried about backfire bombers and Recently we have witnessed a campaign

we have no misiles, no aircraft and no defence ca designed to cut down Telecom's business activi

pacity in any shape or form which can deal with ties, not because Telecom is losing money, not be

any form of bomber at all. Ijust add that this was cause it is costing the Australian community

included as one of the items which was required in money but because it is taking profits away from

the five year defence program set down in 1 976. I substantially overseas-owned companies which

In answer to a question asked last year by myself have built up industries in Australia and would

the Minister indicated that r-rovision of surface like to get control of the profitable operations of

to-air missiles for the Army, which the Chief of Telecom to eliminate their competition, against

Defence Force Staff says will be non-existent in which in a supposedly free enterprise system they

two years, is no longer necessary. The missiles have found that they cannot compete. What will

have been dropped from the program. Those happen when they get control of those sections of

honourable members opposite who stand up in Telecom and it is cut back to handling the loss

1 306 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

sections of the industry? Firstly, the system will deteriorate. [f we look around the world at countries which have free enterprise run public utili ties such as telephone services we find very few that are efficient. I invite honourable members to try to make a telephone call in France and see how they go. [f they want a good telephone call, they should book three days in advance.
More importantly, many areas in Australia are subsidised in respect of telephone services. I do not believe that that is unreasonable because people who live in a vast continent long distances ftom the capital cities are entitled to some relief in this respect. I have spoken on this matter dur ing the whole of my time in the Parliament. The cumulative cost of such subsidies is of the order of $200m a year. The cost of modernising telephone services and maintaining them at the high stan dard which we in Australia have come to expect, and complain about if we do not receive, is even higher. The standard of our telephone and other communication services is extraordinarily high. But the Government now proposes taking away the profitable sections of Telecom and giving them to its friends, probably those who subscribe to its election campaign funds. But who is to pay the $200m to maintain the existing services to non-metropolitan Australia? It will not be paid by the people who draw the earnings from the profitable sections. Who is to meet the cost of the inefficiency and for the maintenance of a modern system of telephones, when the profits from industries built up to support the telephone services and other forms of communication have been handed over, probably to the foreign friends of the Government who have priority in almost every area of activity in this country? The tax payers of Australia will have to meet the cost. They will pay a direct supplement to the profits of the companies to which the Government hands over the profitable operations of Telecom.
If the experience with Commonwealth Oil Refineries and Amalgamated Wireless ( Aus tralasia) Ltd many years ago, and what is now proposed for Trans-Australia Airlines, are any guide, those profits will be substantial and the losses to the Australian community will be great. The Government will sell out its interests at sub stantially below their effective and real value. The most recent example of the Government selling out Australia's interests was provided by the sale of the Ranger uranium deposits. A Labor government would not have embarked on such an under taking at all. Nevertheless, the Government owned a substantial share of what the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) keeps

telling us is one of the most highly profitable resources areas in Australia. But the Australian taxpayer will not share in that profitability; rather, it is to be shared by a few selected friends of the Government. The attack on Telecom is designed to transfer assets and funds away from the taxpayers of Australia and ultimately out of the taxpayers' pocket to friends of the Government and, I am afraid, friends who are financial sup porters of the Government parties.
Mr DRUMMOND (Forrest) (9.25)-Mr Deputy Speaker, first I would like, thrpugh you, to convey my congratulations to Mr Speaker on his re-election. I believe that it is customary to do so at the beginning of a new parliamentary session, although this Parliament has been in session now for some time. Perhaps Mr Speaker is not having as much success with his independent Speaker proposals as he would wish, possible because we all like him so much in this place.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)-l will convey the honourable member's sympathies to Mr Speaker.
Mr DRUMMOND-Not my sympathies; my congratulations, sir. It is quite some time now since we experienced the heat of the election cam paign. It is well and truly behind us, but now is the time to look objectively at the issues that confronted the Australian voters at that time what concerned them and will concern them over the next three years.
This is the fifth time that I have had the privi lege to represent the Division of Forrest, and that after the most radical alteration to its boundaries in 30 years. In area, it is now almost equivalent to the South-West State electorates and includes a small part of the Upper Great Southern State electorate. It is far more urbanised than the old Forrest electorate. The city of Bunbury is a major regional centre and Forrest includes the greater part of the State's bauxite mining industry and timber industry as well as the coal industry. It is gratifying to know that not only have the electors in the farming areas given their support to the Liberal Party; so too have those in the timber industry areas and those in the Mandurah-Pinjarra region where so many employees engaged in the bauxite industry live.
Clearly, there is a grass roots conviction in non metropolitan, wealth-producing areas that Lib eral policies and basic philosophies will best bring about the development that alone creates a higher standard of living. I am more convinced than ever that the greatest continuing issue confronting both the Government and the Parliament over

Governor-General's Speech

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 307

the next three years is the need to cut personal in to taxation. If workers go on strike for a couple of

come tax and to cut Government spending to weeks, they will not be earning but at the year's

make this possible. This Government, over five end their big tax bill will be less. So, tax reduction

years, has shown a real commitment to tax re could be a powerful incentive for industrial san

duction and reform. Some 90 per cent of Aus ity. Also, it would be a disincentive for these wage

tralians pay tax at no more than the standard rate. earners to support extravagant wage claims,

Nobody can deny that he or she is not better off whether in the form of more cash or shorter

than would have been the case under the 1975 tax hours.

scales. Yet the people of Australia feel that we have not gone nearly far enough. This is the mess age that they have given, not just to the Fraser Government but also to this, the Thirty-second Parliament.

It should be noted that the Australian public generally hold a hostile attitude towards strikes and strikers. Yet, when the Queensland miners went on strike against the threat of paying extra tax on their housing, the Morgan Gallup poll

Taxation is a matter for grievance at many levels of our community. Those on higher in comes, who so often are the wealth creators of Australia, feel that our tax laws destroy intitia tive. I invite honourable members to speak to ac countants and to owners of small and medium sized businesses. The message which comes back is that our taxation system kills incentive, that it is not possible to amass capitalother than real estate and that this ensures that many - small business enterprises stay small. Too many enterprising

showed that they had substantial public approval for their stand. This was simply because they were not on strike against their employers for yet higher wages or shorter hours; they were on strike against the tax man. As such, they commanded respect. The Government had my sympathy in that dispute; it was not a simple problem. But I reiterate that lower personal income tax, free from any imposts on such necessities as company subsidised housing in remote areas, is a sure step to a healthy resources industry.

Australians are looking over their shoulders at the tax man, wondering whether it is really worth the trouble to expand their businesses. Some of those

We come then to a far larger group who feel that they are paying too much tax-namely, the average wage earner, particularly if he has a non

who fal l foul of the Taxation Office are cynical working wife and children. The best and surest tax avoiders who deserve what they get, but way that the Federal Government can make life others may have found that they had to try to easier for these families is by taking less money

minimise their tax to stay in business. Let us not forget that a major group of tax avoiders is made up of the traditional little battlers, small trades men in business for themselves operating on a cash-down basis. Thus, the whole national debate on tax avoidance focuses on a symptom, not the real problem. It is not that this Government has been idle or unresponsive. In the 1 979 Budget it

out of their pay packets. What is more, they know that. They appreciate that there are no simple answers to job creation and that there is no alternative to paying more for petrol; but they do expect us to lower personal tax. Again, it is quite untrue to say we have neglected these people. If we pursued big spending, big deficit fiscal policies, we would soon unleash an inflation that

increased the retention allowance for private companies to 70 per cent so that the accumulation of capital would be assisted. But more remains to be done.

would drastically reduce their living standards. This year the Government increased the spouse rebate to give extra relief to the single income family. This was just one step. We must look

Then there is the question of the wage earner in the resource industries, the person who earns a large salary but perhaps living where he would not otherwise choose to live. Many such people feel that they are not getting a fair deal from a taxation system that does not take into account

again at proposals for income splitting, on the lines that the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) and the honourable member for Perth (Mr McLean) have suggested. We should proceed on the basis that the greatest priority is to lower tax, not provide more services.

their necessarily high living costs. If they were not It is of course one thing to talk about cutting

earning at a level sufficient to permit substantial taxes and another to point to the areas of spend

savings within a few years, they would not be ing that can be reduced. We have to look first at

there at all. So we have to ensure that these those areas that have grown so much in the last

workers in our wealth producing industries are decade-social security, health and education.

not in any way disadvantaged by the taxation sys Ten years ago they amounted to 28 per cent of

tem in the context of attempts to achieve tax total outlays; now the figure is 46 per cent. Our

equity. Indeed, much of the industrial unrest that guiding principle in the field of social security has

afflicts the resource industries can be attributed to be allocation on the basis of need, and not on a

1 308 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

universal basis. This will not be easy to achieve, as whether they are fulfilling their function and, if

a great many middle income earners are sincerely not, whether the tax dollar can be saved. I do not

convinced that they need certain benefits, particu decry spending on culture and recreation, but I do

larly in the field of age pensions. For these people not feel justified in squeezing the taxpayer in the

there has to be the basic trade-off of more dispos funding of what may be called non-essentials. The

able income against fewer benefits. If people are Multicultural Broadcasting Service had an allo

given more incentive to invest, through a refor cation of $21m, up $ 1 4m from 1979-80. The

med tax structure, they will not be so dependent National Gallery budget went up $6.6m to $23m.

on government assistance when they retire. I be Can we afford this? Certainly these areas have a

lieve the family allowance should be directed far lower priority than reducing the tax burden on

towards the area of greatest need, by the tax the Australian family. The same applies to our

mechanism or through indexation. It accounts for plans to spend more on sport. Voluntary activites

nearly a billion dollars. As I have said, the best must find their own funds.

way of helping the family is to lower the bread

winner's tax burden.

In the few minutes remaining to me I wish to

It is encouraging to see stirrings of changes in the health field. Duplication of expensive equip ment and overstaffing in the hospital area con sumed $ 1 .7 billion of the last Budget in the total hospitals are,a. We must grasp the nettle and put an end to the injustice whereby the middle income and high income earners, uninsured, get free hospital treatment. Free medical care should be directed at the poor alone. Otherwise, it is a cor ruption of our society. In 1 970-71 , our universities received $ 1 08m; today the figure is $806m. Is the taxpayer getting full value? Is money going to 'mickey mouse' departments and 'soft option' studies, as well as to the teaching of essential tech nical and professional skills? Would the rein troduction of university fees be such an evil if at the same time the Government made scholarships available to academicallygifted students from low income families? Those who have no real aptitude for our expensive system of higher education will have to pay for what is a privilege and not a right. I often think of a worker who lives perhaps in Wollongong and pays $5,000 in tax a year. Prob ably his children will follow in his footsteps and will have nowhere near the opportunity to go on to higher education as would the child of a highly paid lawyer. His $5,000 tax could be seen as a di rect subsidy for the child of a wealthy family to participate in an academic career.

say a few words about industrial relations. Certainly I do not claim to be an expert. Perhaps my comments might be interpreted as expressing a broad feeling that I get from most people in my electorate and with whom I come in contact. The current state of industrial relations is a disap pointment to all of us. Ninety-five per cent of all Australians watch with horror as we rip ourselves apart in industrial conflict. The cost to the nation is immense and the end result could well be anar chy. The other 5 per cent are bent on destroying our social order. My greatest disappointment in the 8 years that I have been a member of this Parliament is to witness a steady deterioration of the situation and suffer the frustration of knowing that this Parliament is relatively powerless. How helpless one feels when people say: 'Why don't you do something about the unions', or 'This can not go on; there must be a way to stop it? ' It would appear that no end of patching up of industrial legislation in this Parliament or State parlia ments has any effect. I am indebted to the honour able member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) who is newly elected to this House. During his maiden speech, he laid bare the difficulties. He is a lawyer who has had a great deal of experience in the industrial field, mainly representing trade unions and trade union officials. If anyone wishes to understand why we are in this unholy mess today, I recommend that they read the speech of

Apart from these areas of big spending, we the honourable member for North Sydney.

must look critically at other items and ask

whether the taxpayers are getting value for Very briefly, the system we have inherited,

money. A good hard look must be taken at patched up along the way, with its divisions be

Government instrumentalities. The Prices Jus tween State and Federal responsibility simply

tification Tribunal costs us $2m. Is it worth this, cannot work and is not working. The honourable

when it merely registers price increases? Is the In member for North Sydney clearly states why it is

dustrial Relations Bureau giving us a fair return not working. I do not wish to canvass his remarks

for the $4.6m allocated to it in the last Budget? I at this time; his speech is in Hansard for anyone

mention these as examples of bodies that have who wishes to read it. I am sure that those in this

attracted ideological hostility from different ends land who have the responsibility of participating

of the political spectrum. They should now be in industrial relations, whether they be employers,

looked at in a strictly practical light to determine employees or governments realise we are on the

Governor-General's Speech

2 April 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 309

short road to chaos. Something must be done. In dustrial law, both State and Federal, is so complex that .a few highly paid lawyers, a handful of bu reaucrats, a few politicians and a few union officials are the only people who understand the law. I believe that over a period the whole system should be scrapped and replaced. The law should be clear, flexible and as simple as possible.
Systems in other countries should be examined. The honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey ) , in his brilliant maiden speech, suggested that the Swedish system had a lot to offer. He also advocated a complete change to our system. But how do we get to a position of change? Change is something that happens in this country at the slowest rate. For greater intellects than I have grappled with the problem and failed. Perhaps there should be a conference of people involved or interested in a complete change to the system; people of good will who genuinely wish to see im provements. For them to some up with recommendations and for the Government to act upon these recommendations there would have to be constitutional change. So be it. I know that that path is a rocky one but I am convinced that a more rational approach, even a revolutionary change, to dealing with industrial relations would be welcomed by the people of Australia. Therefore, I would flag constitutional change; it may not be very difficult to achieve.
We are fortunate at this time to have a man of great experience and wisdom in politics as the Minister for Industrial Relations. I refer to Mr Andrew Peacock. He has the opportunity, what ever his future success may be, to be remembered as a great Australian if he can guide this nation to a sane, rational, simple system of industrial relations. We are also fortunate to have in this House a man of great experience in industry relations as shadow Minister for Industrial Relations. I refer to Mr Bob Hawke. I am sure that he will approach this problem in a bipartisan manner and that with his assistance over the next few years, we will see industrial harmony within Australia. Whatever his future success may be, he also will be remembered as a great Australian by his participation in this endeavour.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (9.43)-It is 25 years since I became a member of this Parliament and I must say that I have never seen the place so dull and uninspiring as it is now. The Parliament is degenerating in almost every respect. It is ceasing to count compared with the way it used to count in bygone years. An atmosphere of rigor

mortis prevails. This place is like a mausoleum. Months have gone by since the Parliament was opened by His Excellency the Governor-General, yet we are still wallowing away in this unobjective debate about the Address-in-Reply to the Governor-General's Speech. It gives us an opportunity to wax eloquent about favourite parochial parish pump matters, but the Parliament should be directing its attention to more worthwhile, idealistic and important things in respect of the well-being of this nation. I want to lodge a protest. I think that we are talking on and on about the Address-in-Reply because the Governor-General is out of the country or something like that. But it is not just this debate that I am complaining about.
We came here several weeks ago obsessed with the understanding that the Government was about to transform the incidence of taxation in Australia. The Press was animated; the atmosphere was electric. Great changes were to be made. Of course, the whole thing turned out to be a damp squib. In other words, the Government had not worked out where it was going. [t still knows and the whole community still knows that there will be a shortfall in revenue in the not too distant future-several years from now-because revenue from the oil parity pricing policy will drop by about $3,500m. We will have to get that revenue from somewhere. We were to get it from retail turnover taxes and all sorts of changes in the taxation system, but we still do not know where we are going in that respect. This whole place has become a farce. Many issues have been talked about tonight. Regrettably there is no legislation of any consequence before us. There is nothing which will transform the state of the nation, nothing that will redress the injustices being ex perienced by masses of people in this community. Here we have a n aimless, unobjective , unanimated government. I f I were sitting on the other side of the chamber I would be utterly ashamed.
The kind of thing that we should talk about to night, I suppose, is the unbridled sellout of Australia's natural resources at bargain basement prices to the cheapest bidder. I do not want to de velop that subject, but there is enormous scope for that. We have lost our national pride. People can drop in from any part of the world and scoop up the resources that we have and this Government is prepared to let them do it. No longer is there the national sense of decency that was typified by the late Rex Connor, who wanted to make us proud

1 3 1 0 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 198 1

Governor-General's Speech

and to retrieve our national dignity. This after noon we touched on the issue of the sellout of our national airline, Trans-Australia Airlines, and we might touch on it tonight. It is a disgrace that we are fattening it up for the kill like a Christmas tur key, turning it into a company so that the assets of the people of Australia can be sold off. We are causing people to believe that because it will be run by some exploitative entrepreneur it will be run better and more beneficially for the Australian people. That is nonsense and crap. We ought to be indignant about the fact that the sale of TAA is even proposed to a self-respecting constituency.
I suppose we ought to be talking about the private sector's exploitation of our resources. Things are just getting stupidly out of perspective in that respect. Money is being poured into the country and we will have a disjointed economy as a result. Already the chickens are coming home to roost in that regard. We cannot have a laissez-faire approach to these things without consequences ac cruing. The other day 1 noted that because coal mining development has occurred in such large measure at Gladstone the authorities there are putting a demand on this Government for an extra $ 1 20m for infrastructure. Soon an extra 1 7,000 houses will be required for an aluminium w0rks at Newcastle.

talk in favour of the union attitude. In 198 1 I hear

precisely the same arguments that were put up

about the 40-hour working week. I was told then

that the whole country was we would never be able to

going hold

otourcohlelaapdsse' haingdh

among the nations of the world-how stupid. I re

member that at that time. I used to quote Henry

Ford. He used to say: 'Look, I have introduced the

40-hour week in my factories and productivity has

risen as a result. [ have had sensible consultation

with my workers and they are responding'. That

was the dialogue that took place at that time.

One cannot be silly and one ought not to regard other people as silly. We all know that it could be deleterious if we pressed a button and had a 35-hour working week tomorrow. But similarly we know that there is some sense in reducing the working week in some industries from 40 hours to 39 hours and may be over a five year period reduc ing the working week by 5 hours. We know that already some industries in which the proceeds of profits are unprecedently high can afford the introduction of the 35-hour working week right now. The Government and the trade union movement ought not be so stupidly dogmatic. i think the trade union movement is far more tolerant and reasonable in the situation than this absurd apology for a government appears to be.

Mr Ruddock-What about that word 'immedi ate' in its policy?

How many reservoirs, sewage treatment works, schools, roads and bridges will be required? No one has even stopped to calculate it properly. This Government does not even get around to men tioning the topic, let alone grappling with the $30,000m blow-out of resource development that is contemplated. None of us want to be negative about these things. Obviously there will be some beneficial fallout. Obviously the public sector will be stimulated and so on. We are saying that there will be great casualties. People will be shifted into communities where there will be no schools or child minding centres and none of the other facilities which should be considered the right of Australians.
There is also the failure of the Government to take a conciliatory attitude to reduced working hours. When I was a very young man I served as a union organiser. I am talking about the immediate post-war period. Honourable members are not asking, 'Which war', are they? They would not be indecent enough to say that. In about 1 946, as a union organiser, I was sent out to factories in relation to the 40-hour working week campaign to

Mr LES JOHNSONi am also concerned about the Government's indifference to welfare benefits. The honourable member who interjects does not have a lot of interest in these things. I think he would profess outside this place to be concerned about welfare benefits. But i have never heard him complain yet about the decline in value of the family allowance for example. The family allowance has not been upgraded for some five or six years. It has not been increased since 1 975.
Mr Ruddock-Why didn't you listen to what 1 said about unemployment?
Mr LES JOHNSON-If the honourable member said anything about it I must acknowl edge that I did not hear it. If he said anything about it, it appears that the Government has not heard it. The honourable member will acknowl edge that the value of family benefits and allow ances has been dissipated enormously over the years. I will not use figures. However, if one has a faJ:nily with three, four or five kids one is going backwards to such an incredible extent that it is real Ned Kellyism. I think the Government would be a bit embarrassed about that.

Governor-General's Speech

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 3 1 1

I have heard very little from honourable members opposite about the problems of housing or about the increasing difficulty that young people especially are experiencing in this area. I must not be tempted to get involved in that subject. I have been sickened by the great debate about the disallowance of the Public Service Arbi trator's decisions in respect of the redeployment and retirement benefits legislation. I was absol utely sickened to see the way in which this Government has recklessly abandoned the prin ciples of arbitration which it requires all other authorities to uphold and to which it constantly advocates the trade movement adhere.
I have outlined some of the situations that pre vail in the Parliament today. As I said, I am not going to talk about any of those things. However, I am going to make some deference to and ack nowledgement of a very important matter-the International Year of Disabled Persons. I think every honourable member ought to make some contribution to this issue this year. Disabled people are seeking equal rights and the assistance required for them to become integrated into the community. At present they claim they are treated as second class citizens and that the services that are available to them are fragmented, paternalistic and old fashioned. There is at times a general hostility or a denigrating attitude against the disabled. The Bulletin poll of middle man agers of 30 community subgroups shows that 34 per cent prefer not to socialise with blind people, 4 1 per cent prefer not to socialise with paraplegics and 59 per cent prefer not to socialise with spas tics. As the programmers of the poll state:

I know that some experiments have been carried out in which people have simulated the di lemma of the disabled for so many hours. One can imagine the problem of trying to press the button of a lift when one cannot reach it. Blind people cannot tell what floor a lift stops at. What an enormous and incredible dilemma to be in. The cost of converting old buildings to cater for the needs of the disabled is very great. Imagine trying to convert this building to cater for the needs of the disabled. That would be a great task indeed. But relatively speaking, the cost of providing fa cilities for the disabled in new buildings is negli gible. The lack of co-ordination in the planning process has resulted even in the International Year of Disabled Persons in the erection of private and public buildings without the most rudi mentary facilities for the disabled.
There has been a lot of discontent already. I do not want to politicise the situation. But I notice that Mr Storer, the Chairman of the Australian Capital Territory Planning and Co-ordination Committee for the International Year of Disabled Persons, resigned in protest over the lack of government funding. An article in the Australian of 3 March 1981 stated:
Mr Storer said in Canbera yesterday that matters had been made worse by a $30,000 fund cut last December to the Canberra branch of the Australian Council of Social Services.
The article also states:
The New South Wales committee appears to have come out best in funding for the International Year with the State Government allocating $750,000 in addition to normal fund ing for disabled projects.

It augurs ill for the future if such strategicallyplacedgroups as middle managers with their potential to become top man agers are found to be hanging on to counter-productive values and attitudes.
There is much to be done to moderate such attitudes and to encourage more realistic attitudes in the community. Our task is to enable the disabled to have access to the same dimensions of life as those who do not suffer disabilities. There are great problems about physical access. The purpose or objective of planning policy should be to create a system of access which would allow people to get into, move around and use the facilities of buildings unaided. The lack of co ordination of planning has led to some idiotic situ ations and solutions such as the provision of toilets for the disabled within a building but no provision for access to the building. Lifts in build ings have buttons out of reach of people in wheelchairs.

Sufficient to say-I have many more quotes but I will not have time to use them-that there is a great concern about funding in the States gener ally and certainly in the Australian Capital Terri tory. I notice that the National Advisory Council for the Handicapped has declared the number of existing rehabilitation programs as totally inad equate. The full number of physically handi capped people in Australia is not known. I take this opportunity to seek leave to incorporate in Hansard two tables which have been provided by the Parliamentary Library. They relate to the 1 977-78 Australian health survey of chronic con ditions and they provide a great deal of informa tion about the incidence of disabilities under a number of headings. I seek leave to have table 1 and table 2 incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted. The tables read as follows-

1 3 1 2 REPRESENTA TIVES 2 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

Table 1 TOTAL NUMBERS OF CHRONIC CONDITIONS REPORTED: TYPE OF CONDITION BY AGE AND SEX
(000)

Type ofconditions illness or permanent disability

Number of chronic conditions reported by persons aged

Under 1 5

16-44

45-64 75 or more

All ages Males

Females

.' )
Persons

Mental disorders

Neuroses . . . . . . . .

Alcoholism

.....

Behaviour disorders ofchildhood

Mental retardation

Other mental disorders

Diseases of the nervous system and
sense organs . . . . . .
Epilepsy . . . . . . . . . . Blindness (includes one eye) Deaf mutism and other deafness Other diseases of the nervous system
and sense organs . . . . . .

Diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue
Arthritis

Congenital anomalies

101.0 16.5 * 41.3 *8.7 34.5
1 38.8 14.0 *6.8 34.7 1 1.8
14.1 *
47.8

1 3 1 .0 60.8 16.6 14.6 40.0
627.5 20.9 23.9 1 10.0 23.0
532.0 1 94.3 30.9

80.4 43.4 *5.9 *5.4 25.7
444.0 12.1
21.10 167.0
18.5
831.7 532.4
10.8

18.1 *8.5 *2.7
* *6.7
348.2 *6.4 37.2 151.7 12.2
488.7 380.7
5.3

172.3 50.6 22.9 25. 3 20.0 53.6
737.7 30.6 39.4
290.6 4 1 .9
794.2 402.2
43.4

1 58 . 1 77.6 *2.2 16.1 9.0 53.4
820.9 22.8 49.4 172.7 23.7
1 ,072.4 705.2 51.4

330.5 128.2 25. 1 41.3 28.9 106.9
1 ,558.6 53.4 88.8
463.3 65.5
1,866.5 1,107.4
94.8

* Estimate not reliable Table 2
POPULATION BY EFFECTS OF HANDICAPS

Males Females Persons

Handicapped inEducation Getting, holdingjob Getting about alone Doing housework Sport, recreation Acts of daily living Other ways
Handicapped inOneway only Two ways Three ormore ways Total handicapped
Not handicapped Ndt stated
Total population

49,338 1 05,924 57,472 35,355 1 17,223 67,093 160,878
231 ,3 1 7 47,038 6 1 ,8 3 1 340,1 86
6,126,001 308,761
6,774,948

37, 1 1 8 65,840
92,679 120,537 94, 1 2 1
86,494 124, 3 1 8

86,456 171,764
150, 1 5 1 1 55,892 21 1,344
153,587 285,196

1 79,988 44,31 2 8 1,214 305,5 1 4
6,170,463 297,524
6,773,501

4 1 1 ,305 9 1 ,350 1 43,045
645,701
1 2,296,463 606,285
1 3,548,448

( 10)
Mr LES JOHNSON-I thank the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) and I thank the House. At least 9.9 per cent of the population over two years of age suffer from a chronic condition that limits their activities in some way. The 1 976 cen sus found that there were 645,520 people handi capped in one, two or three ways. The tables that I have incorporated in Hansard give a great deal of information in that respect. Of those handi capped people, 53,409 were children under 1 4 years. The census figures probably understate the actual number of handicapped people because of the definition difficulties and the reluctance of

(9)
some parents to state in a public document that their children are disabled. One can understand that reluctance.
By comparison, the Repatriation Commission pays repatriation pensions to 1 78,47 1 disabled war veterans. Let us compare that figure with the figure that I have mentioned of some 645,520 dis abled people. Since 1 973-74 the number of recipi ents of this pension has dropped at a rate of 4,000 a year. I Want to make the point that there seems to be a good case for a special Ministry to be established and to be responsible for disabled people. Such a Ministry would be dealing with a lot more people than the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) would ever deal with. Such a Ministry would deal with many more people than, say, the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Senator Peter Baume) would ever deal with. I am not advocating that we should dispose of either of those important ministries, but it is ap parent that at the moment there are great unresol ved problems which need a lot of attention.
Mr Humphreys-They need a great deal more assistance.
Mr LES JOHNSON-They need a great deal more assistance than they have had to date. If we accept the international average of people who are disabled in some way-1 2 per cent in any given nationthis means that Australia has 1 .6 million disabled people in its population. This is backed up by the startling results of a recent government survey showing that 45 per cent of

Governor-General's Speech

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 3 1 3

Australians suffer from some chronic health con dition. [ believe that that in itself justifies the es tablishment of a Ministry. I believe that we need a secreTariat. We need an authority that is well informed, which will assist the States and all the agencies and instrumentalities, co-ordinate their work and bring them together.
As the clock is against me, I will conclude my remarks by saying that I have conducted surveys in my own region. I am able to provide to this Government a great range of suggestions which could and should be implemented in this Inerna tional Year of Disabled Persons, to assist people to live a full life and to alleviate a great deal of suffering, distress and anxiety, especially the enOf mous anxiety which is encountered by any parent who has the misforture and the responsibility of caring for a disadvantaged or handicapped child.
Mr D ONALD CAMERON ( Fadden) ( 1 0.5)-1 should like to commend the previous speaker in the debate, the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson) fOf taking the opportunity provided by this debate to raise the plight of the disabled. I do not agree with everything that the United Nations does. I often wonder whether the United Nations ever achieves many of those things for which it was originally established. However, some of these special years do have the effect of drawing to the attention of the population the plight of certain groups in our community. The plight of the disabled comes more closely to home, as far as I am concerned, than I am prepared to talk about in this place. It is only when one finds that suddenly within one's home or family there is somebody who is not as fortu nate as people regarded as normal that one recognises that those who are disabled have particular problems, and, even more significantly at times, that those who care for the disabled are burdened with extra responsibilities that most people would not even recognise exist.
This is the Address-in-Reply debate to the speech by the Governor-General in opening the Thirty-second Parliament. As the previous speaker said, the Governor-General's Speech was delivered on 25 November 1 980, some four months ago. That Speech was delivered following the general election held on 1 8 October 1 980, which is even further back. Nevertheless, on the day that the Governor-General's Speech was delivered in another place where all members assembled, Australia was presented with a blue print of what the Government proposes to do in the next three years. That blueprint, in conjunc tion with the policy speech delivered by the then Prime Minister who, as the result of the election continued as the Prime Minister, can safely be

regarded by Australians as an indication of what will happen in this country. Of course, not every thing will be achieved, because in three years changes can arise which make it impossible to achieve that which is planned.
Before I move on to a more general area, I want to refer briefly to my electorate, Fadden, which runs from the southern outskirts of Brisbane to the New South Wales border and out to the Great Dividing Range. In terms of growth, the Fadden electorate is growing as fast as any electorate in Australia. The population of my electorate just grows and grows. The growth is mainly due to young families setting up home. Whether they come from other parts of Queensland or from the southern States matters little. Those people are providing the Australia oftomorrow.
One aspect worth noting is that there are more children in my electorate than in any other electorate in Australia. When an electorate has great numbers of children and young people, the de mands on educational institutions and facilities are great. I want to make particular reference to these demands, and make a plea to the Federal Government to recognise that it is all happening in the States of Western Australia and Queensland. There must be a redirection of some of the funds to those States where the growth is actually taking place. It is a sad fact of life that the population-I refer specifically to the population of children in the schools-is diminishing in the other four States. It is only in Queensland and Western Australia that an actual growth factor exists. For this reason alone, we require a redirec tion of the available finance. I speak also of the plight of secondary school children. In my elector ate this year a new high school opened. In my electorate last year a new high school opened. This seems to be a regular pattern. It is true to say that we are all born equal but we are not born equally gifted.
Mr Armitage-- What a lot of bullshit! Mr DONALD CAMERON-That is lovely language coming from the honourable member for Chiftey. When one compares him with the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) , the truth of my statement is obvious.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! I am quite sure that the honourable member offending did not imagine that his remark would be heard. It has been heard and it is now in the record. I ask him to withdraw.
Mr Armitage-r withdraw. Mr DONALD CAMERON-Mr Deputy Speaker, I am quite happy to have that outburst

1 3 14 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Governor-General's Speech

deleted from Hansard for the sake of the reason able reputation of the honourable member for Chifley. It might teach him to be a little more careful in this place and not to make this sort of statement. I was speaking about the fact that we are all born equal but not necessarily equally gifted. I talk in terms of opportunities which are available to those young students in secondary schools when they leave those schools next year or in the next few years. We live in a society which requires more and more skills, and for those who have been trained in skills which are not in de mand, to find work.
In a world in which inflation is rife-it is appro priate to point out that, at this stage, compared with most countries Australia can hold its head high in terms of its performance in respect of inflation-the cost of everything becomes dearer and dearer. Australia is highly industrialised and the cost of labour is a big factor. One thing to which we all aspire regardless on which side of this Parliament we sit is full employment with employment opportunities for all. In recent years we have seen the cost of labour spiralling and many established and long term businesses go to the wall. These days the only way for industry to sur vive is for it to change with the times. As a result of these labour costs we have seen many businesses resort to the introduction of machinery to replace the worker. More often than not, the machines that replace the worker require oper ators. Often that work in itself requires skill. What I am trying to say--
Mr Armitage-You are not making a good job of it.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-The last time the honourable member interjected we almost had to have his remark deleted from Hansard. l ask him just to sit down and to learn something. Because machines are taking the place of workers in this era of technology does not mean that job oppor tunities disappear. It means that a new emphasis is created. There is a new need for the teaching skills. There is no escaping the fact that it becomes more difficult for the totally unskilled to obtain employment. For this reason this Government, which has been in power for the last 5f years, has placed so much emphasis on retraining people and also training people to ensure that they play a use ful role in the work force. Over the last five years, half a million Australians have been trained. On 25 November last year, the Governor-General told us that, during this current year, a quarter of a million Australians will receive assistance of some kind in their preparation for entry or return to the work force.

I take this opportunity to refer also to a concept which is called the 35-hour week. We cannot dispute the fact-neither can we escape from. it that the world is very different today when com pared with the time that certain other changes took place. Inflation has been a part of the West ern world for almost a decade. People look back on the good old days when Sir Billy McMahon was Prime Minister, when inflation was at a level of 3 per cent or 4 per cent. They remember also the time when the Labor Party was in government and the level of inflation rose as high as 1 6 per cent, 1 7 per cent or 1 8 per cent. People have not forgotten those days, as much as honourable members opposite would like to wipe them off the slate. It is a fact of life that inflation is an unfortu nate part of the Western world. That in itself has caused a spiralling in the cost of labour and has contributed directly to the unemployment which exists right across the world today. I honestly believe with all my heart that when Opposition members stand up in this place and fight every inch of the way to lessen the working contribution by the average Australian, they are not doing any Australian a good turn. A 40-hour working week is not an unreasonable contribution but the Australian Labor Party does not understand that, when the working week is reduced to 35 hours, it has the effect of increasing costs of employment by anything up to an additional 2 1 per cent or 22 per cent.
I return now to what I had to say when I com menced my speech. My electorate is about the fas test growing electorate in Australia. Wherever one drives in' the electorate of Fadden one hears the sound of hammers being used in the construc tion of new homes. Young people are attempting to buy new homes. There is no escaping the fact that if we were to increase the cost of labour home building is very labour intensive-by any thing up to 20 per cent that great dream of owning one's own home which has existed since the 1 940s in this country and has been attainable by the average Australian will disappear further into the background. The Labor Party's proposal to reduce working hours to 35 hours a week will mean an imposition of a further 20 per cent on the cost of home construction.
It is obvious that honourable members opposite have not given this matter any thought. This afternoon we heard Dr Theophanous-or what ever his funny name is-talk about how he worked in the railways, how he did this and that and how he never got up. He got up in this place and now has an equal opportunity to shape the destihy of this nation from that side of the House. I hope he stays there forever because of some of

Governor-General's Speech

2 April 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 3 1 5

the funny frangled ideas which he had brought to this place--
l\1r Milton-We wouldn't expect you to under stand'them.
Mr Bourchier-Another socialist. Mr DONALD CAMERON-He is not necess arily a socialist; I do not know him well enough. I know that I come also from a humble background and that the contribution that I made would determine my future. I recognise and understand also that a working man with two or three chil dren with debts over his head may never see the end of the tunnel. His life may well be a struggle to the end. When we compare the golden oppor tunities which exist in this country with those which exist in many other countries, when people say Australia is a lucky country it is not a joke. Australia is so far ahead of most other countries that we would be foolish to allow the destruction of that which gives the many Australians de scribed by the honourable member for Hughes an opportunity to succeed. In the few moments still available to me I want to make reference to an aspect which is creeping into this nation and which causes me great con cern. Mr Deputy Speaker, as you also come from Queensland, you would know of the growth that we are experiencing in our great State. I read recently that the Victorian Development Corporation strongly criticised the rivalry between the States in their attempts to attract overseas investment. That Corporation attacked Western Australia, Queensland and New South Wales. It has been suggested that consideration is being given to taking giant slices off the allocation of Federal funds to Western Australia and Queensland. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) , who is sitting at the table, is shaking his head in a way which indicates that that is not so. Mr Howard-l am shocked at the allegation. Mr DONALD CAMERON-He is shocked at the allegation. I hope it is new to him and I hope that he does not take it to heart and do something about it. I know there are a lot of distinguished Victorians in this place, including the Prime Min ister. Victoria might be going through a downturn, but in years gone the smaller States had to pay far more for products manufactured in this country and protected by tariffs just to give the southern people job opportunities. We have never argued against that. We believe that job opportunities should be made available to everyone in Australia. Just because we are o n the move and the other States are slipping back, do not take a knife to us because Queensland and Western Australia are the States where the golden egg is

presently being laid. I can assure honourable members that the growth in the population of the young people there will enable us to provide for the aged pensioners of the other States in the years ahead. Do not kill the goose that is laying the golden egg; rather, wish those two States the best of luck in the future. We will happily help those people in their retirement after they have trans ferred all their assets to places in the sunshine State.
Debate (on motion by Mr Fry) adjourned.
AIRLINES EQUIPMENT (LOAN GUARANTEE) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr HUNT (Gwyder-Minister for Transport) ( 10.22)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to enable the Commonwealth to provide loan guarantees for the pur chase by Ansett Transport Industries Ltd of new front line Boeing aircraft to operate on the trunk network. The introduction of this Bill at this stage is required to enable Ansett to finalise the financial arrangements for the purchase of the new generation aircraft. The first aircraft is due for de livery in June 1981 . The most significant initiative of this new, competitive era in domestic aviation is the decision by Ansett on the one hand and Trans-Australia Airlines on the other to acquire different front line wide-body aircraft. Trans Australia Airlines was the first to announce its choice of a wide-bodied-type jet and orders have now been placed for five of the A300B Airbus, a proven and well accepted twin-ehgined . aircraft which will carry approximately 270 passengers. Trans-Australia Airlines will also modify those of its DC9 aircraft which it is to retain to redesign ' the interiors to be compatible with its B727 aircraft.
Ansett, on the other hand, chose completely to restructure its fleet, and on 1 7 March last year an nounced its intention to acquire 21 Boeing air craft, comprising five yet to be built B767 wide body twin jets with a capacity of approximately 2 1 0 passengers; 1 2 B737-200 advanced twin jets; and four long range B727-200 tri jets. These air craft are the subject of the Bill now before the House. Expenditure to acquire these aircraft and associated equipment is over $800m. Completion of delivery of the aircraft on order will not be until around 1 985.

1 3 1 6 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Bill

Yesterday 1 announced that the Government has taken an in-principle decision to establish TAA as a public company and has decided to establish an independent fare tribunal. The details are being considered. The Government proposes to bring before the House during this session an airlines agreement Bill which takes into account the Government's decisions on TAA and the tribunal. The Government has also decided to establish an inquiry into whether deregulation is a desirable long term-objective. Having in mind that there will be new wide-bodied equipment and a new era of competition between the airlines over this period, with an inevitable impact upon the way in which our domestic airline system will operate in the 1 980s, it is logical that time will be needed to make a full assessment of the impact of these changes. In any event, the last of the new aircraft will be delivered in 1 984. Therefore, the inquiry will be asked to report within five years so that it can examine the question of deregulation against the experience of our two-airline system using this new equipment. I am confident that both TAA and Ansett will co-operate with the Government in these policy initiatives.
Deliveries of aircraft in respect of which loans will be guaranteed under this legislation will com mence shortly, with the first of Ansett's B737s and TAA's A300 aircraft arriving in June. The second and third A300s will be introduced in mid September and early November. At the same time, Ansett will progressively introduce the B727s between June and September, and the B737s between June 1981 and June 1 982. The proposed delivery date of the first two B767 air craft is November 1 982. The Bill currently before the House is to introduce legislation to provide for the Treasurer, on behalf of the Commonwealth to furnish guarantees in respect of borrowings by wholly-owned subsidiary of Ansett Transport In dustries for the purchase of Ansett's 2 1 new Boe ings and associated equipment and spares. Clause 4 empowers the Treasurer to guarantee the repay ment of moneys borrowed, not exceeding $US490m, for the purchase of the aircraft and for related interest on that borrowing. Clause 5 pro vides that the Treasurer must be satisfied that the terms and conditions of the borrowing are reason able, and provides that appropriate security be afforded to the Commonwealth. The Australian National Airlines Act already authorises the Treasurer to provide guarantees for TAA's bor rowings. This Bill is consistent with the principle of according similar treatment in respect of guarantees to the airlines. r commend the Bill to the House.

Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek leave to respond forthwith.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Leave is not attainable. It is mandatory that the debate be adjourned.

Suspension of Standing Orders Mr MORRIS (Shortland) ( 1 0.29)-1 move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would enable the honourable member for Shortland to respond forthwith.
This is the latest incredible happening in a series of amazing scenes regarding the hapless, embat tled Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt).
Mr Bourchier-I move:
That the honourable member be not further heard.
Mr Morris-There has been a rebellion in the party room, an overthrow of Government policy.
Motion-by leave-withdrawn. Mr MORRIS-There has been a rebellion today in the Government party rkom, a series of blood-letting exercises and the Government's avi ation policy is in a state of collapse. This poor hapless Minister here was to bring in this Bill this afternoon. Here, at this almost indecent hour the Bill was brought in and thrown away, as a throwaway line again, is the announcement of an inquiry into deregulation by 1 985. A quarter of the Minister's speech was devoted to that matter rather than to the substance of the report. Debate interrupted.

ADJOURNMENT Government's Airline Policy-Trade
Unions-Australian Pensioner Magazine-River Murray-Health
Services-Parliament House: Air Conditioning System-Processing in Australia of Australian
Raw Materials

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! It being 1 0.30 p.m., I propose the question:

That the House do now adjourn.

Mr MORRIS (Shortland) ( l 0. 30) -Mr Deputy Speaker--

Mr Bourchier-You adjournment now.

are . speaking

on

the

Mr MORRIS-The honourable member will learn slowly. What has happened is that there has been a collapse of Government policy. Those opposite have enforced upon the Minister for Transport ( M r H u n t ) an in q u i r y in to deregulation.

Mr Sinclair-I move:

That the question be put forthwith without debate.

Adjournment

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 3 1 7

Mr MORRIS-Shame! The Minister wants to cover up the stinking mess that the Government is involved in again.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The question is that the question be put forthwith.
Mr Young-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. You called the honourable member for Shortland to speak on the adjournment motion. The Leader of the House did not jump to ask that the question be put. The honour able member for Shortland has been called to speak on the adjournment.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The point of order is correct.
Mr Bourchier-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order. The honourable member for Bendigo will remain seated temporarily. The Chair put the question at 1 0.30 p.m. that the House do now adjourn. No action was initiated by those who might conceivably have done so if the question was to be negated. I called the honour able member for Shortland to speak to the question that the House do now adjourn.
Mr MORRIS-May I have an extension of time to cover for this delaying tactic? We have this announcement of an inquiry into deregula tion. We do not know by whom or when but it is to be within five years. That indicates, as I said earlier, a collapse of Government policy. It indi cates a Minister who does not know--
Mr Ruddock-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order.
Mr MORRIS-Does not the honourable member want to hear the truth? What is he trying to cover up now?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I call the honourable member for Dundas on a point of order.
Mr Ruddock-I simply wish to know whether the honourable member is entitled to revive a de bate that is in effect functus officio as the House is to adjourn at this time.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Shortland may proceed. The Chair is prepared to hear him further.
Mr MORRIS-The proceedings of this after noon and this evening have made a farce of this Parliament. Again we see the Parliament being treated with utter contempt by those opposite. Legislation to be introduced in this House this afternoon was delayed until a very late hour to prevent the media and the Parliament from

having access to it and, most importantly of all, to prevent the Opposition having an opportunity to respond to initiatives the Government wished to establish. That is what is involved here. Because of the bloodletting opposite, because of the chicanery that has occurred and because of the preference that must be given to Ansett Airlines of Australia, the Parliament is being abused. We are being denied the forms of Standing Orders. We are being denied the opportunity to put a case against the Government's initiatives. Until such time as this Government and this Minister start to treat this Parliament with some proper form of responsibility the Goverhment and the Minister will lapse into chaos, the bloodletting will continue and this Government will fall into utter disrepute. It is already a scandal-ridden Government. We have already seen a series of record resignations and sackings of Ministers.
Here we have this way of circumventing the Standing Orders, of devising a way to circumvent and block the Opposition's opportunity to respond to important initiatives. If there are to be inquiries, if those inquiries are to be properly staffed and if they are to be given full access to and the ful l support of the resources of government it could well be that those on this side of the House would support them. But no opportunity has been given for that assurance. Instead, we have this thief in the night exercise again from the same Minister who, in fact, has practised it repeatedly.
Mr Scholes-After a brawl in the party room. Mr MORRIS-And after a brawl at a special meeting at 7.30 this evening which, as I said earlier, showed the collapse in Government pol icy. It showed the utter chaos the Government is in now as a result of its aviation policy. Here we have a government without a rudder, a government which is in shambles, a government which determines aviation policy on the hour, every hour but which does not have the sense of responsibility or the courage to bring its decisions into the Parliament in a proper form and in proper time for debate. The important issues in cases where liabilities are being embarked upon which will involve the people of the country and which will amount to something like $500m are not being brought into the Parliament in proper time for debate. They are brought in in a manner which prevents discussion. Mr Howard-You can debate them next week. Mr MORRIS-Be quiet, little man. The associated decision was dropped in as an aside in a manner that is really outside the Standing Orders. The matters are not irrelevant to the matters

1 3 1 8 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Adjournment

being debated. They were put before the Parliament in an insidious way, by sleight of hand, to prevent the Parliament and the media from responding properly.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) ( lO.36)-Some honourable members have asked me to expand upon a proposition that I advanced earlier on the question of unemployed, unfinancial union members being able to retain the right to partici pate in union activities and unions being prohibited from recouping unpaid fees for periods when members were unemployed. I have given a great deal of consideration to this very important matter.
Mr Young-You would have to change the law.
Mr RUDDOCK-I intend to expand upon that proposition for the benefit of the honourable member. I recognise that the law will have to be changed. I have a quite precise proposal for the amendment of section 1 48 of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act to enable that to take place. I would have thought that unions would volunteer to accept their responsibility to allow unemployed former members to participate in union activities so that they can make their voices heard when they find that as a result of union activities they have lost their jobs and are out of work. I believe that this is a very responsible proposal which ought to be encouraged. I am sure that with the support of honourable members opposite for this initiative a very worthwhile reform can take place. As I mentioned, it is a simple matter to amend section 148 of the Conciliation and Arbi tration Act. That section states:
All . . . dues payable to an organisation by any member thereof under its rules may, insofar as they are owing for any period of membership subsequent to the registration of the organisation, be sued for and recovered in the name of the organisation . . . as debts due to the organisation.
That section could be amended to control the union practice of forcing back payment of dues once a formerly unemployed member regains employment. I believe that the most relevant way in which to enable the unemployed to be protected would be to insert a provision to the effect that an unfinancial member of an organisation, in the event of being or becoming unemployed, shall not cease to be a member only by reason of the fact that he fails to pay union subscriptions as they be come due while being unemployed. I believe that a simple amendment in that form would require the "automatic amendment of union rules. This would mean that while being unfinancial and therefore, presumably, with limited rights in relation to voting, a person's membership would be protected by the Act until he again became a fully

financial member. This protection could be ex tended further by a provision stating that if an unemployed member regains employment in the same industry or an industry relevant to the union to which he belongs, he shall not be liable for back payment of union subscriptions for the period during which he was unemployed or an unllnan cial member.
Whilst proper amendments may be made to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act to facilitate this initiative, I believe that it would be approprial.e for unions, in their own interests, to amend their own rules and to invite members who would otherwise have forfeited their membership through their inability to pay their union dues once more to take up their membership in an active way. There are very good and sufficient reasons why that should happen. Unions would be able to tend more responsibly to the needs of their members and to take up in a much more genuine way the rights of the unemployed if their unemployed members could still participate in their activities, still have a role and still be able to exercise a right to elect union officials. But as I have said on previous occasions, I believe that there will be many objections to this proposal because union officials are frightened that their former members who have become unemployed as a result of the activities of the unions will seek retribution from them for pursuing such policies. They would seek retribution from officers involved in the 35-hour week campaign which is likely to cost so many unionists in this country their jobs. This is a very responsible proposal and one which I believe should be supported fully by members on both sides of the House.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) ( l O.4I ) -The adjournment debate gives me an opportunity to night to welcome the publication of the new monthly magazine, The Australian Pensioner, the first two editions of which I have read. I com pliment the editor on its high standard. For far too long the problems of pensioners have been ignored. The social security system is at present under review by the Department of Social Secur ity and it is vital that The Australian Pensioner should allow contributors to monitor that review. The social philosophy of this coalition government is that people must help themselves and this will most surely mean reductions in pensions and welfare payments. I am most pleased that pensioners will now have a voice of their own and I wish the new publication, which is the official organ of the Combined Pensioners Association of Victoria, a long and prosperous future. At last it will be possible for pensioners to exert pressure on

Adjournment

2 April 1 981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 3 1 9

government through the columns of their own newspaper.
Statisticians have projected that in the next 20 years there will be a 47 per cent increase in the aged population, including females over 60 years. The future will bring an increase in the percentage of people over 65 years from 9 per cent in 1 976 to 1 0 per cent in 200 1 . That level will rise to 14 per cent in the early years of the twenty-first century. Future governments will ignore such a pressure group at their peril. The present coalition government has chosen to penalise many pensioners by the severe imposition of penny-pinching regu lations and the pensioners will not forget this harsh treatment at the next election.
I have spoken in this House on an earlier occasion about the loss of fringe benefits which many pensioners have suffered as a result of harsh regulations. Another example of harsh regulation has just been brought to my attention by one of my constituents, who is a retired single lady. She is a telephone subscriber who has chosen to have a silent telephone number. The reason for her decision was that, in common with many other fe males whose names and addresses are printed in the telephone directory, she had been harassed by a number of obscene telephone calls. She has now been asked by Telecom to pay a $ 1 0 annual fee for the privilege of not having her name and address printed in the telephone directory. I appreciate that my constituent could have changed her tele phone number and asked for only her initials to be printed. However, this does not alter the fact that Telecom is seeking a fee from those who do not wish to have their personal details printed in the telephone directory. This is a totally unreasonable imposition. I am informed that Telecom must handle 1 .6 million calls a year from people who seek information about telephone subscribers whose numbers are not listed. I am also informed that each call costs 60c, which represents a total cost to Telecom of $960,000 per annum. Surely this cost should be treated as part of the normal running costs of Telecom and not be a charge against those telephone subscribers who have deliberately chosen not to go public. Retired people, many of whom are pensioners, require a telephone as an essential part of their total security and it is iniquitious that those with silent numbers should suffer this additional expense, in addition to the increasing living costs which re tired people incur as a result of government actions. I call on Telecom to reconsider the impo sition of this most unreasonable fee.
Mr FISHER ( Mal1ee) ( 10.44)-At Albury on 1 7 February the Leader of the Australian Demo crats, Senator Chipp, launched a book called

River I n Danger, written by M r E . E . Clarke. I t is an important book because it draws attention to the deterioration of river water quality in the Murray basin system, the degradation of the river's environment and ecology and to the need to ensure the preservation of the river for future generations. Mr Clarke, in his book, correctly draws attention to the irresponsibility of develop ing irrigation schemes without adequate drainage, particularly as, despite past experience, this is still occurring in vast tracts of land. This is so particularly in New South Wales, with the issuing of new water licences.
I cannot, of course, agree with everything in Mr Clarke's book. One would not expect to agree with everything. For instance, Mr Clarke suggests that the Hume Weir should never have been built. In a world in which we are desperately short of food and fibre, with vast tracts of land being swallowed up by urban development and with soil erosion occurring to devastating effect in so many countries, we in Australia have a real responsibility to see that agriculture, recreation and the preservation of our resources can live together in harmony. However, I congratulate Mr Clarke on his book. It is an invaluable reference and a significant contribution to our heritage.
Tonight I wish to direct my remarks to those made by Senator Chipp at the launching. On this occasion the Senator's hysterical hyperbole was issued in terms which I believe are a grave reflec tion on many members on both sides of this Parliament. I have an editorial opinion which was published in the Border Morning Mail of Wednesday, 1 8 February, which is headed 'MPs gutless says Chipp'. The article stated:
Senator Chipp attacked petty-minded bureaucrats and gutless, small-minded politicians who, looking at the Murray River, only cared about the 'fast buck'.
Senator Chipp attacked the many district politicians, local government officials and prominent citizens who sent apolo gies for their absence from the book-launching.
'We ought to be ashamed of that number of apologies,' he said.
'Where are the so-called men and women of this area who get up in council and in Parliament and write letters to the paper about their beloved Murray River?
'Where are the people who talk about the need for conser vation, about the salinity problem-where the hell are they this morning?'
I cannot speak for others, but the invitation I received for the book launching arrived two weeks before the launching. I think anyone would recognise the difficulties people have, with elec toral commitments so far in advance, to respond to an invitation out of their own electorate two

1 320 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

A djo urnment

weeks in advance. I make n o apologies because of this misunderstanding. I ask: Why did Senator Chipp who made those statements at that book launching forget to mention the fact that this was the first such type of function he had attended in his 20 years in Parliament?
I decided to have some research done in relation to the input that members of this Parliament have made in relation to River Murray problems over the last few years. I came up with some very interesting statistics. I did some re search in relation to the comments that have been made by the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) , the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) and the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles) and, of course, some comments I have made. In my hand I hold a copy of the many speeches made and questions asked in this Parliament by the honourable member for Hawker alone. I think we should recognise that in my research I also discovered that in the 20 years in which Senator Chipp has been in Parliament as a Liberal Minister, as a shadow Minister, as an independent member of this House and now as a senator, he has made only one 2+-minute speech in which he has mentioned water or the sig nificance of it to Australia and that speech was made on 23 May 1 980 when speaking on the Western Australia Agreement (Ord River Irri gation) Bill. The Murray River has become an emotive issue and a popular cause and our man for all seasons, the good Senator, has found it worthy of his attention for the moment. I only hope that he continues to do so and assist many members of this House in trying to solve some of the massive problems that face water users in try ing to protect the environment and one of our most valuable resources.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) ( 1 0.50)-The Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) has made a decision and that, therefore, is a matter for cel ebration in this House. The last 1 5 months has been a period of complete non decision making in the health field. Even though the Government has had the report of the Jamison Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals for three months to consider the critical issues of that report, which involves a reform of the health in surance system and the method of funding the hospital arrangement with the States, no decision has yet been made. I understand that this very small decision in relation to cosmetic surgery was
h made this week because the Government felt that
unable to agree on any other issue in the healt field, the Cabinet had to produce some decision.
Mr Yoimg-Or any other field.

Dr BLEWETT-Or any other field; I thank the honourable member for Port Adelaide. The characteristic of this Government for the whole of the period since it was re-elected in 1 980 hasibeen an inability to make decisions in all major fields. In the field of communications, it has abandoned any decision for the moment; it has abandoned any decision in regard to taxation; and, in health, it is unable to make decisions.

Mr Scholes-It is not going well with the air lines, either.

Dr BLEWETT-It is having problems in mak

ing decisions on the airlines too. In the field of

health, the Government is unable to decide the

major issues despite a three month debate in Cabi

net. So, this week, it produced a very small de

cision involving simply a change in the regu

lations. But, in the desert of non decision making,

we must appreciate these small virtues. The

Government decided to remove from the medical

benefits schedule a number of cosmetic oper

ations. Face lifts, eyelid reductions, breast aug

mentation and certain hair transplants are the

major ones eliminated. In principle the Oppo

sition supports the decision made by the Govern

ment. I accept the point made by the Minister

that there has been distinct exploitation in this

field and it is arguable whether the community

should subsidise these particular forms of cos

metic procedures. I think there are certain prob

lems which the Minister has not fully recognised.

Perhaps he does not fully appreciate the ability of

the medical profession to get around any regu

lation. In some ways I fear that some of the open

ings offered by these changes of schedules may

add costs to cover, for example, the seeking of

psychiatric reasons for these procedures. Never

theless, we support in principle the decisions that

have been made by the Government. In addition,

the Government has done its best to be particu

larly selective and to take out those cosmetic pro

cedures which are most clearly open to abuse and

which most underwrite.

clearly

the

commun. ity

should

not

However, one point I raise-I hope the Minister will make some response- - is that these de cisions were announced on 31 March and came into effect on the next day, 1 April. That poses problems for the many people who had already made arrangements for a cosmetic operation in the next few weeks in the belief that they were covered by Commonwealth benefits and their in surance payments but who are now no longer covered for these planned operations. In some cases, deposits have already been paid; in other cases procedures have already been entered into

Adjournment

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 32 1

and are not yet finished. I must say that the Minister has behaved rather like the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and has treated these people as tax avoiders as, at the time of the announcement, only one day's warning was given.
Mr Howard-Would you take it away from them retrospectively?
Dr BLEWETT-This has almost a retrospective effect. We ask for a somewhat more generous provision-a greater period of warning. It seems to me to be a reasonable proposition that, if we are to cancel these operations, at least there should be a greater period of warning than has been given, rather than to deprive the people of the benefits they expected and have paid for, after a warning of only one day. 1 ask the Minister to consider a period of between eight to 1 2 weeks in which these operations can be run down. That does not seem to me to be an unreasonable proposal in terms of the way that this decision has been made.
Mr SPEAKER-Earlier tonight the honour able member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins) drew the attention of the House to media reports indicating that legionnaires disease bacterium had been isolated in a section of the air conditioning unit serving the suite of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). He questioned the possibility of this organism being in other sections of the air conditioning plant servicing Parliament House. I have made inquiry.
In July 1 980 a check was made on the air con ditioning system servicing the Prime Minister's area. Following that check a report in August 1 980 from the National Biological Standards Lab oratory stated that a total of 1 6 bacteria and two mould colonies were obtained from the sample and that the level of organisms detected was very low. Those organisms detected were not considered to be harmful. The report suggested that it may be valuable to repeat the tests when filters were next changed to obtain more representative samples. As a result, further tests were taken and Dr Cavanagh of the Fairfield Hospital reported that legionella, a causative agent of legionaires disease, had been isolated from a water sample taken on 8 January 1981 from the standby cooling tower in the Prime Minister's suite. Mr L. F. Dod son, the Director of the National Biological Stan dards Laboratory reported:
It does not necessarily follow that the air contaminated by passage through the cooling tower would enter the Prime Minister's suite. This would require a combination of wind and air movements which would permit cooling tower air, exhausted near the base of the building, to enter the air inlets on the roof.

In his report, D r Cavanagh of Fairfield Hospital said that he was of the opinion that cases of legionnaires disease in Australia do not reflect the occurrence of the organism in air conditioning cooling towers or in reticulated water supplies. However he said it was clearly desirable that the organism should be eliminated from the cooling towers.
The action Dr Cavanagh suggested in that report including more frequent cleaning and chemi cal treatment, has been taken. Regular testing of all units in the building is continuing and in fact tests were taken this morning. The result is not yet available. 1 am informed that when the previous samples were taken on 8 January 198 1 the sample taken from the emergency water cooling tower servicing the Prime Minister's suite was the only one found to contain legionella when the samples were tested. The action recommended by the health authorities was taken forthwith, and will be continued. I will report any change to the House.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) ( 1 0.58)-1 am certain that we are all relieved to hear that the only bug in the suite of the Prime Minister ( Mr Malcolm Fraser) is that which appears to be under control. I raise tonight the question of the processing of Australian raw materials in Australia. I draw the attention of the House to a statement made by the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) and the Acting Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Sinclair) earlier in the week relating to a report on the potential for further processing of mineral sands in Australia. The report was prepared by the Commonwealth-State Standing Joint Study Group on Raw Materials Processing, a body of officials representing the Commonwealth, the States and the Northern Territory. The group was established to encourage the further processing in Australia of Australian raw materials and to encourage co-operation between the Commonwealth , State and Northern Territory governments.
In the short time available to me I point out that I hope that this organisation, which has stated that excellent prospects exist for the expan sion of further processing operations in Australia and notes that such expansion would result in considerable national benefits, will take on board the suggestion I made in this place a little while ago that there may be some benefit in applying a raw materials export tax as some kind of incentive to people to further process Australian raw materials in Australia. The report states that good opportunities exist for private investment in min eral sands processing in Australia. It puts forward

1 322 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Reply to a Requestfor Detailed Information

a number of proposals for consideration by governments dealing with encouragement of and incentives for the establishment of additional processing plants in this country. I hope that this approach can be extended to many other Australian raw materials. I am glad that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is present. I hope that he also will take on board the proposition that there could be an added incentive in providing a tax disadvant age for those people who simply export our raw materials without processing.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! It being 1 1 o'clock, the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until Tuesday next at 2 . 1 5 p.m.
House adjourned at 1 1 p.m.
NOTICES The following notice was given:
Mr Baume to move
That this House-
( 1 ) expresses its concern at the threat to Australian coal exports posed by continuing delays in the building ofadequate coal loader capacity, particularly in New South Wales, and at the level ofindustrial disruption at existing coalloaders in that State; and
(2) calls upon the New South Wales Government to:
(i) allow private enterprise to build the additional coal loadercapacity in Newcastle required to meet substantially rising demand for steaming coal;
(ii) re-examine the urgent need for the construction by private enterprise of a coal loader in Botany Bay to cater for western and south western steaming and cok ing coals; and
(iii) increase the capacity of the proposed Port Kembla coal loader to receive coal transported by road in excess of the stated 2 million tonnes maximum in view of the inability of the New South Wales Railways to provide adequate handling capacity for at least another 5 years.
Sir William McMahon to move-
That this House, recommends that the government con tinues those flexible economic and financial policies associated with efficient management which have been so suc cessful in achieving the government's economic and financial objectives of greater consumer demand, growth of gross non farm domestic production, and better prospects for employment.
Mr Bourchier to move-

That this House expresses its concern at the increasing drug problem in Australia and calls on the Government to take stronger action to help stamp out this problem by:
( l) imposing much heavier penalties on Australian citi zens convicted ofdrug trafficking,
(2) making it mandatory for convicted persons not Australian citizens to be deported, and
(3) including marihuana in the same category as hard drugs for the purposes of penalties imposed on con victed persons.
REPLY TO A REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Library On 28 February 1981 , Mr Humphreys asked Mr Speaker:
(1 ) Has his attention been drawn to the recent installation of the computerised information retrieval systems, POLIS (Parliamentary Online Information System) in the United Kingdom House ofCommons research library, which will enable library staff and Members of Parliament to call up information on a terminal screen or to transmit updated information back into the data base.
(2) Is a similar computerised information retrieval system planned for the Parliamentary Library in the Australian Commonwealth Parliament.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) r am aware of the automated information retrieval sys tems in the House of Commons Library at Westminster and in other major legislative libraries. These developments are con tinually monitored by our Library staff, some of whom have first-hand knowledge of the application of computerised sys tems in overseas and local libraries.
(2) Our Parliamentary Library is already using computer terminals, micro-processors and word processors in a number of applications. During the corning twelve months, rapid de velopments can be expected in the area of on-line services and in the use of new technology to improve a number of existing services.
The Library's Systems and Co-ordination Unit is currently evaluating:
(a) Major full-text computer retrieval packages to deter mine the most appropriate software,
(b) An extension of word processing systems, (c) Automation of cataloguing, serials control, book circu
lation systems and administrative functions, (d) External data bases beyond the Attorney-General's
SCALE Legal Data Base and the Lockheed DIALOG network to other appropriate overseas and Australian networks, (e) The feasibility of data base creation in conjunction with the libraries of the other Parliaments of Australia through the development of a computerised network.

Answers to Questions

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 323 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The'following answers to questions were circulated:

Invalid Pensions
(Question No. 344)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 4 December 1 980:
( 1 ) Howmany persons were in receipt ofan invalid pension in (a) Australia, (b) New South Wales and (c) the Electoral Division ofBanks in (i) 1 979 and (ii) 1 980 to 30 November.
(2) How many invalid pensions were discontinued to pensioners in (a) Australia, (b) New South Wales and (c) the Electoral Division of Banks in (i) 1 979 and (ii) 1980 to 30 November.
(3) How many invalid pensioners resident in the Electoral Division of Banks whose pensions were discontinued are presently receiving (a) unemployment and (b) sickness benefits.
(4) How many invalid pensioners resident in the Electoral Division of Banks (a) appealed against the Department's decision to cancel the invalid pension and (b) were successful by appeal in having their pensions restored.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( 1 ) The numbers of persons in receipt of an invalid pension in Australia, New South Wales and the Electoral Division of Banks in June 1979, June 1980, November 1 980 and January 1981 are shown in the table below:

30 June 30 June 21 Nov. 1 6 Jan.

1979

1980

1980

1981

Invalid pensions Banks Electorate NSW Australia
Wife pensioners(b) NSW Australia

1 ,420 1 ,436

(a)

(a)

86,983 89,002 86,552 85,416

21 9,843 229,2 1 9 226,660 225,132

22,021 22,946 22, 1 85 2 1 ,794 56,1 53 60,163 59,167 58,451

(a) Annual data only available. (b) The number ofinvalid wife pensioners by Electoral Division is not available.
(2) Statistics relating to terminations of pensions by Elec toral Division are not available. The numbers of invalid pensions terminated in Australia and New South Wales in 1 979 and 1 980 are shown in the table below:

1 979

1 980

Invalid pensions terminated(a) Australia NSW

29,351 1 1,742

32,422 1 3, 198

(a) Excluding wives. Terminations include cancellations of invalid pension, terminations due to death and transfers to age pension.
(3) and (4) Statistics relating to terminations of pensions and to appeals are not available by Electoral Division.

Transport Signs in Languages other than English
(Question No. 387)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 1 2 December 1 980:
( I ) Is it a fact that Australia is one ofthevery few countries in the world where there are no signs in languages other than English in our international airports.
(2) Are there any signs in languages other than English on Australian national and international carriers regarding safety procedures andjor seat belt signs; if not, why not.
(3) Do any provisions exist whereby demonstrations of safety procedures on our national and international carriers can be explained in languages other than English.
(4) Is it also a fact that on Australia's roads there are no signs in languages other than English.
(5) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that more than a quarter of the Australian popUlation are recent immigrants; ifso, does the lack of signs in languages other than English put the life of many Australians injeopardy.
(6) What provisions exist for rectifying these apparent deficiencies on air, land and sea transport.
Mr HuntThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( l ) No. My Department proposes to display some multi lingual signs, together with advice of the availability of the di rect line telephone contact system of the Department of Im migration and Ethnic Affairs I nterpreter Service at International Airports. These matters are currently being finalised by the Regional Offices of my Department. Also, the internationally recognised symbols that depict facilities such as restaurants, toilets, car parking, reception areas and others are used at Australian airports.
(2) No. However, the latest safety cards are presented pic torially without the need for words. Qantas safety cards are in this format and other airlines are moving in the same direc tion. Experience overseas has shown that this is more effective than attcmpting to provide information in numerous languages.
(3) There arc no provisions requiring demonstrations of safety procedures to be explained in more than one language. The necessity for this has been considered and only one airline, Qantas, was found to be carrying sufficient numbers of non-English speaking passengers to warrant the use of other than English. In the case of Qantas, announcements are made in the language of any significant group of passengers asking them to pay attention to the safety demonstration and to study the safety card. Languages used by Qantas include Greek, Italian, German, Dutch, French, Serbo-Croat and Japanese.
(4) It is true that there are no signs in languages other than English on Australian roads and the difficulty this may present for persons who do not read English is recognised. However, to cover even the major languages would be a large undertak ing. The intention, therefore, is to tackle this problem by changing over to a symbolic system of signs, which will also assist persons who have difficulty in reading generally.
In 1 977, the Australian Transport Advisory Council endor sed a Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices which is

1 324 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Answers to Questions

published as an Australian Standard (AS1 742). A compre hensive review of the manual is being undertaken by the re sponsible committee of the Standards Association of Australia, on which the Commonwealth is represented.
(5) and (6) I am aware of the large proportion ofrecent im migrants in the Australian population and the possible problems which lack of signs in appropriate languages could cause.
I believe the provision of internationally recognised sym bols such as these in airports or those to be provided on roads is the only viable solution to this problem.
As already mentioned, provision of these signs is either a fact or under active consideration.
Freedom of Information
(Question No. 398)
Dr Everingham asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Has his attention been drawn to a statement by a former Secretary-General of the United Nations that in war the first casualty is truth; if so, does the record of Australian Governments in withholding from constituents facts favour able to their opponents at home and abroad, support this contention.
(2) Has the explanation of the Soviet Ambassador given to the Australian Government after his protest about Soviet actions in Afghanistan been made available to the Australian public.
(3) Has his Government evidence of an Islamic resurgence involving (a) the partition of India, (b) the annexation of West Irian, (c) the invasion of East Timor, (d) the provision to Pakistan of the latest United States of America weapons and its own atomic bomb and (e) the overthrow of the Shah of Iran when his defence forces were the third strongest in the world.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) I am aware of the statement referred to. This Government, and other Australian Governments, have encouraged public discussion of issues of relevance and importance to the community.
(2) The Soviet Ambassador has from time to time explained his Government's policies to the Australian press. In so doing, he has far more freedom than his counterpart in Moscow. There exists in Australia a genuinely free press, such as is not available to foreign diplomatic representatives in the Soviet Union.
(3) No general or related pattern of Islamic resurgence is evident in the five events referred to.
New Qantas Building, Sydney (Question No. 405)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 24February 1981 :
( 1 ) What has been the total expenditure to 24 February 1981 on the construction of the new Qantas building in Mar garet Street, Sydney.
(2) What is the estimated total cost and completion date.
Mr Hunt-The answers to the honourable member's question are as follows:
(1) $63.3m. (2) $90m. It is difficult to estimate a precise completion date. The extended date for practical completion under the contract is currently 29 June 1981 .

Marine Science (Question No. 420) Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 24 February:
( 1 ) Is it a fact that the Senate Standing Committee on Sci ence and the Environment released a progress report on mar ine science progress in Australia duringearly 1980.
(2) If so, does one of its recommendations identify a need for the declaration of an exclusive economic zone for Australia as rapidly as possible.
(3) Have the boundaries of this zone been declared.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) Yes. The Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment tabled its progress report on Australian mar ine science on 22 May 1 980. The report was examined by the Government and a response tabled in the Senate on 4 December 1980 by Senator Durack in his capacity as Minister representing the Minister for Science and Technology.
For the benefit of the honourable member, the Government's response to each of the Senate Committee's twelve recommendations may be summarised as follows:
SUMMARY RESPONSE SenateCommittee Recommendation
1 . The Government acccpt responsibility for a significant expansion of marine science. This will involve definition of a national policy, establishment of priorities, development of appropriate programs and allocation of adequate funds and resources. Any national plan developed as an expression of policy should, as far as possible, build on existing institutions and facilities.
Government Action
The Government introduced a program of marine science research grants in the 1979-80 Budget following advice from the Australian Science and Technology Council (ASTEC) that greater attention be paid to the marine sciences and tech nologies in Australia, and following recommended priority areas for research by ASTEC's Standing Committee-the Australian Marine Sciences and Technologies Advisory Committee (AMSTAC). The Government decided recently that the Antarctic Division of the Department of Science and Technology would be developed as a Centre of Excellence in Southern Ocean marine biology.
The Government substantially increased its allocations for marine research grants and its funding for the Australian In stitute of Marine Science in the 1 980-81 Budget following a further report from the ASTEC Standing Committee on mar ine sciences and technologies.
The Government decided to establish a $25 million Marine Science Complex in Hobart, the CSIRO Marine Laboratories (including a multipurpose oceanographic research vessel to be used as a National Vessel) to house the new Divisions of oceanography and fisheries.
Seuate Committee Recommendation
2. The Prime Minister extended the terms of reference of AMSTAC to include advice on the formulation and execution of national policy with respect to marine sciences and tech nologies, as required to meet the national interest.
Government Actiou
The powers and functions of ASTEC as set out in the Australian Science and Technology Council Act 1 978 are wide enough to include the purport of the recommendation by the

Answers to Questions

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 325

Senate Committee. AMSTAC is a Standing Committee of ASTEC and it would not be necessary to widen its terms of reference in the way recommended by the Senate Committee.
Senate Committee Recommendation 3. The Government adopt as a medium-term aim, the pro
gressive building up of a fleet of civilian ocean going marine research vessels to reach a total of at least 6 by 1986.
Government Action The Government has agreed to the high priority rec
ommendation of ASTEC that CSIRO acquire an oceano graphic research vessel. The current fisheries research program of CSIRO is being carried out by a chartered stern trawler. AMSTAC is currently reviewingAustralia's need for ocean-going vessels including fisheries vessels and a vessel equipped to undertake research in the marine geosciences and the Senate Committee proposals will be fully considered in this review. The provision of an Australian Antarctic ship with significant marine research capabilities is also being considered.
Senate Committee Recommendation 4. The Government move as rapidly as possible towards
declaration of an Exclusive Economic Zone for Australia.
Government Action The Government has this matter under close scrutiny.
Senate Committee Recommendation 5. The Government examine at once the probable require
ment for a second or even third blue-water vessel, within the framework of the overall national need for marine research, with a view to drawing up a medium-term plan for research vessel acquisition, funding and operation.
Government Action See comment on Recommendation 3.
Senate Committee Recommendation 6. The Minister for Science and the Environment explore
the possibility of arranging short-term hire of overseas re search vessels, as an interim measure, until such time as Australia is able to fully deploy her own marine research fleet.
Government Action See comments on Recommendation 3.
Senate Committee Recommendation 7. The Government explore the possibility of deploying
Commonwealth ships, such as navigation aid servicing vessels or Antarctic supply vessels, for marine research purposes, during the time they are not being used for their primary purposes.
Government Action See comments on Recommendation 3.
Senate Committee Recommendation 8. The Minister for Science and the Environment aggregate
in the first instance aU the marine activities of CSIRO into one institute.
Government Action The Executive of CSIRO recently addressed the general
question raised by the Senate Committee and has decided that Oceanography will be a Division as part of the Institute of Physical Sciences, and Fisheries Research a Division as part of the Institute of Biological Resources. Oceanography has strong links with atmospheric and fluid sciences and fisheries with biological resources management. The placement of the

Divisions in their respective Institutes will strengthen these ties. To preserve strong links between Fisheries and Ocean ography the two Divisions will be located together to form the CSIRO Marine Laboratories in Hobart.
Senate Committee Recommendation 9. The Minister for Science and the Environment explore
the application of technology other than shipborne equipment in marine science. Such technology could include remote fixed or free sensors, satellites, and aircraft including airships.
Government Action The Government accepts this Recommendation. The
Senate Committee's proposals are consistent with the Government's policy of a balanced development of Australian marine science within the constraints of budgetary considerations and priorities established on the advice of ASTEC, and are being examined.
Senate Committee Recommendation 10. The Minister for Science and the Environment require
the council of the Australian Institute of Marine Science to determine and report on the facilities and funding required to develop the function of collecting and disseminating information relating to marine science on a national scale. This de termination should consider at least 3 levels of operation:
(i) the compilation and maintenance of a register of mar ine research being conducted throughout Australia;
(ii) the establishment and maintenance of an inventory of available marine science data;
(iii) the establishment and operation of a national compu terised marine science data network.
Government Action Collecting and disseminating marine science information on
a national scale is a matter upon which the Government has sought advice and which AMSTAC has under consideration. In view, however, of a recent decision that the Australian In stitute ofMarine Science focus its attention on research on the Great Barrier Reef, it is not appropriate for that body to undertake the task of developing a national marine science in formation system.
Senate Committee Recommendation I I . The Minister for Science and the Environment review
the marine taxonomic effort of the Australian Biological Re sources Survey with a view to strengthening its work in the marine area and giving adequate support to the taxonomic studies which are now essential for proper management of the Australian Fishing Zone. The review should include examin ation of the need for co-ordination with state taxonomic authorities.
Government Action The Government accepts this recommendation. The Aus
tralian Biological Resources Study provides a mechanism for co-ordinating national taxonomic efforts. Considering overall needs, the ABRS to date has devoted the larger part of its resources to terrestrial biota. This need for taxonomic knowledge of terrestrial biota is not diminished by an increased need for such knowledge of the marine flora and fauna.
Senate Committee Recommendation 1 2. The Prime Minister direct AMSTAC to investigate and
report on the place of university marine research stations, with a view to upgrading the support given to their operation.

1 326 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Government Action Parent institutions of the Great Barrier Reef Island Re
search Stations are eligible to apply for Commonwealth mar ine research and development grants (see also comments on Recommendation I ) .
2 . Yes. Recommendation 4 does recommend such a course of action.
3. No. See the above summary statement.
United Nations Resolution 2 162 (XXI) of 1966
(Question No.485)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( l ) Was United Nations Resolution 2 1 62 (XXI) circulated to other Ministers and/or their Departments following its adoption by the 1484 plenarymeeting 5 December 1966
(2) If so, on what date and to which Ministers and/or De partments was it sent.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( l ) and (2) United Nations resolutions which affect the responsibilities of departments and agencies of the Australian Government are circulated as a matter of routine by the De partment of Foreign Affairs and are subject to interdepart mental consultation and reference to Ministers as appropri ate. All resolutions adopted by the United Nations General Assembly are also published by the United Nations Organisation in Official Records of the General Assembly, copies of which are held by major reference and departmental libraries.
General Assembly Resolution 2162 (XXI) of 1966 encom passed issues which fall within the Foreign Affairs and De fence portfolios.
Pakistan: Acquisition of Hydrogen Bomb
(Question No. 488)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'Saudis set to finance Zia H bomb' (Age, 19 January 1981, page 7).
(2) If so, is he able to state whether Saudi Arabia has agreed to provide Pakistan with $A670 million to help it make a hy drogen bomb.
(3) Has Australia made any representations to Pakistan regarding Pakistani acquisition of a hydrogen bomb; if so, what was the substance of those representations, when were they made and what was the result.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
3.-

( 1 ) Yes. (2) While Pakistan receives general economic assistance from other countries, including Saudi Arabia, the Government of Pakistan has stated publicly that it has not received financial assistance from any foreign source for its nuclear en ergy programme. The capability of that programme to absorb funds of the order mentioned is doubtful. (3) Please see the answer to Question 5826 (Hansard, 23 April 1980, page 2230). There has been continued questioning internationally of the character and scope of Pakistan's nu clear development programme.
Ministerial Staff: Establishment
(Question No. 530)
Mr Free asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( I ) What is the current establishment for Ministerial staff.
(2) What was it on 1 1 November 1975.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) 194 as at 28 February 1981 . (2) 242 as a t I I November 1 975.
Foreign Affairs: Overseas Posts
(Question No. 540)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
{ I } How many overseas posts administered by his Department have been closed down and then reopened during the last five years;
(2) What were the dates of closure and reopening; (3) What were the respective staff strengths at closure and reopening and their designation; (4) What were the costs involved in each case in reopening the posts; (5) Does the Expenditure Review Committee propose to close any posts.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
1 . Two overseas posts have been formally closed and reopened during the past five years-Bombay and Los Angeles. Additionally, the Australian Embassy in Beirut ceased to function in March 1 976 when staff were evacuated because of civil disorder and recommenced operating with reduced staffin May 1977.
2. The Australian Consulate-General in Bombay was closed on 3 1 March 1976, and reopened on 6 February 1979. The Consulate-General in Los Angeles was closed on 30 April 1976 and reopened on 2 September 1 978.

Foreign Affairs Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Staffat closure (a) Bombay
Consul-General Vice-Consul Secretary 20 Local staff
Vice-Consul

Staff at reopening Consul-Gl)neral 3 Local staff Nil

Answers to Questions

2 Apnl - 98 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 327

Foreign Affairs
Trade and Resources Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Australian Information Service

Staff at closure
(b) Los Angeles Consul-General Consul Vice-Consul 1 5 local staff Trade Commissioner Assistant Trade Commissioner 1 1 Local staff Consul Vice-Consul Consul

Staff at reopening
Consul-General Consul Vice-Consul 14 local staff Trade Commissioner Assistant Trade Commissioner 7 Local staff Vice-Consul Vice-Consul Nil

4. Costs involved in reopening the posts, and in operating them until the end of the 1978/79 financial year (excluding salaries and administrative expenses) were:
(a) Bombay . . . . . . . . . . . $AI22,174 (b) Los Angeles . . . . . . . . . $A268,822 5. I understand that the reference to the Expenditure Review Committeeactuallyrelates to the Ministerial Committee on Review of Commonwealth Functions. That committee has reviewed numerous aspects of the Department's operations, including its overseas representation. Details of the Committee's conclusions will be available when the Committee's report is released.
Social Welfare: Eligibility (Question No. 546)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister represent ing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) What criteria are used by the Department of Social Se curity in determining the existence of a de facto relationship prior to establishing eligibility for pensions or benefits.
(2) Do benefits become subject to an income test if the cri teria used applies to a homosexual domestic arrangement.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honour able member's question:
( 1 ) In determining the existence of a de facto relationship regard is had to the relevant facts of each case but essential el ements include:
the relationship involves a man and a woman who are not married to one another; and
the couple are living together and sharing the economies and advantages of a legally married couple. (2) The criteria used do not apply to homosexual domestic arrangements.
Mirage Aircraft (Question No. 562) Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) How many Mirage aircraft are o n the inventory of the Australian Defence Forces.
(2) How many are currently (a) operational and (b) retained in reserve.
(3) At what locations are the operational aircraft stationed.
(4) How many are operational at each location.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) There are 85 Mirage aircraft on the RAAF inventory.
(2) (a) 84 Mirage aircraft are operational. (The term oper ational is used in the sense that the aircraft are capable of per forming the missions for which they were designed.)
(b) one two-seat aircraft is currently being held in long term storage at the Government Aircraft Factory (GAF), Avalon.
(3) The operational Mirage aircraft are normally located, except for one aircraft at GAF, Avalon undergoing a major servicing, as shown below:
38 at RAAF Butterworth, Malaysia (these include our continuous detachment to Singapore).
42 at RAAF Base Williamtown, NSW. 3 at RAAF Base Edinburgh, SA.
(4) Apart from routine maintenance all aircraft at each lo cation are operational although the aircraft based at Edin burgh are presently instrumented for trials flying.
Department of Social Security: Functions (Question No. 595)
Mr McLean asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 25 February 1981 :
( 1 ) What is the function of the Property. Accommodation and Services area of the Department of Social Security.
(2) What functions does it perform which could not other wise be carried out by the Department of Administrative Services.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( 1 ) Briefly, the main functions of the Property, Accommo dation and Services Sections in the Department are to:
control and direct the activities concerned with the ser vicing of the Department, including property and accom modation, office services, physical security and decentralisation.
(2) The successful undertaking of such activities requires a detailed knowledge of the functions and operations of the De partment of Social Security. The Department of Administrative Services which is the central co-ordinating department in such matters does not have sufficient detailed knowledge of the unique requirements of the Department of Social Security to enable it to provide the same level of service as is currently available.

1 328 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Answers to Questions

National Health: Duplicate Services
(Question No. 597)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 25 February 1981 :
( 1 ) What are the functions of the National Health area of his Department.
(2) Does this area employ a staff of approximately 1 100.
(3) To what extent do the functions of this area duplicate services provided by the States.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) Those functions of my Department authorised by the National Health Act are:
(i) the administration of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme;
(ii) the administration of assistance to nursing homes;
(iii) the administration of payments of domiciliary nursing care benefits;
(iv) the oversight of medical and hospital benefits organisations;
(v) the administration of the Isolated Patients' Travel and Accommodation Assistance Scheme;
(vi) the provision of hearing services and aids to approved persons;
(vii) the provision of diagnostic pathology laboratory services;
(viii) the assessment of nurse education requirements;
(ix) teaching, research and advisory services in relation to child health;
(x) teaching, research and advisory services in relation to the improvement of health or the prevention of dis ease; and
(xi) the provision of research, surveillance, and advisory services regarding health hazards from radiation sources.
(2) The number of staff employed on the above functions is 2101.
( 3 ) In those cases outlined in ( 1 ) where the States are also involved in these or similar functions, there is no duplication of the servicesprovided by the States. For example, pathology laboratory services cover distinctly separate areas and Commonwealth hearing services in Victoria are supplemented, not duplicated, by the provision of a hearing assessment service in a small number of regional hospitals. Commonwealth inspec tions of non-Government nursing homes are directed towards areas of responsibility of the Government under Commonwealth legislation and are undertaken for different purposes from the inspections undertaken by the States of these institutions.
Upgrading of Federal Highway
(Question No. 601)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 25 February 1981 :
( 1 ) What is the proposed route, landmark to landmark, of the upgrading of the Federal Highway.
(2) Is the route one that was considered in the Bureau of Transport Economics publicationNational Highways Linking Sydney, Melbourne and Canberra, 3rd Report, Canberra Connections, 1 979; if so, which alternative is being implemented.

(3) Have any cost-benefit analyses been undertaken on each of the alternatives; ifso, whatwere the results.
(4) Has the further environmental study considered"necess ary by the Bureau been carried out; if not, why not. " ( ,
(5) Will he release the reports of any studies; if not, why not.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) The proposed final route of the Federal Highway between Goulburn and Collector is generally along the existing alignment of the present Federal Highway. The final route south of Collector to the ACT border has not yet been determined. The present Highway is duplicated for some 9.7 km south of its junction with the Hume Highway, and a further 8 km is under construction just north of Collector.
(2) Yes. The Bureau of Transport Economics recom mended that the ultimate connection between Canberra and Goulburn should follow the existing alignment of the present Federal Highway.
(3) In its report the Bureau of Transport Economics has published one cost benefit ratio for the recommended route that is, along the present alignment. At the time of the study the cost benefit ratio for a reconstructed Federal Highway was 0.9, which indicated that at the time, construction of the Highway along its whole length outside the ACT to full National Highway standard was not economically warranted. However the report estimated that on predicted traffic, development of the Highway would be warranted by 1 980.
(4) No. The environmental study is still under consideration by the New South Wales Department of Main Roads.
(5) If such a study results in a report being produced, I will consider releasing it after consultation with my New South Wales colleague, the Minister for Roads, Mr Jensen.
Nomad Aircraft
(Question No. 608)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 25 February 1981 :
( I ) How many Nomad aircraft (a) have been sold and delivered to buyers in the United States of America, (b) are under construction for United States buyers, (c) are proposed for construction in 1981 and (d) are marked for sale in the United States in 1981 .
(2) Who is the agent in the United States for Nomad aircraft.
(3) Does the Government Aircraft Factory or its agents in the United States employ technicians in that country to provide after sales service.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honour able member's question is as follows:
The USA. Federal Aviation Authority certificated Nomad for use in Regular Public Transport/Air Taxi roles in the USA. in November 1978.
Since achieving USA. certification Nomad has been par ticularly successful in breaking into the fiercely competitive USA. market.
Nomad aircraft are now being successfully operated throughout the USA. including New Jersey, Texas, Califor nia, Alaska and the US. Virgin Islands.
Concerning the specific matters raised by the honourable member, I am advised that:

Answers to Questions

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 329

( 1 ) (a) a total of 25 Nomad aircraft have been sold to buyers in the USA. and, as at the end ofFebruary 1981 , 1 8 of these aircraft had been delivered;
(b) seven; (c) seventeen;
(d) seven. (2) Hughes Aviation Services, Las Vegas is the USA. dis tributor for Nomad. In addition, Wipair Inc., Minnesota, is USA. distributor for Nomad fioatplane and amphibian ver sions only. (3) Under the terms of their respective Nomad distribu torship agreements with the Government Aircraft Factories, the USA. distributors are required to provide after sales ser vice to Nomad operators in the USA. Government Aircraft Factories Field Service engineers also make regular visits to Nomad operators in the USA.
School Curricula
(Question No. 617)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 25 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Further to his reply to Question No. 1 34 (Hansard, 4 December 1980, page 469) and to his speech to the National Convention of Young Liberals on 14 January 1980, did he say that our educational institutions were not successful in preparing young people for employment; if so, does the fault for this lie with the State Government responsible for establishing and administering school curricula.
(2) If so, has the Government raised this matter with State Ministers on the Education Council.
(3) Will the Government seek more direct involvement in primary and secondary schools curricula to overcome this problem.
Mr Malcolm Fraser T - he answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) There is mounting evidence that the school system is not adequately meeting the needs of all young people, especially those who are not academically inclined. The Schools Commission, in its recent report: 'Schooling for I S and 1 6 Year Olds', criticised the preoccupation of secondary schools with preparation for tertiary study and drew attention to the situation in which many students experience a curricu lum unsuited to their needs or interests, and from which they gain little of a positive nature. It is a fact that a significant number of young Australians who leave school each year do not have an adequate preparation for the world of work and face considerable difficulty in making a successful transition to employment, within a reasonable period.
It was largely for these reasons that the Government de cided in January of this year to examine as a matter ofurgency further ways of increasing the opportunities available for under 1 8-year-olds in education, training and employment. I wrote, at the time, to each Premier asking them to consider ways ofsubstantially increasing the capacity and range of suit able courses in secondary schools and TAFE institutions, par ticularly for potential early school leavers and of improving the retention rates in full-time education.
(2 and (3) The Government has sought and obtained the co-operation of the States in the current Review. The matter was discussed at the recent meeting of the Australian Edu cation Council.
There are no simple answers to what is a complex problem. Any changes to existing arrangements will be effected care fully and in co-operation with the authorities responsible for

administering education systems when the current examin ation is completed.
Drugs: Removal from Pharmaceutical Benefits List
(Question No. 634)
Mr Armitage asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 February 1981 :
( I ) What drugs have been taken off the Pharmaceutical Benefits List since 1 8 October 1 980.
(2) What was the date when each of these drugs was re moved from the list.
(3) For what medical condition would each of these drugs have been prescribed.
(4) Are any other drugs available on the list to treat these conditions.
Mr MacKellar- - The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) The drugs taken off the Pharmaceutical Benefits list since 1 8 October 1 980 are listed in the first column of the attached table. Items marked with an asterisk were taken off following advice from the manufacturer that the product had been discontinued.
(2) Each of these drugs was removed from the list as from I December 1 980.
(3) The second column of the attached table shows for each drug the major condition for which the drug is therapeutically indicated or the therapeutic group to which the drug belongs.
(4) In general, other drugs which may be used to treat the conditions named or which also fall within the therapeutic groups named are available on the list. The suitability of the alternative drugs is a matter for the patient's doctor to decide in each case.
DRUGS DELETED FROM THE PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS LIST AS FROM I
DECEMBER 1980

Major medical condition or therapeutic group

Drugs in ready prepared preparations

A m in o p h y l l in e w it h Asthma

Ephedrine Hydrochloride

and Amylobarbitone

Amylobarbitone

Sedative/hypnotic

Butobarbitone

Sedative/hypnotic

*Carbinoxamine

Antihistamine

Colestipol Hydrochloride

High blood cholesterol level

*Cycloserine

Tuberculosis

*Demecarium Bromide

Glaucoma

Desferrioxamine Mesylate Iron chelating agent

*Deslanoside

. Cardiac glycoside

Dextropropoxyphene Hydro Analgesic

chloride with Paracetamol

Ephedrine Hydrochloride Asthma

with Phenobarbitone

*Gas Gangrene Antitoxin Gas Gangrene

(Oedematiens)

*Gas Gangrene Antitoxin Gas Gangrene

(Perfringens)

*Gas Gangrene Antitoxin Gas Gangrene

(Septicum)

Goats' Milk

Cows' milk allergy

- L Y n 0 e s t r e n 0 I w it h Anovulant

Ethinyloestradiol

Mecamylamine

Elevated blood pressure

1 330 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 198 1

Answers to Questions

Major medical condition or therapeutic group

Nalidixic Acid . . .

Urinary tract infection

Pentobarbitone Sodium

Sedative/hypnotic

Plasma Substitute

Physiological Shock

Pseudoephedrine

Decongestant

Hydrochloride

Quinalbarbitone Sodium

Sedative/hypnotic

Rauwolfia Alkaloids .

Elevated blood pressure

Rauwolfia Serpentina

Elevated blood pressure

Secbutobarbitone

Sedative/hypnotic

Theophylline with Ephedrine Asthma

Hydrochloride and

Phenobarbitone

Drugs for use in extemporaneous dispensing

Amylobarbitone

Sedative/hypnotic

Amylobarbitone Sodium

Sedative/hypnotic

Ephedrine

Asthma

Liquid Extract of Nux VomBitter 'tonic'

ica

Pentobarbitone Sodium

Sedative/hypnotic

Tincture of Nux Vimica

Bitter 'tonic'

Railways Employees: Compensation
(Question No. 647)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 26 February 198 1 :
( 1 ) What is the total sum paid to employees of the Australian National Railways Northern Region as compensation for hearing loss due to noise as a result of their employment, under provisions of Commonwealth compensation legislation since 1965.
(2) How many employees have been issued with hearing aids, and at what cost.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable question is a follows:
( I ) Amount paid up to 3 March 1981 is $471 ,058.88.
(2) 50 employees, at a cost of $3,033.
Air Movements at Aerodromes in South Australia
(Question No. 648)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 26 February 1981 :
What are the total average daily air movements in and out of the aerodromes of
(a) Port Pirie, (b) Port Augusta, and (c) Whyalla in South Australia.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Based on the 1979-80 statistics, the total average daily movements were
(a) Port Pirie-13 (based on pilot notified movements only)
(b) Port Augusta-IS (based on pilot notified movements only)
(c) Whyalla-31

Loan Guarantee Facilities
(Question No. 663)
Mr Willis asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 3 March 1981: '
( 1 ) Is he able to say which State Governments provide loan guarantee facilities for small business
(2) If so, how do these loan guarantees work (3) How much use is made of these facilities (4) Is this facility available to small business in the Australian Capital Territory
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honour able member's question is as follows:
( I ) Each of the States provides some form of financial as
sistance either by loan or guarantee, or in some cases both, to encourage development in the State. In some States this is re stricted to decentralised industries. The assistance is available but not restricted to small firms. In addition in NSW and Victoria there are loan guarantee schemes in operation which are restricted to small firms only.
(2) I am not in a position to comment on the operation of these schemes. I suggest that the Honourable Member contact the State Governments direct for this information.
(3) See answer to (2) above. (4) No.
Di-gesic
(Question No. 722)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 5 March 1981 :
( I ) Were vitamins, laxatives and the general purpose anal gesic Di-gesic deleted from the schedule of pharmaceutical
benefits approximately 12 months ago, and on I December
1980. (2) If so, have the deletions resulted in pensioners who pre
viously had been able to obtain these drugs free of charge now having to pay full price for them unless they attend a public hospital.
(3) Will he consider restoring these items to the scheme for pensioners.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) Di-Gesic tablets were deleted from the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits on I December 1 980. Certain vit
amin preparations were deleted between December 1975 and August 1979 and certain laxatives were removed prior to 1978. There has been no across-the-board deletion ofvitamins and laxatives.
(2) Yes. (3) These deletions were made on the recommendation of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) which bases its recommendations primarily on medical con siderations. Ifthere are medical grounds for reconsidering the deleted items for availability as pharmaceutical benefits I would be pleased to receive a detailed submission on the subject and torefer it to the PBAC for consideration.
Accommodation for the Aged: Subsidy
(Question No. 737)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 1 0 March 1981 :

Answers to Questions

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 3 3 1

( I ) How many outstanding applications are there for sub sidy for accommodation for the aged under the Aged Persons Homes Act within the Electoral Division of Grey.
(2) From what locations have the applications been made. Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) 17 (2) Burra, Ceduna, Cleve, Cowell, Crystal Brook, Cum mins (2), Gladstone, Jamestown, Kimba, Peterborough, Port Lincoln, Streaky Bay, Tumby Bay, Wallaroo, Wilmington, Wudinna.
Taxation Evasion (QuestionNo. 747) Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 1 0 March 1981 :
( I ) Has his attention been drawn to the alleged practice of certain employers in the Sydney and Melbourne areas, who have negotiated an arrangement with respect to the payment of wages to contract labour, whereby part of the company's wages payments do not appear in the company's financial ecords.
(2) Have inspectors of the Australian Taxation Office investigated certain workshops in the Sydney area to deter mine whether such practices are, in fact, occurring.
(3) If so, (a) what workshops were visited and (b) did Taxation Office investigators find that such practices constituted calculated and fraudulentevasion of tax.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Allegations that certain employers in the Wollongong area have omitted part of the payments made for contract labour from their financial records have been brought to my attention.
(2) The Commissioner ofTaxation has advised that inspec tions have been carried out by his officers to ascertain whether practices of the kind alleged are, in fact, occurring or have occurred.
(3) The secrecy provisions of the income tax law prevent the Commissioner from supplying this information. He has, however, been able to give the general advice that, where breaches of the PAYE provisions of the law are detected, it is his practice to take appropriate action to secure compliance with the requirements of the law.
Government Economic Panel (Question No. 752)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 1 0 March 1981 :
( 1 ) Who are the members of the Government's Economic Panel and what are their positions.
(2) When does the Panel meet. (3) Do members of the Panel prepare papers for the Government and/or does the Government present papers to the Panel. (4) To what extent is the Panel consulted about economic policy.
(5) Do public servants attend meetings of the Panel; if so, who.

(6) What are the conditions, such as attendance fees and travel arrangements, under which academic economists serve on the Panel.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) Professor N. T. Drane, Professor of Economics, Macquarie University; Professor R. C. Gates, Vice Chancellor, University of New England; Professor W. P. Hogan, Professor of Economics, University of Sydney; Mr A. Jolley, General Manager-Economic Affairs, Victorian Chamber of Manufactures; Dr N. R. Norman, Senior Lec turer in Economics, University of Melbourne; Professor I. G. Sharp, Professor of Economics, University ofNewcastle; Pro. fessor R. H. Snape, Professor of Economics, Monash University.
(2), (3) and (4) I currently have the arrangements for the Panel under review, in consultation with Panel members. In the past the Panel has generally meet three times a year and members of the Panel have brought forward papers for dis cusion from time to time. The views of Panel members on matters pertaining to economic policy have been sought as part of the overall range ofadviceavailable to me.
(5) Yes. OffiCials from the Reserve Bank of Australia, De partment of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Department of Finance, Bureau of Industry Economics and the Treasury have attended meetings.
(6) Attendance fees are not paid to academic members but travel costs incurred by members are met from public funds.
1981 Census (Question No. 759) Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 1 1 March 1981 :
( 1 ) Has concern been expressed among the general public over the insistence of the Australian Bureau of Statistics on the compulsory disclosure of individual names in compiling the 1981 census.
(2) Does the Bureau require. persons to disclose their names; if so, why.
(3) Is the Bureau concerned that persons will not supply ac curate information if they fear it may be recorded and filed under their name.
(4) In view of the concern and fears ofmany persons filling out census forms that the private information sought might be recorded in some way and used against them, will he (a) consider having the Census and Statistics Act amended to relax the provisions relating to the compulsory disclosure and (b) remove from the text of the census form the requirement that persons must supply their names.
(5) Would the deletion of this requirement improve the ac curacy of the information supplied to theBureau.
(6) Would this action also (a) be less expensive than and (b) achieve the same purpose as the $ 1.2m publicity campaign planned by the Government to assuage public fears about the census.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) In pilot tests leading up to the 1981 Census of Popu lation and Housing, very little concern was expressed by the general public over the need to record individual names on the census schedule.
(2) Under the Census and Statistics Act 1905 persons are required to supply names on the census forms. The reasons for this are:

1 332 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Answers to Questions

census collectors need to obtain names so that i f it is necessary to call back to seek further information on miss ing data, they will have a reference point for their inquiries;
during processing, information on individuals is used to compile data on families, and in two family households names are needed for this purpose; and
a survey is run immediately after the census to check on the completeness of coverage of persons. Names are necess ary to check whether everyone in the households selected in this survey was included on census forms.
(3) The ABS is concerned that people may mistakenly believe that information from the Census will be recorded and filed under their names. Assurances have already been given that names will not be transferred to computer records and that census forms will be destroyed as soon as processing is completed.
The purpose of the Census is to gather statistical information and the legal obligation on people to answer census questions is accompanied by strict measures to ensure the con fidentiality of the information provided. The Government be lieves that it would be inconsistent with that purpose and with that guarantee of confidentiality to retain information on identified persons or households.
(4) and (5) It is considered that removal of the requirement
to supply names would have a serious effect on the quality of the data collected. Because of the importance of producing re liable data from the Census, and in view of the safeguards adopted to protect the confidentiality of individual information, the Government does not consider it necessary to amend the Census and Statistics Act to remove the require ment to supply names.
(6) Assuring the public that identified information will not be retained or divulged is only one aspect of the public aware
ness campaign planned by the ABS for the 198 1 Census. The
campaign also aims to inform the community of the import ance of the Census; the uses to which the information will be put; the availability of assistance in completing the form; and the procedures available ifpeople do not want their form to be seen by other members of the household or the collector.
Taxation Deductions for Motor Vehicles
(Question No. 765)
Mrs Kelly asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on I I March 1981 :
What figures, in terms of cents per kilometre, were allowed by the Commissioner of Taxation in assessing claims for de duction of running costs for motor vehicles with an engine ca
pacity of 1 800cm' where expenditure was incurred in earning income, for each year from 1 974-75 to 1 979-80.
Mr HowardThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Commissioner of Taxation has advised that it is not general practice to calculate income tax deductions allowable for motor vehicle running expenses by reference to a rate per kilometre based on engine capacity. This method is used only where details of the motor vehicle expenses actually incurred are not available. It is not practicable to set uniform rates ap plicable in all cases where the method is used. The deduction allowed is determined in each case on the basis of the information available.
Nuclear Power
(Question No. 782)
Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 1 1 March 1981 :

( I ) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the state
ment contained in the Annual Report of the Australian
Atomic Energy Commission for 1 979-80 that during the period to early 1980, the Commission conducted analytical
studies of the whole Australian energy scene with a view to determining the possible circumstances under which nuclear power could make a contribution to Australia's energy needs, and the size of that contribution.
(2) Have any reports of the results of studies been prepared; if so, will the Minister make them available to the public.
(3) What are the findings of these studies.
Mr AnthonyThe Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( I ) Yes.
(2) The analytical work conducted was, as noted in the
AAEC's Annual Report 1979-80, related to an overall analy
sis of Australia's energy system. Three reports giving information on and data from the analysis were published in the Proceedings of the Australian Institute of Energy Conference,
5-9 February 1979. The papers were:
'A Suite of Energy and Economic Models for Australia': P. Essam, K. J. Maher, K. J. Stocks
'An Approximate Energy Consumption Series for Australia': P. Essam, K. J. Maher, K. J.-Stocks
'Energy Flows in Australia, 1974/75': P. Essam, J. J.
Faulkner, K. J. Maher, K. J. Stocks.
(3) These Reports do not reach conclusions but provide data and techniques which are being utilised in the work the AAEC is doing on Australia's behalf in the IEA Energy Sys tems Analysis Project which is still in progress.
Freshwater Research
(Question No. 820)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 1 2 March 1981 :
( 1 ) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the fact that
most, if not all, developed countries have national institutes or similar bodies which conduct freshwater research and provide advice on the management of freshwater resources.
(2) Is it a fact that much research on freshwater countries is not applicable to Australia because its inland waters have many unique features; if so, does Australia have such an insti tute. since water is a far scarcer, and in many cases more threatened, resource in this country.
( 3) IfAustralia does not have an institute, why not.
(4) Will the Minister consider establishing such an institute;
if not, why not.
Mr AnthonyThe Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( 1 ) I am aware that a number of developed countries have
national water research institutes or similar bodies.
(2) Yes. Nevertheless, Australia has a number of insti tutions and organisations within which a wide range of fresh water research is undertaken but there is no national institute as such.
(3) In its 1978 report on the Commonwealth's role in the
assessment, planning, development and management of Australia's water resources, the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources concluded that because of the wide

Answers to Questions

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 333

range of tasks of development, the diverse range of problems, climate and topography and the great distances involved, many of Australia's water research needs were specific to a particular region or State, and would not be met effectively by a central research authority. The Government agrees with the Senate Committee's conclusion that a national research insti tute would not be appropriate for Australia at the present time.
(4) Not at the present time, for reasons given in (3) above.
River Murray Salinity Mitigation
(Question No. 821)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for N ational Development and Energy, upon notice, on 1 2 March 1981 :
( I ) Is it a fact that funds provided in 1980-81 for River Murray salinity mitigation works as recommended in the Maunsell Report, form part of the National Water Resources Program allocation and do not represent additional funding.
(2) Does the Government intend to continue assessing River Murray salinity mitigation works in competition with other projects put forward under the National Water Re sources Program or will the Government provide additional funds specificallyfor these works.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( l ) In response to a recommendation of the Senate Stand ing Committee on National Resources in its 1 978 inquiry into the role of the Commonwealth in water resource matters, the Government undertook to establish a special sub-program within the National Water Resources Program to provide financial assistance to the State for salinity control. The States have been provided with whatever assistance they have requested on a dollar-for-dollar basis to implement projects recommended in the Maunsell report.
(2) Although funds are provided for salinity control proj ects from the global Budget appropriation for the National Water Resources Program, they have not been in competition to date with funds for other purposes such as water resource assessment, conservation, et cetera.
Murray-Darling River System: Water Hyacinth
(Question No. 823)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 12 March 1981 :
Will the Minister provide a status report on the threat posed by water hyacinth in the Murray-Darling River system.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I have been advised that a program to control the severe in festation of water hyacinth on the Gingham watercourse of the Gwydir River in northern New South Wales, which posed a threat to the Murray-Darling rivers system, has been an out standing success and the area has been virtually cleared of the infestation. The Commonwealth, New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia all contributed to the cost of the control program. The major task nOW in progress is to improve the water management along the watercourse and the surveil lance of fresh germinations of water hyacinth. Research is also

being undertaken within the University of New England on the persistence of seed germinations with a view to effecting total eradication of water hyacinth on the watercourse. No sightings of fresh germinations have been reported outside the area.
River Murray: Amoebic Meningitis
(Question No. 824)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 1 2 March 1981 :
( I ) What is the likelihood that water in the River Murray main stem harbours the amoeba responsible for amoebic meningitis.
(2) Has the public been made aware of the possible dangers associated with this amoeba being present in River Murray waters.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( I ) I understand that organisms of this type are relatively widespread in Australian inland waters and, under certain conditions, can develop the strain responsible for amoebic meningitis. M y Department has been advised, however, that the organism responsible for amoebic meningitis has not been detected in the waters of the main stem of the River Murray.
(2) My Department has also been advised that the South Australian authorities are currently undertaking a State-wide publicity program concerning risks associated with the rec reational use of freshwater generally, but with no specific em phasis on River Murray waters. The State will be providing about $200,000 annually for this program and for more inten sified surveillance of freshwater for the amoebic organism and for associated research.
Service Retention Rates
(Question No. 829)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 1 2 March 1981 :
What were the (a) Army, (h) Navy and (c) Air Force re tention rates for (i) male and (ii) female personnel for each month since December 1975.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Service Monthly Retention Rates are calculated as the ratio of the number of personnel retained to the average strength for each month. Figures exclude cadets, other ranks on recruit and initial employment training and members of Citizen Forces or Reserves on full-time duty.
Monthly retention rates for each Service, for males and fe males, divided into officers and other ranks are presented in Table I for each month since July 1 977. Data is not available to permit retention rates prior to that date to be calculated in this format. Table 2 shows the average monthly retention rate which has been calculated for six-monthly periods from July 1975 to June 1 977.
It should be noted that monthly retention rates differ greatly from annual retention rates. Annual wastage rep resents a summation across 12 months of all those Service personnel who were not retained, whilst Service strengths remain relatively similar to the average monthly strength.

1 334 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Navy

Year/Month
1977-
July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.
1978-
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.
1 979-
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.
1980-
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.
1981-
Jan.

Male officers
99.8 99.7 99.9 99.4 99.6 99.6
99.5 98.7 98.4 99.3 99.0 99.7 99.5 99.6 99.6 99.8 99.7 99.5
99.2 99.2 99.2 99.5 99.5 99.3 99.3 99.7 99.7 99.5 99.5 99.7
99.4 99.4 99.6 99.4 99.6 99.2 99.1 99.2 99.4 99.6 99.8 99.5
99.0

Table 1 MONTHLY RETENTION RATES JULY 1977 TO JANUARY 1981

Male
other ranks

Female officers

Army

Female other ranks

Male officers

Male other ranks

Female officers

Air Force

Female
other ranks

Male officers

98.6 98.1 99.3 98.6 99.2 99.1
98.9 98.9 98.9 98.9 98.5 99.3 98.2 99.0 98.7 99.3 99.3 99.5
99.0 99.3 99.3 99.1 99.2 99.4 98.7 99.3 99.2 99.0 99.3 99.5
98.8 99.4 99.3 99.2 99.2 99.3 98.7 99.2 98.9 99.3 99.3 99.5
98.4

98.4 100.0 100.0 100.0
98.5 97.0
100.0 100.0
98.5 96.8 97.2 97.3 98.6 100.0 98.6 100.0 98.7 98.6
98.7 100.0 100.0 95.9
98.6 98.7 98.7 100.0 100.0 100.0 98.6 100.0
97.4 100.0 98.7
98.7 100.0
98.7 93.6 98.7 93.3 100.0 97.3 100.0
94.2

97.8 97.0 96.4 97.7 97.9 98.9
97.9 97.3 98.4 98.9 95.3 98.4 95.5 98.1 99.2 98.8 98.6 98.4
98.0 97.1 97.0 99.1 98.6 98.5 98.8 97.6 97.8 98.6 99.1 99.2
98.7 98.5 99.3 97.9 97.8 98.2 97.9 98.3 97.6 98.0 98.6 99.3
98.9

99.3 99.7 99.6 99.8 99.6 99.7
99.5 99.5 99.3 99.7 99.5 99.8 99.4 99.6 99.8 99.5 99.5 99.8
99.3 99.2 99.3 99.5 99.4 99.5 99.2 99.5 99.6 99.6 99.8 99.4
99.1 99.2 99.1 99.6 99.3 99.7 99.2 99.5 99.6 99.7 99.6 99.6
99.4

99.0 98.8 99.0 99.2 98.8 99.4
98.9 98.7 98.7 99.1 98.8 99. 1 98.9 98.8 99.1 99.2 99.1 99.3
98.5 98.9 98.8 98.8 98.6 98.9 99.0 98.7 99.0 98.7 99.2 99.3
98.6 99.2 98.9 98.8 99.0 99.0 98.6 99.0 99.2 98.8 98.9 99.4
99.0

99.4 99.4 99.4 99.4 99.4 98.9
98.5 97.4 100.0 98.8 98.4 99.5 98.6 99.5 98.6 100.0 99.0 99.1
99.1 100.0 99.5 99.5 99.6 100.0 100.0 99.6 99.1
99.1 99.1 100.0
98.4 100.0 99.2 98.4 100.0 100.0 100.0 99.6 99.2 98.8 99.2 99.3
99.3

97.7 98.6 - 97.3 98.8 97.9 99.4
97.7 99.1 96.8 98.9 96.5 99.1 98.9 98.6 99.1 99.2 98.7 99.5
98.3 98.7 98.1 98.8 97.7 98.9 98.9 97.6 98.3 98.9 98.7 98.8
99.0 99.0 98.7 96.8 98.8 98.7 97.5 99.1 9.8. 5 99.4 98.8 99.0
99.3

99:3 99.5 99.4 99.4 99.6 99.4
99.0 99.4 99.5 99.4 99.5 99.7 99.7 99.4 99.1 99.7 99.6 99.3
99.3 98.9 99.1 99.3 99.1 99.5 98.8 99.0 99.7 99.5 99.7 99.7
98.8 99.2 99.3 99.4 99.6 99.6 99.2 99.6 99.6 99.3 99.6 99.4
98.3

Male other ranks

Female officers

Female other ranks

99.2 99.2 99.3 99.5 99.5 99.6
98.8 99.1 98.7 99.0 99.1 99.0 99.1 99.3 99.5 99.5 99.6 99.7
98.9 99.2 99.3 99.2 99.3 99.3 99.3 99.5 99.6 99.6 99.6 99.7
98.6 99.3 99.3 99.5 99.5 99.5 99.5 99.4 99.4 99.4 99.6 99.7
98.7

99.3 98.6 97.9 97.9 98.6 96.4
98.5 97.1 99.3 98.6 99.3 100.0 100.0 100.0 99.3 98.6 97.9 96.5
95.7 95.6 99.3 98.6 100.0 99.3 99.4 98.1 96.8 99.4 96.9 100.0
96.9 99.4 100.0 99.4 98.3 98.8 99.4 98.9 99.5 98.9 99.5 98.9
99.5

98.0 98.1 97.7 99.2 98.2 98.2
98.1 99.0 96.7 96.2 97.2 97.3 98.1 97.2 98.0 97.4 98.0 97.7
98.5 98.0 98.2 98.4 97.7 98.1 98.6 97.7 97.5 99.1 98.0 98.4
97.6 97.5 98.9 97.2 98.0 98.8 96.9 98.3 97.6 98.7 97.7 97.3
97.9

Table 2 AVERAGE MONTHLY RETENTION RATES FOR HALF YEAR PERIODS

Period
July-Dec. 75 Jan.-June 76 July-Dec. 76 Jan-June 77

Navy
Male Officers
99.4 99.3 99.5 99.5

Male Other Ranks
97.9 98.4 99.0 98.7

Female Officers
98.7 98.3 98.7 99.4

Army

Female
Other Ranks

Male Officers

97.6 97.4 97.4 96.9

99.4 99.4 99.6 99.6

Male Other Ranks
98.9 98.6 98.9 98.9

Female Officers
98.3 98.6 99.3 98.3

AirForce

Female Other
Ranks

Male Officer

98.4 98.1 98.3 98.2

99.3 99.2 99.4 99.5

Male Other Ranks

Female Officers

99.5 99.2 99.4 99.2

99.1 98.6 98.7 98.7

Female Other Ranks
98.4 98.0 98.2 97.8

Henderson Poverty Line Concept
(Question No. 830)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister, representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 1 2 March 1981:
Did the Minister's predecessor instruct the research secretariat within the Department of Social Security to review

the Henderson poverty line concept and develop a new poverty line.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The previous Minister for Social Security, Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle, announced in the Senate on 28 February 1980 that she had recently asked the Social Welfare Policy Secretariat, in consultation with her own Department, to

A nswers to Questions

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 33 5

examine the whole issue of alternative approaches to setting a poverty line that would be relevant to Australia in the 1980's.
Trade Practices Commission
(Question No. 280)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Busi ness and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 3 December 1 980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to an article in the Australian Financial Review of 26 November 1980 headed 'Trade Practices Commission looks to its own demise'.
(2) Is the Government committed to the continuation of the Trade Practices Commission; if so, will he guarantee that sufficient funds will be provided for the Commission to carry out its duties under the Act including funds for legal expenses incurred in any prosecution ofcompanies under the Act.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) Yes.
(2) All the functions ofGovernment are being reviewed by the Ministerial Review of Government Functions. It would not be proper for me to anticipate the results of that review. As with any function of Government the funds provided from time to time to the Trade Practices Commission are those considered appropriate to the function as determined.
School Dental Clinics
(Question No. 516)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( l ) What school dental clinics are operating in the Elec toral Division ofSwan.
(2) How many children in the Division are still waiting to receive dental attention (first contact) from the School Den tal Scheme.
(3) How many dental therapists are being trained at the WA. Institute of Technology's Dental Therapy Unit and what percentage of graduates from the dental therapists course at WA.I.T. have been able to find employment.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( l ) School dental clinics are operating at Bassendean, Bel may, Carlisle, Cloverdale, Guildford, Kewdale and Lathlain.
(2) All primaryschool children in the Division have access to the School Dental Service and there are no children await ing dental attention through the unavailability of dental services. Children attending schools without a dental clinic may receive treatment at a nearby school clinic. Some children may not yet have received dental attention because it has not been sought.
(3) Currently, thirty dental therapy students are being trained at the Western Australian Institute of Technology (WA.I.T.); eighteen are in the first year of the course and twelve are in the second year. I understand that all 1980 graduates are employed in either full time or part time pos itions. I have no information which indicates that any WA.I.T. dental therapy graduates are unemployed.

Petrol Retail Marketing Legislation
(Question No. 528)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Business and, Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
I n what way has the enactment of the petrol retail market ing legislation affected the method by which lessee operators receive and pay for petrol supplies from each of the major oil companies.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
If the terms and procedures of payment for petrol supplies are discriminatory that may constitute price discrimination within section 20 of the Petroleum Retail Marketing Fran chise Act 1980. Section 20 prohibits a franchisor discriminat ing between its franchisees in relation to the amounts payable by franchisees in respect to supply of motor fuel by the franchisor. except in certain circumstances, which are specified in the section. The petroleum retail marketing legislation does not otherwise regulate or affect the method by which franchisees receive or pay for petroleum supplies.
Land Usage at Lucas Heights
(Question No. 574)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister represent ing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Has the Australian Atomic Energy Commission varied restrictions recommended on the use of land (a) within 1 .6 kilometres, (b) between 1 .6 and 4.8 kilometres and (c) over 4.8 kilometres of the nuclear reactor at Lucas Heights, NSW in the last 1 2 months; if so, what are the variations, when did they occur and what was the justification for them.
(2) Has the Commission considered reviewing the restric tions imposed on land usage within 4.8 kilometres of the nu clear reactor at Lucas Heights; if so, what are the proposals.
(3) Has the Government or the Commission received any requests from State or local government authorities request ing the variation of restrictions on land usage referred to in part (2); if so, what were the requests and when were they made.
(4) Has the Commission advised officially or unofficially the Sutherland Shire Council on limitations of development in the Lucas Heights neighbourhood during the last 12 months; if so, whatwas the advice given.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and E nergy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( 1 ) (a) , (b) and (c) No.
(2) The Commission has an ongoing program of updating safety related systems and components of the HIFAR reactor to maintain its operations in line with the best overseas prac tice. In this regard. safety standards have continually been improved and the Commission is currently reviewing the need for its recommended restrictions on development beyond 1 .6 kilometres and additional measures that would be required to permit relaxation of the recommendations. Any proposals resulting from the review will be canvassed with Sutherland Shire Council and State authorities.
(3) No.
(4) During the last 1 2 months the AAEC has confirmed to Sutherland Shire Council that the recommended restrictions on land usage in the vicinity of Lucas Heights remain those

1 336 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Answers to Questions

which were made to the New South Wales Government in 1967. Council and the relevant State authority have also been advised of the review noted in (2) above.
Petrol Retail Marketing (Question No. 629)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
( 1 ) I s it a fact that Amoco Australia Limited is providing lessee dealers with an ex gratia temporary rent assistance on condition that lessee dealers meet a standard of cleanliness, customer service and merchandising to Amoco's satisfaction.
(2) If so, is this rent assistance approximately $700 per month in most cases.
(3) Is this assistance an incentive to lessee dealers to adopt merchandising practices dictated by Amoco, including the transfer to self-service stations.
(4) Does this practice circumvent certain provisions of legislation passed by the Parliament in 1980 in relation to petrol retail marketing.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) As to some dealers, yes.
(2) Amoco Australia Limited has stated that the amount of ex gratia payment varies and in some cases no rent assistance is provided.
(3) Amoco has stated that the question of conversion to self-service operation is in no way related to the payment ofex gratia rental assistance.
(4) The Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Act re quires that a franchisor shall not fail to renew a franchise agreement unless any increase in, inter alia, rent sought upon renewal is reasonable having regard to market value. The Act does not otherwise regulate the quantum of rent.
Young Unemployed: Dental Health (Question No. 192)
Mr Groom asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 27 November 1 980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that many young unemployed persons are unable to affordregular dental treatment because of their limited means and the high cost of treatment.
(2) Has any reliable investigation been carried out over recent times of the general health, and in particular the dental health, of the young unemployed; if so, what were the general findings of that investigation.
(3) Are the young unemployed entitled to receive free den tal care, or dental care at a reduced charge, as a result of any Commonwealth, State or local government scheme; if so, will he provide details.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) It seems likely that there are some unemployed people who have difficulty in meeting the cost ofregular private den tal treatment. However, I am not aware of the numbers involved.
(2) I am not aware of any investigation of the dental health of young unemployed persons specifically. However, in June 1980, the Australian Bureau of Statistics published a report (Catalogue No. 4339.0) which includes information about

dental health ofpersonsaged 15-24 years. This report does not specificallyrefer to young unemployed persons.

(3) There treatment to

iysonuongCoumnemmopnlwoyeeadlthpesrcshoenmsesptoecpifricoavlildye. '

d,ental Ih the

States and Territories, the unemployed generally have sImilar

access to free or subsidised government dental services as the

other disadvantaged groups in the community.

Young unemployed persons in receipt of unemployment benefits are generally eligible for free or subsidised dental care in the States and Territories. However, in South Australia, a minimum qualifying period of six months' continuous unemployment is applied while, in Western Australia, a similar pre requisite is applied to those unemployed persons outside the metropolitan area.

Based on information from States and Territories health authorities, the current situation within each State and Terri tory is summarised below:

New South Wales Tasmania Australian Capital Territory Northern Territory Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia

Free dental care is avail-' able to unemployed pcr sons in necessitous circumstances. Free dental care is available to persons in receipt of unemployment benefits. Other unem ployed persons are subject to a means test. Free dental care is available to unemployed per sons, subject to a means test.
After six months' con tinuous unemployment, persons are generally eli gible for free dental care. Unemployed persons not in receipt of unemployment benefits are eligible if they are in necessitous circumstances.
Subsidised dental care is available to unemployed persons in necessitous circumstances. In areas outside the metropolitan area, this service is con ditional on an unem ployed person having been continuously unem ployed for at least six months.

Proposed Insurance Brokers Legislation
(Question No. 414)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Did he state in tabling the recommendations from the Law Reform Commission on the proposed legislation to regu late insurance brokers that the recommendations would be referred to both the States and the industry for consideration and comment.
(2) Has he received requests by some life insurance companies to include the life agents in the proposed insurance brokers legislation.
(3) If so, and in view of the escalating number of insurance brokerage firm collapses over recent years, and the requests from the States for legislation, in particular from New South Wales and Western Australia, will he give an assurance that

Answers to Questions

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 337

the proposed legislation will be given priority, and that the question of the need to regulate agents will be considered separately.
(4) In view of the urgent need to iinplement legislation to regulate insurance brokers and the fact that there has been more than adequate time for recommendations to have been considered both by the States and the industry, is he able to say when the proposed legislation will be introduced.
Mr Howard -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) The ministerial statement made at the time of tabling of the Law Reform Commission's report (No. 1 6) on Insurance Agents and Brokers outlined my intention to refer the Report to both the States and the insurance industry for comment.
(2) To date a variety of views have been received on this matter.
(3) and (4) Prior to the Government's assessment of the Commission's Report I am naturally unable to give any indi cation of action the Government might wish to take. As is clear in my statements in the House on 5 March 1981 the matter is under notice at the present-time.
Health: Urea-formaldehyde Foam
(Question No. 499)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 24 February 198 1 :
( 1 ) Is he in a position to provide details o n (a) when the introduction of urea-formaldehyde foam for insulation purposes took place in Australia, (b) how many buildings have used this type of insulation and (c) whether this foam is used mainly for (i) domestic or Oi) other applications; if so, what are the details.
(2) Has his Department made any investigation of overseas claims that the use of urea-formaldehyde foam may cause health problems; if so, when was that investigation made and what were its results.
Mr MeVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) (a) Urea-formaldehyde foam (UF) insulationwas first used in Australia about 1 9 7 1 .
(b) The number of buildings in which UF insulation has been used throughout Australia is not known.
(c) (i) UF insulation has been used mainly in domestic dwellings, where it is mixed on site and injected into walls and ceilings. Insulation in housing in Australia is more normally urethane or styrene foam installed as a slab or bat; (ii) UF in sulation has also been used in the walls of industrial buildings.
(2) The Department of Housing and Construction is currently compiling all available information on UF insulation. It will be evaluated in conjunction with Health Authorities with the view to developing, in the first place, Policy Directives and Information Documents for use by the Department.
Invalid Pension: Means Test
(Question No. 510)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Will action be taken to extend the eligibility of persons receiving the invalid pension to receive the pension free of any means test, as is the case with persons receiving the blind pension.

(2) Is it a fact that disabled persons working in sheltered
employment may earn only $20 per week before their pension is reduced (that is, for every $1 earned, the pension reduces by 50 cents).
(3) If the position is as stated, is this a real disincentive to disabled persons in the International Year of Disabled Persons.
Mr Hunt--The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( I ) There arc no specific plans at present to extend similar
treatment to invalid pensions. This is a matter for possible Budget consideration.
(2) Single persons in receipt of sheltered employment allowances may be in receipt of non-allowance income (including any earnings from sheltered employment) of $20 a week before their allowance is reduced under the prevailing income test. For married couples, combined non-allowance income must exceed $34.50 before allowance is reduced. Above these amounts allowance is tapered away by 50 cents for each $1 of non-pension income. A concession from income of $6 a week is also allowed for each dependent child.
(3) The purpose of the taper in the income test is to provide incentives for those in receipt of pensions and allowances to supplement assistance provided by the Government.
Under current arrangements, some pension or allowance remains payahle until non-pension/allowance income exceeds $ 148.20 a week (single persons) and $248.10 (married couples) . These limits are increased where the pen sioner/allowee has dependent children. These limits rise auto matically each May and November by virtue of the automatic indexation provisions applying to pensions.
Unlike most other pensioners, recipients of sheltered employment allowances (and invalid pensioners under age pen sion age) enjoy the benefit of their payments being non-taxable.
They also receive an income test free incentive allowance of $5 a week in lieu of supplementary assistance which is subject to a strict income test.
They are also eligible for pensioner fringe benefits on a more liberal basis than other pensioners. (Fringe benefit eligi bility ceases when their weekly non-allowance income reaches $68 for a single person and $73 for a married couple, as com pared with $40 and $68 for other pensioners).
Unemployment Benefit
(Question No. 535)
Mr Free asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) What is the current weekly level of benefit paid to unemployedpersons aged 16 and 17 years.
(2) When was it last increased.
(3) What was the previous level.
(4) What sum, calculated on annual increases in the Con sumer Price Index, would now need to be paid to provide pur chasing power equivalent to that at the time of the last increase.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

1 338 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Answers to Questions

( 1 ) The rate of unemployment benefit for a single person aged 16 or 1 7 years without dependents is at present $36 a week.
(2) This rate has applied since 19 May 1975.
(3) The previous rate was $31 a week, which had applied from 31 July 1974.
(4) If the present rate were increased by the movements in the Consumer Price Index (six State capital cities) from the June quarter 1 975 to the December quarter 1980 (the latest available), tlie new rate would be $62.00 a week (rounded to the nearest 5 cents) .
Naval Patrol Boats for Civil Surveillance
(Question No. 564)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) How many RAN patrol boats were directly available for civil surveillance ,and enforcement in (a) 1 977-78, (b) 1978-79 and (c) 1 979-80.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1 ) (a) Seven of an Attack Class patrol boat force of twelve.
(b) Initially eight increased to nine in accordance with the Government's announcement in July 1978 concerning future arrangements for civil coastal surveillance.
(c) Nine. In addition to those nine, since June 1980 RAN Attack Class patrol boats have also provided surface surveil lance of the Bass Strait oil and gasinstallation area. As I stated in my press release of 6 June 1980, details of the surveillance activity in Bass Strait will not be released.
Cerebl'al Palsy (Question No. 577)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister represent ing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
( 1 ) Will the Government (a) allow a means test free pen sion to be granted to invalid pensioners suffering from cer ebral palsy and (b) raise the limit of $20 on earnings by dis abled persons in sheltered employment as part of the means test; if not, why not.
(2) What other assistance does the Government propose to assist persons suffering from cerebral palsy to mark the Inter national Year ofDisabled Persons.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( 1 ) There are no specific plans at present to (a) extend el igibility for an income-test-free pension to invalid pensioners suffering from cerebral palsy, or to (b) raise the limits on earnings ('free areas') of $20 a week (single person) or $34.50 a week (married couples) before allowances are reduced for disabled persons in sheltered employment. These are matters for possible Budget consideration.
As with most other pensions invalid pensions and sheltered employment aJlowances are paid subject to an income test in order to concentrate assistance on those most in need.
At the same time, encouragement is provided for pensioners and sheltered employment allowees to supplement assistance from the Government by the withdrawal of only 50c of pen sion or allowance for each $1 of private income above the free areas.

Under current arrangements some pension or allowance remains payable until non-pension income exceeds $148.20 a week (for a single pensioner) and $248. 10 a week (for married couples) . These limits are increased by $26 a week for each dependent child, and rise automatically each May and November by virtue of the automatic indexation provisions applying to pensions.
Recipients of sheltered employment allowance are already advantaged compared to some other pensioner categories because their allowances are not subject to personal income tax. A similar provision applies to invalid pensions paid to persons under age pension age.
Sheltered employment allowees also receive an income test-free incentive allowance of $5 a week in lieu of sup plementary assistance which is subject to a strict income test.
They are also eligible for pensioner fringe benefits on a more liberal basis than other pensioners. Fringe benefit eligi bility ceases when their weekly non-allowance income reaches $68 for a single pensioner and $73 for a pensioner couple, as compared with $40 and $68 for other pensioners.
(2) The Government is concerned that, though there arc many individual groups of disabled persons, the goals of 'full participation and equality' set by the United Nations, should be achieved for all disabled people.
Through a national publicity ampaign and community
awareness program the Government is identifying measures which can contribute to the welfare and independence of all those people with disabilities.
The Commonwealth is playing its part, not only in provid ing the overall co-ordination of the year's activities, but within almost every portfolio particular emphasis is being placed upon projects and programs which will assist in providing for disabled people the same opportunities, choicies and personal dignity available to the rest of the community. Activities range over a wide spectrum, from developing skills of disabled people to the modificationofbuildings to facilitate access.
Veterans' Affairs: Medical Officers
(Question No. 644)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing I, the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 26 February 1981 :
( I ) How many medical officers in the Department of Vet
erans' Affairs are, or have been, wholly or partly involved in examining Vietnam veterans or otherwise processing their claims, as at (a) 30 January 1980, (b) 30 July 1980 and (c) 30 January 198 1 .
(2) Have any of the medical officers referred to in part ( I ) resigned from the Department between 3 0 January 1980 and 25 February 1981, because of disagreements with Government or departmental policy, due to (a) insufficient avail ability of medical staff and (b) inadequate office space, treat ment facilities, and other support facilities.
(3) If so, has any legal action against the Government been commenced.
(4) If legal action has been commenced, (a) when and (b) in what court or tribunalwasit commenced.
Mr McVeigh-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( l ) The numbers involved at the respective dates were (a) 3 1 ; (b)33; and (c) 36.
(2) No.
(3) Noneas far as I am aware.

Answers to Questions

2 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 339

(4) Not applicable.
Natural Disaster Relief
(Question No. 668)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(I) O n what basis was the 1980-81 Budget estimate of Commonwealth advances in respect of natural disaster relief assistance to the States formulated.
(2) Is it a fact that the 1980-81 estimate is lower than actual expenditure in this category for any single year since 1976-77.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( I) The 1980-81 Budget estimate of $ 1 2.8m made provision
for expected payments in respect of expenditure estimated by the States on relief and restoration measures for natural disas ters which had occurred in previous years ($7.8m), and also made some allowance for payments expected to be made in relation to possible new disasters, some of which on the basis of past experience, could be expected to qualify for Commonwealth assistance ($5m)
(2) Yes.
Health Insurance (Question No. 714) Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 March 1981 :
( I ) Has his attention been drawn to the increasing interest being shown by commercial insurers in offering various forms of cover against illness and health expenses outside the ambit of the National Health Act and the Health Insurance Act.
(2) If so, is he able to say how many persons have health cover provided outside the registered health funds.
(3) Does the activity of the commercial insurers, by attract ing low risk contributors, furthr undermine the principle of community rating and thereby lead to higher health insurance costs for the less healthy and the elderly; if so, to what extent.
(4) Are there any regulatory mechanisms for controlling the activities of these fringe health insurers.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) Yes.
(2) As theseinsurers are operating outside the provisions of the National Health Act, I do not have figures on the number of persons who have cover with them. Indications are, how ever, that the impact of commercial health insurers has been very small.
(3) The commercial insurers, by virtue of the conditions imposed on persons wishing to take out such insurance, would mainly attract low risk persons. If a large number of prsons withdrew from traditional health insurance to take out cover with the commercial insurers, or for any other reason, the principle of community ratingwould be weakened. This could lead to higher health insurance contribution rates for those remaining in traditional health insurance. Availability of com mercial insurance is only one factor affecting an individual's decision to drop traditional health insurance. To date, com mercial insurers have had no discernible effect on health in surance contributions.

(4) As these insurers are operating outside the legislation administered by my Department, I have no regulatory mech anisms for controlling their activities.

I understand that the 1973, administered by the

Commonwealth's Insurance Act Insurance Commissioner, enables

the Commonwealth to exercise controls relating to the finan

cial viability of authorised insurance companies but itdoes not

provide for any control over classes ofbusiness undertaking or

over premium rates.

Social Security Pensions
(Question No. 750)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister represent ing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 1 0 March 1981 :
( I ) How does the Department of Social Security carry out
checks in overseas countries to ensure that pensions and benefitssent overseas are not based on fraudulent or incorrect claims on public funds.
(2) In which overseas countries are these checks carried out and are officers of the Department of Social Security directly involved in these investigations.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( I ) and (2) An identification check is made at the overseas paying office before payment of a current Australian pension or benefit commences to the overseas address.
Reviews of pension and benefit entitlement in other countries are substantially the same as those within Australia. Re views are controlled from Australia with the exception of those cases involving payment through the Geneva Office, where a similar review operates but is locally selected and controlled.
R eviews generally are carried out by mail and are proces sed, for New Zealand residents, by officers of the New Zealand Department of Social Welfare; for the United King dom and Eire, by officers under the control of the Official Secretary, Australian High Commission, London; and broadly for residents of Continental Europe and the Middle East, by officers of the Austulian Department of Social Security stationed in Geneva. The remainder are processed within the Department of Social Security in Australia.
The assistance of Australian consular staff may be enlisted where the need arises. Australian medical officers located overseas conduct medical reviews where necessary.

Asbestos
(Qnestion No. 753)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 1 0 March 1981 :
( l ) Is asbestos included by the National Health and Medi cal Research Council on the list ofhuman carcinogens.
(2) Is it a fact that many publications by the National Health and Medical Research Council refer to asbestos as a human carcinogen.
(3) If asbestos is not on the National Health and Medical Research Council list as a human carcinogen, what is the reason.
Mr MacKellar--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( l ) The National Health and Medical Research Council does not maintain a comprehensive list of substances which

1 340 REPRESENTATIVES 2 April 1981

Answers to Questions

may be carcinogenic to humans. The list of carcinogenic sub stances probably referred to is limited to known chemical car cinogens. This forms part of a document on model regulations for the use of industries which handle such substances.
(2) Yes. In fact Council considered the health hazards of asbestos to be of sufficient importance to warrant the establishment of a special series of committees to prepare a com prehensive report and a series of advisory documents on and guidelines for the use ofmaterials containing this substance.
c3) It is obviously more useful to the professions, industry and consumers to provide information, advice, codes of prac tice, guidelines and other such documents on specific materials likely to cause health hazards than merely to produce lists.
Home Savings Grants Scheme
(Question No. 896)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
( I ) What is the current waiting period for grants issued under the Home Savings Grants Scheme.
(2) How many applicants were awaiting grants as at 28 February 198 1 .
M r M cVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( l ) A nine months waiting period applies from the date of lodgment of an application for a home savings grant before payment of a grant may be made. This decision was an nounced in the Budget on 15 August 1 978. The decision was made to help reduce the Government's expenditure in that difficult budgetary year, as part of the continuing attack on inflation. The allocation of funds in subsequent Budgets has not permitted a reduction of the waiting period.
(2) At 28 February 1981 20,732 applications for a grant were approved but awaiting payment.
Disabled Persons: Access to Federal Buildings
(Question No. 901)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 25 March 1981 :
( 1 ) How many Federal Government-owned and Federal Governmcnt-leascd buildings in Sydney have ready access for disabled persons and which departments occupy these buildings.
(2) How many of these buildings are currently being modified to allow ready access for disabled persons.
(3) What sum has been alIocated for the alterations of these buildings.

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I ) The Department of Housing and Construction as part of its program of activities in support of 1981 as the Inter national Year of Disabled Persons is conducting a survey of some 500 Commonwealth-owned and leased buildings throughout Australia to assess their accessibility by disabled people.
Completion of the total survey is expected towards the end of April 1981 .
Based o n the results of the survey to date, the following buildings have been identified in Sydney that provide facilities' for access by the disabled:
(a) Grace Building, York Street, Sydney-Department of Veterans' Affairs.
(b) Commonwealth Centre, Chifley Square, Sydney Department of Administrative Setvices, Health, Im migration and Ethnic Affairs, Public Service Board.
( c ) Queen Elizabeth II Rehabilitation Centre, Camperdown-Department of Social Security.
(d) Offices at 1 1 7 Clarence Street, Sydney-Department of Social Security.
(e) International Terminal Building, Sydney Airport Department of Transport.
(f) Offices at 5-7 Hickson Road, Circular Quay, Sydney Bureau of Customs.
(g) Repatriation General Hospital, Concord Department ofVeterans' Affairs.
(h) Lady Davidson Hospital, Turramurra-Department of Veterans' Affairs.
(i) Mt Wilga Rehabilitation Centre, Hornsby Department of Social Security.
(i) Blues Point Road, North Sydney-Department of Veterans' Affairs.
(2) The following buildings are being modified this financial year to improve access by disabled people:
(a) Australia House, Sydney -unisex disabled persons toilet.
(b) Commonwealth Centre, Chifley Square, Sydney new automatic sliding door entry, new taps, modifica tion to cafeteria food race, lower public telephone, dis abled persons toilet.
(e) 5-7 Hickson Road, Circular Quay-disabled persons toilet.
(3) (a) Australia House-$\ O,OOO.
(b) Commonwealth Centre --$28,500. (c) 5-7 Hickson Road-$9,500. There is a continuing program to modernise the Grace Building on a floor by floor basis and facilities for the disabled are being included in this program.
Provision for access and use of leased premises by disabled people is taken into account when considering leasing proposals or fitout of leased premises.


