House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 123, 1981 Tuesday, 9 June 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3321

Tuesday, 9 June 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has had serious adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilisers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering they vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from falling into priv!lte hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage, Mr Beazley, Dr Blewett, Mrs Child, Mr Free, Mr Hawke, Mr Humphreys, Dr Jenkins, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Charles Jones and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) the imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies

and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.

(iii) those students arid potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of fees for post-secondary education.

Your petitioners therefore pray that:

1. post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any

courses or for any category of students:

2. the visa charges upon private overseas students be re-

moved immediately.

-

3. the Minister of Education immediately clarify the

government's attitude to the re-introduction of post-

secondary tuition fees.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Child, Mr Free, Mr Kent, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Mountford.

Petitions received.

Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in: (i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline
services in Australia; (ii) higher domestic air fares. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jacobi, Mr Charles Jones and Mr Morris. Petitions received.

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) The imposition of tuition fees for second degrees and post-graduate degrees will deter many able persons from enrolling for such courses and further preserve higher education for the rich.
(iii) The introduction of a loans scheme, subsequent review of the level of TEAS and the tightening of the eligiblity criteria for TEAS will cause great financial hardship and will deter students from enrolling in tertiary institutions.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
1. post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students.

3322 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Petitions

2. the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately.
3. the government reverse its decision to introduce a loans scheme and instead increase and extend TEAS scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling and Mr Humphreys. Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Rep!esentatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
1. the proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. the proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a "poor risk" (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. in regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. the proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.
5. the proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid 19808, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quali~y of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that: (i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any
courses or for any category of students; (li) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully
meet the real financial needs ofstudents. (iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced. (iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary
Assistance. (v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CABs uuless they are
rationalised be rescinded. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling and Dr Theophanous. Petitions received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(1) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to

bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hy~enic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (li) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child. Petition received.
Curfew at Eagle Farm Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That noise levels created by aircraft using Eagle Farm Airport already constitute an annoyance and inconvenience to those residents living near the airport and along flight paths.
That relaxation of the Eagle Farm Airport curfew to allow any aircraft including TAA's airbus to fly into and out of Eagle Farm Airport between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. would:
(a) Substantially increase the inconvenience and annoyance caused by aircraft noise because the operation of aircraft at this time would seriously disturb people's sleep;
(b) Contradict and negate a commendable undertaking made by the Commonwealth Minister for Transport, the Hon. Ralph Hunt, in reply to a question on notice in the Parliament, that the curfew will remain on the runways at the existing site at Eagle Farm Airport.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will not approve the application of TAA-or any other airline-to relax or withdraw the curfew at Eagle Farm Airport.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Health Care Services: Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we strongly condemn any action taken by the Federal Government which will lead to the destruction of the Free Hospital and Medical Services of the State ofQueensland.
And your petitioners therefore humbly pray: That the Parliament reject the proposed health cost
sharing arrangements between the Commonwealth and the State governments and guarantee the maintenance of the

Petitions

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3323

present scheme whereby all Queenslanders who wish to avail themselves of these services may do so.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Overseas Aid
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Australia, as an affluent and developed nation, should be able to expend more of its resources on the alleviation of human suffering and deprivation in other less developed countries.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will:
Increase overseas aid to 0.7 per cent of Australia's G.N.P.
Increase to 4 per cent the proportion of overseas aid channeled through recognised non-government organisations such as World Vision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Social Security Benefits
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled, the petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that the projected decision by the Government to abolish social security payments for all those under eighteen years of age should not be proceeded with on the following grounds:
1. The proposal by the Government is in direct contravention to a major recommendation from the National Youth Conference held in Canberra, 1979.
2. The proposal will further detract from the ability of young people to make decisions about their own lives.
3. The proposal implies a denial of the right to work for the under 18 age group, by denying them benefits when they can legally leave school and enter the work force.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Members of Parliament assembled should take all possible steps to abandon any decision made by the Government to abolish social security payments for persons under the age of eighteen years.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That, as ex-servicemen are eligible to receive a Service pension five years earlier than other Australian males are eligible to receive an age pension, subject to certain conditions, so too should the age at which the means test is applied to pension increases be reduced for service pensioners by five years to age 65.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will, in recognition of the service they have performed

for their country, and because of reduced life expectancy as a result of that service, reduce the so-called means test free age limit for Service pensioners from 70 years to 65.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That public investment in tertiary education in the form of Federal Government funding is an investment in Australia's future and enables Australia to meet the demands of Technological innovation.
That grave concern has been generated as a result of the Government's decisions to:
(a) abolish the Education Research and Development Committee,
(b) terminate special support for educational research, (c) scale down in-house and contracted research activities
of the Department of Education, (d) scale down participation in international education
activities, particularly UNESCO and OECD, (e) further tighten already restrictive eligibility guidelines
for TEAS, (f) supplement TEAS assistance by means of a loan
scheme, (g) phase in tuition fees for students undertaking degrees
and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification, (h) reduce grants to universities and colleges to take account of fee income, (i) completely abolish 30 colleges of advanced education and (j) scale down various engineering schools in colleges of advanced education around Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these regressive decisions and desist from obvious attempts to pave the way for a complete reintroduction of tertiary fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound wiII ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned Australian citizens showeth:
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital has been of inestimable value to eligible repatriation beneficiaries for many years, and the closure or dispersal of the facilities available at the hospital would be a retrograde step.
The proposed decision to close Rosemount Repatriation Hospital through active discouragement by departmental administrative officers of any further referrals by medical officers of patients for medically prescribed occupational therapy is objectionable.
Closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital would severely disadvantage veterans in Brisbane's northern suburbs, as well as their relatives and friends who would be required to travel a great distance in order to visit hospitalised veterans at either of the two alternative repatriation hospitals.

3324 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Petitions

Closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital and transfer of patients to Greenslopes would greatly add to the administrative burden of that repatriation and general hospital.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will reverse its announced decision to close the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Great Barrier Reef: Oil Exploration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens showeth:
That the undersigned are of the opinion that the Great Barrier Reef and region must be protected in entirety from the potentially destructive effects of mining and respectfully demand that you ensure this by declaring a continuous marine park of the reef zone from Fraser Island to the Torres Strait in 1981, for which management plans of the type devised for the Capricornia Section can be prepared and discussed in due course.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that "between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent."
It is your petitioners sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for th~ child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission

and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrDobie.
Petition received.
National Day of Prayer and Fasting
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the Undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that; in view of the Spiritual and Moral decline of our nation we, your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament will call a day of National Prayer and fasting in 1981.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie.
Petition received.
Transcendental Meditation: Medical Benefits
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
That the Federal Government is currently paying medical benefits for Transcendental Meditation where it is provided by a medical practitioner as part of a professional attendance.
That the Federal Department of Health has described the Transcendental Meditation practice as a 'medically indicated relaxation technique'.
That Federal courts in the United States of America have found Transcendental Meditation to be a religious practice and have consequently banned Federal Government funds being spent on Transcendental Meditation.
That the organization conducting Trancendental Meditation courses in Australia, the World Plan Executive Council of Australia Ltd, has sent large sums of money to its Swiss Headquarters.
That all teachers of Transcendental Meditation have to pledge allegiance to the Guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi who has claimed that advanced practitioners of Transcendental Meditation can levitate.
Your practitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should respond to our plea that the Health Department should make available the scientific evidence on which it decided that the Transcendental Meditation practice is 'a medically indicated relaxation technique' and further that the Federal Government should cease paying medical benefits where Transcendental Meditation is provided by a medical practitioner.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will <lver pray.
by Mr Steele Hall.
Petition received.
Bendigo Ordnance and Clothing Factories
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned, wish to make it known to the Prime Minister, Mr Fraser, and the Liberal Government that we strongly condemn the proposed implementation of the Government Review Committee (The Razor Gang) recommendations:
The proposed sale of Government enterprises in a number of areas and their implied discontinuation of operation if not sold is simply a sell-out to private commercial interests and a rejection of the rights of the public to have a say in the operation ofmany areas of industrial importance.

Petitions

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3325

We are particularly concerned with the proposed closure of the Bendigo Ordnance Factory and the sale or lease to private enterprise of the Australian Government Clothing Factory.
The acts will risk the jobs of many hundreds of workers and jeopardise the working conditions of many hundreds of others.
Your petitioners urge that the decisions taken by the Liberal Government in relation to these plants be reversed.
We demand that the Bendigo Ordnance Factory and the Australian Government Clothing Factory remain as they are.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrHawke.
Petition received.
Health Insurance
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That Federal Government proposals to shift the cost of health insurance onto the individual has placed a disproportionate and unfair financial burden on lower income groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes.
2. That an estimated 15-20 per cent of Australians will not be able to afford insurance and will be forced to undertake extensive travel to avail themselves of outpatient services,.the quality of which will be drastically reduced because of staff cuts.
3. That doctors, who at this moment are awaiting a fee increase, will inevitably become more and more expensive.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government (i) will re-examine the effects of health proposals and of the necessity for compulsory health insurance on lower income groups who do not presently meet the description of disadvantaged, and (ii) redefine the criteria determining the genuinely needy and disadvantaged to encompass the categories of persons mentioned in (1.) above.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(1) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.

(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oithe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
(2) That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
(3) That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases. against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored public inquiry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker, and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That the decisions arising out of the Review of Government Functions (undertaken by The Razor Gang) in relation to tertiary education funding will severely impair the process of developing the nation's intellectual resources.
2. That the inevitable outcome of the decisions will, in general terms, be:
(i) the financial impoverishment of small and mediumsized universities;
(ii) the abandonment of non-vocational courses and the possibility of widespread academic unemployment.
3. That amongst the particular consequences of the decisions, namely consequence~ following on the re-introduction of tertiary fees for selected categories of post-graduate students will be:
(i) the discouraging of part-time post-graduate students and all those not receiving Commonwealth or University scholarships;
(ii) the weakening of the national research effort to which post-graduate students have in the past made a significant contribution.
4. That the provision of the maximum TEAS benefit to only 14 per cent of all students, indeed, the failure to adequately support financially all undergraduate students, will be a disincentive to enrolment in tertiary institutions.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government 10 re-consider the decisions arising out of the Review of Commonwealth Functions and urgently initiate a full and complete inquiry into the following:
(i) employment in tertiary institutions;

3326 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Petitions

(ii) the effects of the Government's decisions upon the national research effort and upon post-graduate enrolments;
(iii) the adequacy of tertiary student support systems.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your Pensioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That there is an urgent need to ensure that the living standard of pensioners will not decline further and your petitioners urge that action be taken to:
1. Adjust all pensions and benefits quarterly to the consumer price index.
2. To restore items deleted from the pharmaceutical benefits scheme and to add other necessary items.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Klugman.
Petition received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The club industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the tbree basic needs oflife: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The club industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The club industry is entirely within the private sector and makes a contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The club industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level ofemployment.

5. The club industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian club industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the consumer price index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the club industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
11. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State licence fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The club industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that honourable members of the House of Representativ~~:
1. Recognise the importance and place of the Australian club industry in the social and economio life of the nation.
2. Accept that the viability of the club industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the club needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that honourable members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
EISalvador
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully sheweth:
That the present Government of EI Salvador has been responsible for the deaths of at least 10,000 people in 1980 alone; and that it has been condemned as one of the worst human rights violators in the world by organisations such as Amnesty International and the US Conference of Catholic Bishops.
Therefore we humbly request that the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia, (i) urge the Government of the United States of America to immediately cease all military aid to the government of EI Salvador; (ii) support the freedom of

Petitions

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3327

the Salvadorian people against the governing military dictatorship.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Owing to an overwhelming and continuous demand by the Australian people for a cruise service within the economic scope of the working man and his family, we request the Government to lift the ban placed on Soviet passenger cruise vessels entering Australian ports.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And further, that annual Budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should:
Take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing functioning of the Betsy Women's Refuge and the network of shelters in Australia.
We ask that the Federal Government acknowledge that 'Betsy' and its counterparts provide housing and care for women and children in violent situations, and the Government agree to meet the financial responsibilities for continued and effective Refuge functioning.
The Federal Government should be informed that one in every five applicants are not accommodated at the Betsy Refuge due to overcrowding or full occupancy.
We therefore petition for full and adequate funding. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions, the ACTU and the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our national airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of Australia (DEBRA A) and their supporters respectfully shows:
That funds for medical research into epidermolysis bullosa are no longer being made available from the Federal Government to the medical team at the University of New South Wales, enabling them to continue medical research into epidermolysis bullosa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray 'that these signatures contained on these forms will serve to make it known that we expect these funds to be forthcoming in the very ncar future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Staging ofAmerican B52 Bombers
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and rest and recreation base for American B52 bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52s:
(a) Carried nuclear weapons (b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another
state. Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy. Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region. Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidential radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents. Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of peace in the Pacific region and

3328 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Notices ofMotions

violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty. Your petitioners therefore pray that the members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location iii Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrKent. Petition received.
Garden Island, Western Australia
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That although cottages numbers 11, 12, 13 and 14 on Garden Island in no way impede construction at HMAS Stirling, they are now required by the Department of Administrative Services to move by 30th June, 1981.
Your petitioners humbly pray that: Cottages numbers II, 12, 13 and 14 on Garden Island be allowed to remain and to move only when the remaining northern end cottages do so. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean. Petition received.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-l inform the House that the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony), the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street), and the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) have left Australia on ministerial business. The Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) is Acting Minister for Trade and Resources, the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) is Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, .and the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) is Acting Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) is representing the Attorney-General in this House in his capacity as Acting Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.
NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY Notice of Motion
Mr UREN (Reid)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House(I) deplores the failure of the Government to recognise the dangers in the recent development of nuclear weapons technology in India, Israel, South Africa, Pakistan and, according to the Israelis, Iraq, and (2) condemns the Government for its failure to avert the risk of nuclear war by its commitment to the mining and export of Australian uranium, particularly in view of the 3rd

principal finding of the 1st report of the Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry, that the nuclear power industry is unintentionally contributing to an increased risk of nuclear war and that this is the most serious hazard associated with the industry.
NORTHERN TERRITORY UNIVERSITY Notice of Motion
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory)-Igive notice that, on the next day of sitting, 1 shall move:
That this House-
(1) notes the present difficulties of obtaining tertiary qualifications in the Northern Territory;
(2) recognises the immediate and long-term benefit to the Northern Territory with the establishment of a university; and
(3) calls on the Government to review its decision not to provide funding this triennium for a university in the Northern Territory.
ALLIED MERCHANT SEAMEN Notice of Motion
Mr MORRIS (Shortland)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House is of the opinion that allied merchant seamen who served in a theatre of war in World War II and have the necessary residential qualifications should qualify for a service pension.
ABORIGINES AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS
Notice of Motion Dr EVERI~GHAM (Capricornia)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That the House accepts the fact that the indigenous people of Australia, now known as Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders, were in possession of this entire nation prior to the 1788 First Fleet landing at Botany Bay and urges the Australian Government to admit prior ownership by the said indigenous people and introduce legislation to compensate the people now known as Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders for dispossession of their land.
COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT LAND ACQUISITIONS AND USES Notice of Motion
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan)-I give notice that, for General Business Thursday No.9, I shall move:
That this House-
(1) notes-
(a) the anomalies and inadequacies of current Commonwealth compensation legislation and
(b) the Australian Law Reform Commission's recommendations concerning injurious effects, and
(2) is of the opinion that a select committee should be established to inquire into the availability of compensation for people adversely affected by Commonwealth Government land acquisitions and uses.

Questions Without Notice

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3329

LEBANON: MIGRATION OF RESIDENTS TO AUSTRALIA
Notice of Motion
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House, taking into account the ongoing conflict in Lebanon, the resultant loss of life and displacement of persons, calls on the Government to expedite approval of applications for immigration to Australia of residents of Lebanon, when the object of such immigration is to reunite families and further calls upon the Government to relax the NUMAS requirements for applicants from Lebanon during the present conflict.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
ISRAELI AIR ATTACK
Mr HAYDEN-I refer the Prime Minister to the Israeli air attack on the nuclear power generating installation near Baghdad on 7 June. Is he aware that the United States, Britain, France and numerous Arab states have condemned the attack, which, in the words of the spokesman for the United States State Department, 'cannot but seriously add to the already tense situation in the area'? Is he aware that this attack is likely to harden the Arab attitude against any Middle East settlement and, in particular, has seriously endangered the goodwill of Egypt? Is he aware that Prime Minister Begin, who faces an election in three weeks' time, undertook this action without informing any of the other political parties in Israel, or any of his allies, including the United States? Will the Prime Minister express the Australian people's unqualified condemnation of this act of aggression?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I am aware of some of the facts alleged in the honourable gentleman's question but not all of them. Quite obviously this Government, and I believe the whole House, would very greatly regret any action which would add to tensions in the Middle East. I hope that our approach, on a bipartisan basis, can be based on that presumption.
AUSTRALIAN BANKING SYSTEM
Mr SHACK-In the light of the likelihood of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System finding in favour of a more open Australian banking system is the Treasurer concerned that the Federal Treasury is reported to be opposed to such a move?
Mr HOWARD-I assume that the honourable member for Tangney is referring to some Press reports on a submission made by the Treasury to the Campbell Committee on the subject of banking

regulation. That submission, like other submissions made to the Committee by the Treasury and other bodies and other departments, was made public in the interests of as full as possible public debate on this matter. I make it plain to the honourable member that I do not at this stage propose to debate the merits of that submission or indeed any other submission to the Campbell Committee of Inquiry. Suffice to say that the submission made by the Treasury on that subject was its own submission and does not necessarily represent my views or indeed the views of the Government. The Government will assess the recommendations of the Campbell Committee against a background of its general disposition not to intervene in the market place unless there is a strong national interest in doing so and against the background of my personal bias towards greater deregulation of the financial system.
FILM INDUSTRY: TAX CONCESSIONS
Mr WILLIS-Is the Prime Minister aware that the tax concessions for the Australian film industry which he said in his policy speech last October would cost $2m have now been admitted by the Treasurer to cost $40m in respect of the 150 per cent deduction for capital invested with a further random addition to be added for the cost of the exemption from tax or net receipts for a film up to 50 per cent of the capital invested? How does the Prime Minister account for the fact that the costing he gave at the last election was less than 5 per cent of the real cost of the scheme? Does he agree that by vastly understating the cost he deceived the electorate? Will he promise that in future he will provide a proper costing of his promises as well as refraining from massively overstating those of the Opposition?
Mr HOWARD-I have already explained to the House both in response to questions and in the course of the debate on the relevant amendment to the income tax law that the estimate provided in the policy speech was based upon an estimate supplied to the Government by the Australian Film Commission. That figure was and is less than the concession will cost on a full year basis. I endeavoured in the course of the debate last Friday to explain the only proper basis on which, in the light of the evidence now available to the Governmerit, a costing could be made. I do not believe anything can usefully be added to what has been said on the subject.
BUILDERS LABOURERS FEDERATION
Mr PEACOCK-My question is directed to the Acting Minister for Industrial Relations. I refer him to Government statements in mid-April

3330 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

that deregistration proceedings against the Builders Labourers Federation were to be expedited. Will the Minister advise the House of the reasons for the delay in instituting such proceedings?

these tax increases for the great bulk of taxpayers mean that--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hunter will resume his seat.

Mr FIFE-I can inform the honourable member for Kooyong and other members of the House that the Government is pressing ahead as rapidly as possible with its preparation aimed at securing the deregistration of the Builders Labourers Federation. Indeed, the honourable member and the House will be interested to know that the Commonwealth has already engaged counsel and has appointed Messrs N. McPhee, QC., and N. B. Dowling, QC., and Dr Jessup to act on behalf of the Commonwealth. The work of assembling the material has involved widespread consultation with employers. This work is taking place, as I have just indicated; as rapidly as possible. The Government believes it will be in a position in the very near future to commence proceedings.
INCOME TAX Mr ROBERT BROWN-I refer the Treasurer to his recent statement announcing less than half tax indexation for the next financial year and the abolition of tax indexation for the following years. Is it a fact that because of his Government's failure fully to index taxes and because of discretionary changes in favour of high income earners in the past, almost 80 per cent of taxpayers are paying a greater proportion of their income in tax in 1980-81 than they were in 1975-76, and that an even higher proportion will be worse off next year because of the lack of full tax indexation? Is it also afact that for a taxpayer--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable g~ntleman will cease giving information and ask for it.
Mr ROBERT BROWN-With respect, Mr Speaker, I am seeking information. The Treasurer, presumably, is the person who is able to confirm or deny the matters that I am putting.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will ask his question or I will rule him out of order.
Mr ROBERT BROWN-I conclude by asking: Is it also a fact that for a taxpayer without dependants who is on average weekly earnings the 95c tax cut which will take effect on 1 July will be quickly swallowed up by the secret tax of inflation, to quote the Prime Minister-so much so that if a taxpayer's income rises by 12 per cent next year he will be paying an extra $507 or $9.75 a week over the course of the whole year? Do

Mr HOWARD-In supplementation of the honourable gentleman's question, it is also a fact that if the expenditure policies of the former Labor Government had been continued we would be paying about $4,000m or $5,000m more a year in tax and the percentage of gross domestic product paid by Australian taxpayers now would be significantly greater than what it in fact is.
TELEPHONE CONVERSATIONS: PRIVACY
Mr GROOM-I preface my question to the Minister for Communications by informing him that over recent months I have frequently heard the personal telephone conversations of other people when I have been making telephone calls. This often happens on subscriber trunk dialling calis, especially from Parliament House, but it can occur also when making local calls. On one occasion I even heard a Government Minister speaking on my line to another person. Recognising that not only Government Ministers but also members of the general public expect their telephone conversations to be private and confidential, I ask the Minister: Is Telecom Australia aware of this problem? What is causing it? What action can Telecom take to ensure that telephone conversations remain personal and private?
Mr SINCLAIR-I think most members of the general public are most envious of the honourable gentleman being able to use the subscriber trunk dialling system at all at the moment. That aside, certainly from time to time there is interference to which we have all been subject or in which inadvertently we seem to have participated. J have canvassed this with Telecom Australia in the past, including at the time of the leaks of purported telephone discussions between His Royal Highness Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer. There seemed to me to be a basis for thinking that there could have been deliberate interception in some way, and the hearing of other calls might be indicative of that. Telecom has assured me that that is not so, that there are difficulties in tracing the circumstances that generate that type of interruption. Like the honourable gentleman, I think there is a community concern that it should happen at all. I will certainly draw his concern to Telecom's attention and see whether there is some way in which the problem can be eliminated.

Questions Without Notice

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3331

ECONOMY
Dr THEOPHANOUS-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. I refer to statements by the Prime Minister and the Treasurer claiming that recent economic growth is due to the Government's policies. I ask, firstly, whether it is a fact that from 1976 to early 1980, when there was very little economic growth, real wages were reduced because of the policies of this Government. Secondly, is it a fact that due to the activities of the union movement, and notwithstanding massive efforts by the Government to prevent it, real wages have risen in the last 12 months? Thirdly, is the Government aware that in the opinion of many prominent economists it is this union led increase in wages which has been the major cause of the only economic growth we have had in the six years of this Government? Fourthly, will the Government therefore cease claiming credit for economic growth which, if it had its own way on wages, would not have occurred?
Mr HOWARD-I inform the honourable member for Burke that the Government will not cease claiming credit for those areas of success in economic policy which have demonstrably been due to the policies followed by the Government. It is quite clear that the 6t per cent non-farm growth which occurred in the Australian economy during the first half of this financial year owes much to the policies followed by the Government over the last four years, as, of course, does the fact that our inflation rate is very much below the inflation rate of most industrialised countries, as does the fact that over the last 12 months there has been a 2t per cent rise in the total level of employment in this country, and as does the situation in which the most recent unemployment figures are the most encouraging since the present series was established. All of these things are due to what the Government has done; all of these things are very much due to the policies followed by this Government. If the honourable gentleman is interested in the real connection between the level of wages and levels of economic activity and unemployment, I invite him to re-read the economic history of Australia in 1974 and 1975.
TERTIARY EDUCATION FEES
Mr STEELE HALL-J ask the Minister for Education: In view of the claims and counterclaims concerning the scheme to impose tertiary education fees, can he refute suggestions that the income from such fees will be matched by the scheme's administrative costs? Can the Minister

estimate the expected net income from the fees scheme?
Mr FIFE-I am not able at this stage to give an accurate estimate of the likely net income from the imposition of fees in that very limited area where the Government has decided to reintroduce fees for tertiary students. I am unable to give that information at this stage because the Government yet has to look at the areas of exemptions in relation to post-graduate awards that are offered by the Commonwealth and universities and also the recognised double degree courses. When that information is available, the information sought by the honourable member for Boothby will be readily available. I will certainly provide that information to him.
I take the opportunity to reiterate what I have said previously in this House and elsewhere. It is the Government's intention to introduce tertiary fees only in this very limited area for those people undertaking second or higher degrees. When the fees levels have been set-that decision will be taken in the very near future-it will be apparent to all that those students to whom I refer will be required to make only a contribution towards the cost of their tertiary education. It is not intended that the fees be set on a cost recovery basis. The taxpayer, through the Commonwealth Government, will continue to provide a very substantial subsidy to those people to whom I have referred.
GREAT BARRIER REEF
Mr WEST-I ask the Prime Minister whether he recalls stating on 4 June 1979:
We will not permit any drilling on the Great Barrier Reef or any mining or drilling which would damage the reef.
Is he fully aware of the implications of the Government's recent amendments to the Seas and Submerged Lands Act which place the whole Coral Sea area under the control of the joint Commonwealth-State Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, as set up in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act, for the purpose of issuing oil drilling licences? Does he know that the winds and tides of the Coral Sea would carry an oil slick on to the Reef from any blow-out hundreds of miles to sea? If the answer to those questions is yes, how does he equate the Deputy Prime Minister's statement that the reef would be protected by not giving any commitment to allow oil drilling within a mere 30 miles of the reef with his own quite firm and definite commitments that the reef would be protected at all costs?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-This matter concerns not only the Commonwealth Government but also the Queensland Government. The Premier of Queensland has also said that no action

3332 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

would be allowed that could run any risk of Within the Full Bench, of course, there is an

prejudicing the future security of the reef. I think opportunity to establish that the settlement terms

that sometimes honourable members in this Parand their bases are appropriate and valid and that

liament and in other places forget that the Comthere is proper regard to the wage indexation

monwealth's authority on the Great Barrier Reef guidelines. For it is in relation to them that some

Marine Park Authority and under the Great BarState instrumentalities seem to have moved way

rier Reef Marine Park Act is totally unimpaired ahead of the position that is now applicable in re-

by arrangements entered into. What we have said lation to Telecom. Part of the disparity which is

about the protection of the reef stands as very recognised by the Commonwealth flows from the

firm policy. What has happened in relation to the fact that others have moved outside those proper

Coral Sea in no way detracts from that guidelines.

commitment.

However, the Commonwealth is not prepared

TELECOMMUNICATIONS DISPUTE Mr IAN ROBINSON-I ask the Minister for Communications: Is there an eerie silence on the Australian telecommunications network? What progress is being made towards overcoming this spartan-like environment in the present technological age? Is the livelihood of the nation largely dependent on the telecommunications network for everyday communications?

to let the bans and the disruption to the public interest continue indefinitely. It believes, in seeking to resolve the matter within the procedures, there should be a basis by which the bans are lifted and normal communications proceed. Indeed, it has been suggested that in some way I, or the Government, have some capacity to have the bans eased. It needs to be recognised that the only basis on which that can be achieved is if the Government is prepared to waive all the normal and cus-

Mr SINCLAIR-It is certainly true that there has been a significant loss in most Telecom Australia services throughout the country. I understand that congestion on the east coast from Canberra to north Queensland is probably more significant than it is elsewhere in Australia. Main switching exchanges have been lost in Brisbane, Sydney and Adelaide. In Melbourne the switching exchange is working, but telex and drafter transmission facilities are out. These things have hap-

tomary procedures. This it is not prepared to do. On the other hand, it is possible for the unions to lift the bans immediately. The Government hopes that, in the interests of trying to resume normal communications, that might take place. At the moment a proposition has been put on behalf of the Commonwealth to Sir John Moore. We believe that proposition to be a reasonable one. We hope that the unions might accept it and that the matter can be resolved.

pened because the unions have imposed bans while negotiations are continuing. While the

PERTH AIRPORT: NEW TERMINAL

Commonwealth has said that it is not, in prinMr BEAZLEY-Is the Minister for Transport

ciple, opposed to some consideration of the probaware that the Belmont City Council in my elec-

lems that have been identified by the unions with torate has devoted $37,000 to a public awareness

Telecom in their wage and allowance relativity, campaign to put a point of view contrary to that

the Commonwealth quite strongly believes it is presented by his Department on features of the

not in the public interest for these extensive bans construction of the new terminal at Perth Air-

to continue.

port? Is he further aware that the Council's objec-

tion is based on the belief that the Department's

The anomalies conference is, in fact, continuing at this moment. Therefore-as with the situation last week-it is very difficult for the Commonwealth to make stands and to announce the procedures that it intends to follow. I think it is

campaign has misled the Western Australian public on the question of options available for the siting of the new terminal and the development of a north-south parallel runway? Will the Minister consider the Council's views and re-site the new

necessary that I say to the Parliament that the Commonwealth is certainly prepared to proceed on the normal course within an anomalies conference procedure. As we understand that, it is necessary that there be not only a conference be-

terminal to make a new parallel runway viable? Will he meet representatives of the Council to discuss differences?
r Mr HUNTam not aware of the full circum-

tween the parties under the supervision of the stances surrounding the Council's concern, but I

Conciliation and Arbitration Commission-in know that the honourable gentleman has been

this instance under the supervision of a deputy concerned and has placed a number of questions

president-but also that there then be a reference on the Notice Paper. I will ask my Department to

to the Full Bench.

look at the concern of the Council in this matter.

Questions Without Notice

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3333

Of course, before proceeding with the development of the Perth Airport it will be subject to a full hearing of the Joint Committee on Public Works. I suggest that the honourable member ask the Council to make sure that it gives adequate notice of, and evidence to, that hearing. If it has any further information I will be pleased to make sure that the Department evaluates it accordingly.
REPATRIATION ACT Mr ROCHER-My question is addressed to the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs. Will the Minister advise the House whether significant changes are contemplated to the Repatriation Act this year? Is he aware of the interest and concern of organisations representing ex-service men and women and their dependants in any proposed changes to the Act? Will those organisations and others which may be interested have an opportunity to discuss any proposals before they are introduced by way of intended legislation? Mr THOMSON-I am not aware of any significant changes to be made to the Repatriation Act, but I will pass this question on to the Minister for Veterans' Affairs. I am sure that if any alterations or amendments are intended they will be discussed with the appropriate bodies. I know that the Government and the Minister feel it most important that the ex-service bodies should be consulted before any major changes are made.
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS Mr MORRIS-My question is directed to the Minister for Transport. Why is his Department spending large sums of money in attempts to recruit air traffic controllers overseas while, at the same time, several foreign governments are recruiting air traffic controllers in Australia with offers of salaries and conditions which are much more attractive than those available from this Government? Is he aware that Brisbane Airport is being closed down at least once a week because of the serious shortage of air traffic controllers and the proposed transfer of air traffic controllers from provincial airports in Queensland to Brisbane? Finally, will the Minister now take positive action to overcome the critical shortage of air traffic controllers and to arrest the developing crisis in air safety in this country? Mr HUNT-lam well aware of the serious shortage of air traffic controllers at some of our airports. Brisbane Airport is a case in point. The Department of Transport has embarked upon a recruiting campaign, both in Australia and overseas, to try to overcome the shortage of people to

fill these very important positions within the Department. The recruiting program in Australia has not yielded sufficient numbers to overcome our shortage, mainly because of the qualifications and the type of people that we require for this very important task. It is true that a number of air traffic controllers have, in fact, accepted positions overseas. There is an exchange of air traffic controllers between various countries. Until such time as we are able to overcome the shortages that we have we will continue to recruit air traffic controllers from whatever reasonable source we can recruit them. In the meantime I will give the honourable gentleman an assurance that the Department will not, in any way, relax the safety standards or provisions that are necessary. Where there is a shortage of air traffic controllers we will have no alternative but to reduce services.
EXCHANGE RATE Mr KERIN-I address my question to the Treasurer. Is it a fact that the real effective exchange rate increased by between 4 per cent and 5 per cent in 1980, that it has increased by 6.5 per cent against the trade weighted basket and that, for some agricultural commodities exported, it has increased by up to 10 per cent? If so, what impact does this have on Australia's rural exporting industries? Is the increase in the effective exchange rate due to the increasing level of investment in energy and resource projects? If so, what will the Government do to lessen the impact of appreciation of the currency on our rural exporting industries? Mr HOWARD-The answers to the first two parts of the honourable gentleman's question are yes and yes. The appreciation of the Australian dollar against the trade weighted basket must also be seen in the light of the very rapid appreciation of the United States dollar, which has meant a relative decline in the value of the Australian dollar vis-a-vis the United States dollar from the beginning of this financial year. Any assessment of the impact of movements in the trade weighted index must be viewed in that light. I have indicated in response to questions on this subject before that in conducting the exchange rate policy, which I believe has been conducted with conspicuous success over the last four years, the dominant consideration will be, of course, the anti-inflationary policies of the Government.
INTERNATIONAL AIR SERVICES Mr BUNGEY-Can the Minister for Transport advise the House on the progress of the application by British Caledonian Airways to fly from England to Australia?

3334 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr HUNT-I am aware that the United Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority has rejected applications from Laker Airways and British Caledonian Airways to operate services to Australia. I understand also that in rejecting the application of British Caledonian the British Authority has indicated a willingness to consider sympathetically any joint application that may be made at a later date between British Caledonian and an Australian operator. There have been Press reports concerning possible new ventures being negotiated in Australia for the establishment of a joint Australia-United Kingdom service. I have not seen the details of that application. I would certainly need to study such a proposal before I could comment. In the first instance it is essentially a matter for the United Kingdom authorities, but later in the year, of course, the Commonwealth Government will have considered its review of the international civil aviation policy and at that time will be in a better position to make its own policy position clear.

written to him and said that until such stage as consultations are held between the Government and the ABC I believe it improper for him to make public statements of that sort. So far as the future determination of funds to be made available is concerned, that is certainly at the moment moving through the normal consultative process between officers of the ABC, the Department of Communications and the Department of Finance. When those deliberations are concluded recommendations will be made to the Government and I will then have discussions with the ABC. Certainly I will have very much in mind the concern of the honourable member, for it has not been the intention of the Government in any way to affect those very necessary services to the remote and far flung parts of Australia which, of course, are predominantly the responsibility of the ABC. It would be in the Government's mind, if there are to be any changes introduced in the Commission's programming or otherwise, that those services should to the maximum be preserved.

DEFENCE FORCE PERSONNEL
Mr SCHOLES-I ask the Minister for Defence: What arrangements have been made for the compensation of Service personnel and their families who have had transfer and other arrangements cancelled without notice, who were in the final stages of preparation for transfer to overseas or internal postings and who are confronted with very substantial personal losses?
Mr KILLEN-I appreciate my friend's question. Indeed, you, Mr Speaker, brought a case before my notice a week or so ago. I acknowledge the significant distress that has been caused in some cases. I have asked my Department to put the matter to speedy examination and to see what assistance can be given to those who have been affected.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING COMMISSION: PROGRAMS AND
SERVICES
Mr TAMBLING-Has the attention of the Minister for Communications been drawn to statements by the Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission that unless the Government gave the ABC more funds, programs and services would be cut? Will the Minister give an assurance that remote communities will not be affected by any arbitrary action of the ABC's management?
Mr SINCLAIR-I have seen some comments in a Press statement made by the Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission. I have also

COLLECTION OF HEALTH INSURANCE CONTRIBUTIONS
Mr CUNNINGHAM-I address my question to the Minister for Health. Is it a fact that the new health scheme forces Australians to contribute to what are by nature private health tax collecting agencies in order to be eligible for Commonwealth health benefits? Are the private health tax collecting agencies using a portion of the moneys collected to pay commissions to agents? Is it a fact that the moneys collected are not paid into a trust account? Is it also a fact that the chemists who collect the insurance contributions use the moneys to finance their day to day business enterprises?
Mr MacKELLAR-The payment for health services encompasses a broad range of people and governments. It is quite incorrect to suggest, as has been suggested by the Opposition, that all Australians necessarily have to belong to health insurance organisations. About one in five Australians are covered by the special arrangements announced by the Government to cover those holding pensioner health benefit cards and those in special need. For the remainder, it is the Government's view that they should contribute towards the cost of their health care. I say 'towards the cost' advisedly. because a significant element of equity is built into the scheme due to the fact that a large proportion of the costs of providing health care to the Australian people comes from general taxpayers' funds. It is a nonsense to suggest that the costs laid down by the various

Questions Without Notice

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3335

States in relation to bed day charges in fact cover the actual cost of providing that accommodation. So there is a significant element of equity built into the scheme insofar as taxpayers, through the Commonwealth Government and the State governments, provide a great deal of the money which is required for providing health care to the Australian people.
In relation to commisstons given to agents by health care funds, that is a long-standing practice. There is a voluntary code which has been sent around to all health funds relating to that matter. I have seen reports in relation to commissions which are alleged to have been given which have disturbed me. I am having an investigation of that matter made at present. I will see what action, if any, needs to be taken in relation to it.
CABIN LUGGAGE IN AIRCRAFT
Mr BURR-I ask the Minister for Transport: Which regulation does the Department of Transport use to require air passengers to stow cabin luggage under the seat immediately in front of them? Does the Minister consider such a requirement reasonable, or is it alJinconvenience to passengers and an embarrassment to cabin staff?
Mr HUNT-The Department of Transport in 1979 adopted a regulation to ensure that there was safety in the cabin of an aircraft in the event of an accident or in the event of any unforeseen circumstance. Among the measures that were adopted at that time was a measure to ensure that during take off and landing, or at a time when bad weather was encountered, passengers would put their hand luggage under those seats in front of them in order to avoid any spillage of luggage or any movement of luggage in the event of an accident circumstance. That regulation has been promulgated to the various airlines.. I was not at all happy with the way in which' the regulation was being implemented. I have asked my Department to talk to the airlines about the way in which that regulation is being administered. I would in no way dissuade my Department from adopting safety measures. The Secretary of the Department has a statutory responsibility for safety, and I think it is a desirable circumstance that he has. I have taken note of a number of complaints from members of this House, from both sides. I might say that I felt somewhat put out myself when asked by a hostess to put my briefcase under the seat in front of me. Nonetheless, I do see a reason why it is advisable for loose luggage to be put under seats during take off and landing. But I am certain that in future the way that that regulation is handled will not be to the annoyance of passengers in the aircraft.

Mr Donald Cameron--Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. Is it possible to give a supplementary answer to the inadequate answer of the Minister, because I know the full explanation?
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DISPUTE
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Minister for Communications: Is he aware that in the current anomalies conference concerning the Telecom Australia dispute and chaired by Sir John Moore, the Government is putting the proposition that if Sir John instructs the Government to accept the sensible agreement arrived at between the employer, Telecom Australia, and the Australian Telecommunications Employees Association on salary increases-ranging from $15.50 to $23 to be granted immediately, with an additional $3 to $9 per week to be granted within 12 months-the Government will go along with the direction? Is he aware that Sir John Moore's firm line is that he is not prepared to accept that sort of responsibility or the implications that go with it and that if there is to be any settlement it will require the Government to accept its responsibility by becoming a party to a consensual agreement? In view of the vast disparity in salary between salaries for Telecom trades people and similar but higher paid employees of State government authorities and the fact that employer and employee representatives have reached agreement on this issue, will the Government accept Sir John Moore's advice and accordingly bring this dispute to a speedy end?
Mr SINCLAIR-As the honourable gentleman would know, the Commonwealth is not the only party to the anomalies procedure. As I am advised, the Confederation of Australian Industry and the Victorian Government, on behalf of State governments, have taken a very strong stance that they doubt the extent to which the anomalies exist at all. The Commonwealth has had a very clear position throughout, that it believes that through the anomalies conference procedure there is a basis by which the two parties, in this instance Telecom and the two unions-Australian Telecommunications Employees Association and the Australian Postal and Telecommunications Union-can meet to discuss the formula to try to see to what degree there is an anomaly and what sort of proposition can then be referred back to the Full Bench. That part of the proceeding is now continuing.
The Commonwealth has continually said that it believes the full anomalies procedure should be followed. That involves a reference from the anomalies conference to the Full Bench. We have

3336 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

certainly put a proposition through counsel this morning which indicates that if the Full Bench sees, on the basis of having the bans lifted and the dispute resolved, that some immediate cash offer should be made the Commonwealth would be prepared to. accept the recommendation of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission on that basis. The Telecom negotiating position has, of course, been taken properly within the anomalies conference. Equally, the Full Bench needs to be in a position where it can consider to what degree the settlement terms are justified and whether their bases are appropriate and valid. The Full Bench must also pay proper regard to the guidelines.
The Commonwealth believes that while it is in a position where it can accept whatever stand might be taken by the Commission-it is hoped that might be on the basis of an early resumption of full work and the lifting of bans-it cannot do so other than in circumstances where there is to be a Full Bench hearing.
It is also imperative on the basis of any offer made by the Commonwealth that no payments should or will be made unless there is a lifting of the bans. Unless those bans are lifted, the Commonwealth needs to reserve its rights as to the extent to which procedures available to it through appropriate Commonwealth legislation on stand downs and dismissals need to be proceeded with. I would be very disappointed if it were necessary for those consequences to be applied. It would seem that if the bans are not lifted and the available procedures are not taken advantage of there is little option available to the Commonwealth.
NEW ZEALAND-AUSTRALIA TRADE AGREEMENTS: VICTORIAN POTATO
GROWERS Mr BOURCHIER-Is the Prime Minister aware of the concern of the Victorian potato growers at the possible effects on their industry as a result of the recent trade agreements between New Zealand and Australia? Will he meet with a delegation from the growers in order to discuss this matter? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There is no recent trade agreement with New Zealand which will affect any Australian interests. There are,'of course, discussions between the Australian and New Zealand governments about a closer economic relationship which could have implications for Australian industry. It is as a result of that that the Government has determined there should be the closest possible consultation not only between the Australian and New Zealand governments but also, where necessary, between the Australian

and New Zealand industries to make sure that the situation is acceptable to all parties and on both sides of the Tasman. This is part of the detailed negotiation and consultation which must precede any firm move for a closer economic relationship.
There have been discussions. My colleague the Minister for Trade and Resources was in New Zealand a little while ago. Quite plainly, there is a very long way to go before any final decisions are made on either side of the Tasman. To any interest in Australia that believes its own concerns may not yet have been fully considered I indicate that there is plenty of time for consultation to take place with the Government. Some of the people concerned in the Victorian potato industry of course come from my own electorate, where the industry is very strong and has been for decades. I have been waiting for the Minister for Primary Industry to return to Australia because I would like to have him with me when I meet a delegation from the Victorian potato growers. Now that my colleague has returned, although he is not in the House today-he will be tomorrow-an appropriate meeting will be arranged.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE The following Bills were returned from the
Senate without amendment or requests:
Independent Air Fares Committee Bill 1981. Airlines Equipment Amendment Bill 1981. Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill 1981 ,
SPECIAL ADJOURNMENT Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That the House, at its rising, adjourn until 10.30 a.m. tomorrow.
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXPENDITURE
Mr LUSHER (Hume)-On behalf of the Standing Committee on Expenditure, I present the report of the Committee entitled 'Review of Auditor-General's Efficiency Audit Report; Department of Administrative Services-Australian Property Function', together with a transcript of evidence and minutes of proceedings.
Ordered that the report be printed. Mr LUSHER (Hume)-by leave-The report of the Expenditure Committee which has just been tabled is the first parliamentay review of an efficiency audit report of the Auditor-General. The Expenditure Committee has reviewed this first report on the Australian property function of the Department of Administrative Services on behalf of the Parliament. The Committee received its reference from the House on 16 Apri11980, but the progress of that inquiry was interrupted by the

Standing Committee on Expenditure

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3337

Federal election. We received the reference again allow for efficiency audits, the Government said it

after the Committee was reconstituted in the proposed to review this function after two years.

Thirty-second Parliament, but work really comAs the amendment received royal assent on 7

menced in February of this year. In other words, March 1979, that two year period has already

we have completed our inquiry and reported to expired. However, only one efficiency audit

the House within a space of about 4t months. For report-that which has just been tabled-has

this concentrated effort, I must thank the been examined on behalf of the Parliament. In

members of the sub-committee, namely, the order to allow the Expenditure Committee and

honourable member for Berowra (Dr Edwards), the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Public

the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Accounts to examine a representative number of

Brown), the honourable member for Hunter (Mr reports before the review is undertaken, the

Robert Brown) and the honourable member for Expenditure Committee has recommended that

Barker (Mr Porter). I was also a member of the the review be delayed until mid-1982. I commend

sub-committee. In particular, J would like to the report to the House.

thank the Chairman of the Sub-committee, the honourable member for Berowra, for his indefatigable efforts to complete the inquiry and finalise the Committee's report before the House rose for the winter recess.

Dr EDWARDS (Berowra)-..-by leave-This report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure is presented to the Parliament pursuant to the responsibility placed upon the Committee to respond on behalf of the

Efficiency auditing is primarily a means of makParliament to the Auditor-General's audit of the

ing the public sector more accountable to the Parproperty function of the Department of Adminis-

liament for efficient administration. The process trative Services. We are to respond by making

has a potential of becoming the most comprehensome assessment of the Auditor-General's work

sive administrative review mechanism available to by way of follow up by the Parliament. All this is

the Parliament. Given this, our interest, in this relatively new ground. As chairman of the sub-

early period of reviewing efficiency audit reports committee which produced the report that has

and, as shown in the inquiry objectives of our rebeen tabled, I can say that the reference of this

port, is to check departmental responses to matter to the sub-committee presented it with

findings of the Auditor-General's Office and something of a challenge. Of course, it was also

examine the quality of its report. From the renew ground for the Auditor-General.

sponses of the Department of Administrative Services I get a dear impression that it does take a
long time for things to be done in the public sector. The Auditor-General's Office was invited by the Department of Administrative Services to examine the efficiency of the administration of the property function. It gave the Department of Administrative Services and the Public Service Board an executive summary in January 1979. Yet it was not until the conclusion of our hearings in April 1981 that matters were finalised. Some things are still being done--slowly.

To put the situation in some perspective, I point out that the efficiency audit process involves investigation and report by the Auditor-General, report to the Parliament and parliamentary response. This process was established under the Audit Amendment Act 1979 as an additional component in the whole process of scrutinising the Public Service which, unlike the private sector, has no self-regulating mechanism such as market competition to put pressure on organisations to be efficient. There are all sorts of ways by which it is sought to promote efficiency in the

I turn to the quality of the report of the public sector, including internal management re-

Auditor-General's Office. There are pluses and views, the activities of the Public Service Board,

minuses. The pluses cover the contribution that outside pressures by the media, the Ombudsman,

the office has made to the reorganisation and systhe Administrative Appeals Tribunal, and so on.

tematic administration of the property function. To these ways of promoting efficiency has been

The minuses embrace the diffuse nature of the readded the efficiency audit function of the

port and an absence of specific recommendations Auditor-General.

for action. To sum up, using a cricket analogy, the Audit office has put runs on the board but has lost some wickets in the process. Honourable members should note, however, that the present Auditor-General has yet to come to the batting crease. We look forward to that.

The traditional role of the Auditor-General has been in the area of financial compliancechecking that public money is spetH as authorised by Parliament and in accordance with the rules. However, the efficiency audit function goes beyond mere financial compliance, to the reviewing

I draw the attention of the House to the fact of how economically and efficiently public sector

also that when the Audit Act was amended to programs and activities are being run in terms of

3338 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Standing Committee on Expenditure

labour, material and financial costs. It should be noted that a further stage in what is really a continuum-the scrutiny spectrum, as it has been referred to-is that of effectiveness reviews. An efficiently run program complying with all the financial requirements is of little point if it fails to achieve desirable end results. That distinction is summed up in the dictum that 'doing things the right way-efficiency-is not as important as doing the right things'-effectiveness.
Whilst there is not time to develop these matters one can say only that the efficiency audit is intended to be pitched at the intermediate stage, but inevitably issues of effectiveness get caught up in the work. Indeed, it is noted in paragraph 35 of the report being tabled that significant disagreement emerged between the Department of Administrative Services and the Audit Office as to the interpretation of the Administrative Arrangements Order, under which the Department works. That is an issue related to the effectiveness stage of the process.
As I said, the whole matter presented a challenge both to the Audit Office and to the subcommittee. The thrust is to expose inadequacies of administration in an organisation, but this is difficult to demonstrate with any conclusiveness. Basically, the approach of the Auditor-General's Office was to construct a qualitative model of the Department's property function, to compare the Department's performance against this model framework, to identify deficiencies in property administration, and thus to provide a basis for suggested improvement. The Expenditure Committee's main conclusions are spe1t out in paragraph 20 of the report, which states:
In summary, then, the Committee: Commends the broad methodology of the EA Report;
As the Committee states elsewhere, the systematic approach to examining the efficiency of the property function is a major strength of the report. The report continues:
agrees that the main thrust of the Report-that the Department had not developed a systematic approach to domestic property administration and that alternative Central Administration and Regional Office structures as proposed, and other changes, would improve property administration -is sustainable . . .
In a third point in the same paragraph the Committee expresses some reservations about other aspects of the audit report, for example, the dearth of specific recommendations for action and the lack of quantification of the benefits of findings, which the Committee finds subtracts from the quality of the report. Perhaps, to a significant extent, these are the result of the atypical circumstances in which the first efficiency audit

was carried out-those circumtances are noted at paragraph 17 of the report-together with the fact that, inevitably, a learning process is involved. For the future these circumstances will be different-and there has been significant development of policy within the Auditor-General's Office, which has also been referred to in paragraph 17 of the Committee's report. As the Chairman of the Committee said in the concluding paragraphs of the report which has been tabled, it is suggested that the efficiency audit process has the potential of becoming the most comprehensive review mechanism available to the Parliament, which is the prime client of efficiencyaudits.
In concluding, as chairman of the subcommittee which prepared the report, I express my thanks to my predecessor, the chairman of the sub-committee in the previous Parliament, the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown), and my colleagues, the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) and the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown), for their hard and effective work, put in over long hours of committee hearings and meetings, and also the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher), the Chairman of the Expenditure Committee. I thank the Clerk to the Committee, Mr Malcolm Aldons, for his strong advocacy of points of view as to the efficiency audit report, and other members of the secretariat.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter)-by leave-I would like to endorse the comments that were made both by the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher), and the Chairman of the sub-committee, the honourable member for Berowra (Dr Edwards), in connection with the efficiency audit report and the review undertaken by the Subcommittee of the Standing Committee on Expenditure. In two senses it involved breaking new ground. It broke new ground, firstly, because this was the first efficiency audit report from the Auditor-General since he was given specific responsibility in this area. It was also breaking new ground as far as the Committee was concerned, secondly, because, as it was the first report from the Auditor-General, it was the first report the Expenditure Committee had an opportunity to revie,:". I found it a particularly interesting exerCIse.
I would like to endorse the congratulations extended by the honourable member for Hume to the honourable member for Berowra in relation to his chairmanship of that sub-committee. I would

Redevelopment of Australian Antarctic Bases

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3339

like to endorse also the remarks made in connection with the other members of that subcommittee who, to my mind, handled that new area of inquiry very effectively. Not only were there new developments in relation to the approach of the Auditor-General and a committee of this Parliament as a result of that review but also, at the same time, there was a need to clarify the nature of the relationship between the Parliament, the Auditor-General and the agency on whom the efficiency audit had been conducted in the first place.
The honourable member for Berowra referred to the traditional responsibility of the Auditor General being in the area of compliance or financial auditing. This Parliament, to a certain extent, has lagged behind development which has taken place in the parliaments of other Western democracies, particularly Europe and North America, in relation to this matter. It is a matter that must be pursued more adequately in the future. It is simply not sufficient for parliaments to be satisfied with financial or compliance auditing in the traditional role of the Auditor-General. It will become increasingly important that parliaments and committees of those parliaments take the opportunity to overview, as the honourable member for Berowra said, the efficiency with with the total resources which are available to government departments, authorities and agencies are being used.
That takes us finally, if it is pursued further, to the effectiveness with which Government programs are being carried out and whether other priorities or policies might more appropriately be pursued by the Government and by the Parliament. The concluding sentence of the report states:
As mentioned earlier, the efficiency audit procedure should develop as the most comprehensive administrative review mechanism available to Parliament.
I am sure it will. I am sure that, as a result of the ground which has been broken, both by the Auditor-General's Office and by the subcommittee of the Expenditure Committee of this Parliament, efficiency audits and the review of those efficiency audits by the Parliament will become increasingly important to the administration of government.
REDEVELOPMENT OF AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC BASES
Report ofPublic Works Committee
Mr BUNGEY (Canning)-In accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee

Act 1969, I present the report relating to the following proposed work: Redevelopment of Australian Antarctic bases.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr LES McMAHON (Sydney)-by leave was one of the Public Works Committee members who went to Antarctica earlier this year.
Mr Young-You left the window open on Ted Innes and he nearly froze to death.
Mr LES McMAHON-That is right. I congratulate the Committee. It is a hard working Committee. I also congratulate the scientists and artisans who look after our base in Casey. It was a great experience. We spent four days travelling from Christchurch to McMurdo and to the Scott base.
Mr MacKenzie-Tell us about the take off.
Mr LES McMAHON-It has nothing to do with Ted Innes. He is all right. He just got a bit of frostbite. We are doing a great job in the Antarctic. We will be spending approximately $60m in the future. Prior to the hearing the Committee travelled to New Zealand and the United States bases. We flew in a ski-equipped Hercules. It was not a good ride; it was a rough ride. But we had to do it the hard way.
Mr MacKenzie-How about the green death?
Mr LES McMAHON-I will not say anything about that. It is not in the report. I am trying to convey to the House the situation of scientists and our own artisans at that Antarctic base. I would like honourable members to read the report of the Public Works Committee. It indicates that artisans were paid less than their counterparts in the American and Scott bases.
Mr Young-They don't pay any golf club fees down there though.
Mr LES McMAHON-I am trying to convey to honourable members that this is a serious matter and that other speakers will want to contribute to this debate. While I am dealing with the other countries that are involved, I might mention that during the summer months Argentina has 204 personnel and Australia 102. At this stage Belgium has none, and the figure for Chile is not known. The figure for the Federal Republic of Germany is not applicable. France has 52 personnel; the German Democratic Republic eight; Japan 27; New Zealand 177; Norway 25; Poland 26; South Africa 19; the United Kingdom 72; and the United States of America 1,165. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has 402 personnel in the summer and 207 in the winter. The reason for the difference in number of personnel in summer and winter months is that in summer it is light for

3340 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Redevelopment of Australian Antarctic Bases

24 hours a day and in winter it is dark for 24 hours a day.
I recommend this report to honourable members. I think the Committee has done a remarkable job. I recommend that in future helicopters or aeroplanes should be provided to cart our scientists and artisans from place to place. I was pleased that the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) went with us on this trip. He was sympathetic, and we helped each other along the way.

will convey my remarks to the Minister for Science and Technology. I think it is very important that we do what I have suggested.
Mr SPEAKER-I make the comment that the debate on the presentation of the report of the Public Works Committee and the debate on the presentation of the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure have illustrated the way in which members from different sides of the House can come together on committees and bring in unanimous reports which are of great value to the Parliament.

Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith)-by leave-I
know that many honourable members treat the Antarctic as a joke, but I certainly do not and I am sure my colleague the honourable member for Sydney (Mr Les McMahon) does not. I congratulate the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) and his Department for the submission they put to the Public Works Committee. I congratulate also other government bodies which put submissions to the Committee.
My only brief is with the Minister for Science and Technology. I am sorry that he has left the chamber. I returned to Australia with the Minister and was present at the Press conference which was held. It was a good Press conference. It became evident from that Press conference and from talk-back radio sessions that, unfortunately, people in Australia are not aware of what really happens in the Antarctic. When I have been travelling around my electorate or speaking on talkback radio programs people have asked why the Australian Government proposes spending $58m in the Antarctic. They say that there is nothing there and ask why we would want to be involved there. I hope that all honourable members will read the Public Works Committee report. They will then be able to report to their constituents what it is alL about. I know that the Minister will do all that he can in the future to make people aware. But I am saying there should be public awar.eness campaigns, and documentaries should be shown on television and in schools to let the people of Australia know why Australia is really involved in the Antarctic. The Antarctic is not a joke. It is not just big masses of ice cubes, penguins and leopard seals with lipstick on for the men there. It is a very important area. Whilst we all like to crack jokes about the Antarctic, I am sure that the shadow Minister for Science and Technology, the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones), is aware of the true situation. I know that the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) who is sitting at the table

HOUSING
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The failure of the Fraser Government to fulfil its national responsibility of meeting the current and emerging housing needs of the Australian people and to ensure an adequate provision of housing finance at affordable interest rates.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders haVing risen in their places-
Mr UREN (Reid) (3.35)-All Australians have a right to security of housing, a right to live with dignity and in comfort. It is a national responsibility of the Federal Government to ensure that the housing needs of the Australian people are properly met. It is a national scandal that, under the Fraser Government, more and more people are being denied their right to housing security and that a growing number of people are experiencing hardship and neglect of their housing needs. It is a scandal that the Fraser Government in each year of its period in office has withdrawn further and further from its housing responsibilities. It has transferred an increasing range of responsibilities to the States. and local government. But it has continually cut back on the provision of Federal funds. Consequently, there is a widening gap between the housing needs and the ability of the State authorities to meet those needs.
The recent Commonwealth and State Housing Agreement is a tragedy. Over the next five years the Federal Government will make a base amount of $200m a year available to the States for housing. Yet last year $200.3m was paid back to the

Housing

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3341

Commonwealth by the States in interest and capital repayments. The Labor Government in 1974-75 made $850m available to the States and Territories for housing, including Aboriginal and pensioner housing. That $850m has now been cut back to $200m. As a result, increasing burdens are being imposed on low income and middle income earners who have been left to fend for themselves in the private housing market at a time when the private housing market is under great stress. The obsession of the Fraser Government with holding down domestic and public sector activity in order to allow a free rein to foreign corporations has caused chaos in the housing finance market and in the housing industry generally. The contractionary monetary policies of this Government have fuelled high interest rates and led to a restriction on the availability of housing finance for low and middle income earners. The housing industry has been sacrificed to make room for the expansion of resource development activity.
The great tragedy is that it is not only the present generation in need of housing which will suffer hardship as a result. This deliberate policy of housing neglect also jeopardises our ability as a nation to cope with emerging housing needs in the future. That is something that this Government fails even to understand. There has been no effort on the part of this Government to project emerging housing needs and no willingness to plan ahead. Already more than 80,000 families are on the waiting lists for public housing across Australia. In some regions some people are waiting up to four years. It is estimated that 250,000 people are now living in caravans and makeshift homes, and that 150,000 people are homeless. For too many people at present their housing situation is intolerable.
But even bigger problems lie ahead. For too many people in need of housing the future is bleak-and bleak indeed. Recently a report from the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs estimated that by 2001 Australia's population will increase to a figure within the range of 18.4 million to 19.6 million. In the next two decades Australia's population will rise by over 33-!- per cent. At the very least in the next decade we will have to duplicate the urban infrastructure provided in the last decade. But we will have to provide it for a different social mix on the basis of age, country of origin and location.
At present, over 5 million Australians or 35 per cent of the population are less than 20 years of age. These people will progressively reach the age

where they form their own households and where they will require separate accommodation and associated infrastructure as well as jobs. The rate of new household formation will be significantly greater than the rate of population growth at least until the 1990s. That will require a large commitment of urban land and investment in urban services, including housing. It is expected that by the end of the century the number of people aged 65 years and over will increase by about two-thirds, while the number of people over 75 will roughly double. In itself, that increase in the aged population will require a larger provision of accommodation for aged persons. It is also expected that Australia will experience increasing relocation of people out of country towns and declining regional centres into capital cities and resource development centres. In fact, already we have seen that shift taking place. It is a question of dislocation rather than relocation.
Too many regions are vulnerable to decline because of the one-sided resource development policy being promoted by this Government. Too many people in the resource development regions are experiencing hardship. I have referred before to the tragic situation in Gladstone. Sadly, the conditions there are replicated in many -centres throughout Australia. It is estimated that in the Latrobe Valley in Victoria around 3,000 people are living permanently in caravans. About 80 per cent of the 900 caravans sites in the valley are occupied by construction workers and young families; other people are forced into motels. In the private rental market a three-bedroom house costs between $85 and $105 a week to rent. A fourbedroom house costs upwards of $110 a week. Over 600 families in the Latrobe Valley are on the Housing Commission waiting list, and they are waiting for a time in excess of two years. It is not only the newcomers to the region who are experiencing difficulty; the pressures are causing hardship also to established residents, especially those in rental accommodation.
This Government regards the situation as a State responsibility, but it is part of a national shift in the location and structure of the labour market and the housing market. It is a national responsibility, and there must be co-operation and co-ordination between the Australian Government and the States. The Victorian Government has blundered along and has failed to plan for obvious developments. The Fraser Government has also been reducing the funds available to the States for housing and has failed to co-ordinate an integrated national response to these emerging changes. The Victorian Minister for Housing has estimated conservatively that at least 100,000

3342 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Housing

households are in need of housing in that State. He estimates that the public housing stock in Victoria can cater for only 34 per cent of the apparent need. If that is the position now, what will it be in a few years time? Since that estimate was made the number of people living in poverty in Victoria has increased and a larger shift has occurred in the location of population. The Victorian Government cannot escape its own irresponsibility in selling off a large proportion of public housing stock. At the same time, the Fraser Government is guilty of neglect. Real net Federal payments to Victoria for housing under the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement have been reduced from $126m in 1974-75 to $13.3m in 1980-81. Victoria will receive less again for 1981-82 and subsequent years under the new Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. The

number of new public dwelling completions in Victoria fell from 3,016 in 1974-75 to 1,213 in 1979-80. Public dwelling rents have increased to such an extent that over 40 per cent of public tenants are in rental arrears. That is the legacy of the Fraser Government's policy on housing, of looking after the wealthy and neglecting the really needy.
The problems are not confined to the public housing sector. In the private housing market, severe stresses are obvious, and they are being aggravated by the blind policies of the Fraser Government. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table showing the building and loan approvals for dwellings in the March quarters of 1980 and 1981.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

BUILDING AND LOAN APPROVALS FOR DWELLINGS March quarter 1981

Dwellings given approval

New dwellings approved for loans

All dwellings approved for loans

Number of dwellings March qtr 1981

% Change on March
qtr 1980

Number of dwellings
March qtr 1981

% Change on March
qtr 1980

Number of
dwellings March
qtr 1981

% Change on March
qtr 1980

New South Wales Victoria Queensland
South Australia Western Australia Tasmania
Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory

13,520 6,194
9,459 1,584 3,816
638
474 626

3.7 -0.4 23.8 -18.2
-4.4 -24.9 -12.4
33.8

5,576 4,200 3,575
1,084 1,817
338 182
539

-18.7 -9.5 -5.1 -23.3 -17.4
-15.9 -47.2
13.5

21,950 18,197 11,085
5,677 6,551 1,595
522 1,652

-13.5 -0.5 +1.1 -6.6 -8.5
-5.5 -4.2
7.6

Australia

36,311

4.7

17,311

-13.9

67,229

-6.2

Mr UREN-I thank the House. The table
shows that loan approvals increased over that period in only Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory. I add that in Queensland a
large part of the building activity is confined to speculative activity on the Gold Coast and the Sunshine Coast. For instance, Mr Deputy
Speaker, in your electorate of Wide Bay and in the north, particularly in the Townsville area, which I visited recently, the housing market is one-third under its capacity. A building boom is not occur-
ring all over Queensland; it is occuring only in the resource and speculative areas of the Gold Coast and surrounding districts. Across Australia there is a contraction in housing finance which is most

pronounced in the building societies and credit unions, whose home loans in the March quarter of 1981 were down by 12.5 per cent and 6.7 per cent respectively on the figures of the previous year. Increasingly, housing loans are being provided by finance companies, whose interest rates are around 15t per cent and upwards, and people are being forced to pay those high interest rates. I seek leave to incorporate in Hanard two tables showing the incomes required to service a housing loan of $30,000 and the deposit gap for home buyers on average weekly earnings, for house prices of $45,000, $55,000 and $65,000.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows---

Housing

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3343

INCOME REQUIRED TO SERVICE A HOUSING LOAN OF $30,000

Termofloan

Interest

Monthly

rate repayment

Weekly income required to service loan (a)

Proportion of all male
employees with incomes less than that required (b)

25 years 25 years 25 years 25 years 30 years 30 years 30 years 30 years

%

$

$

%

ll.5

307.74

284

73.5

12.0

318.75

293

75.4

12.5

329.91

303

77.0

13.0

341.07

314

80.5

11.5

298.92

275

71.0

12.0

310.35

285

73.5

12.5

321.94

296

76.1

13.0

333.54

307

78.7

Notes: (a) assumes that maximum repayment does not exceed 25 per cent of gross weekly income.
(b) based on weekly earnings distribution of all male employees, Australian Bureau of Statistics, Weekly Earnings Survey, August 1980.
DEPOSIT GAPS FOR HOME BUYERS ON AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS FOR DIFFERENT HOUSE PRICES AND HOUSING LOAN INTEREST RATES

$

$

$

House price Loan required (a) Average weekly earnings (b) Maximum allowable monthly repayment (c) Borrowing limit (d)-
at 11.5 per centinterest rates at 12.5 per cent interest rate Depositgap (e)at 11.5 per centinterest rate at 12.5 per cent interest rate

45,000 40,500
277.70
298.50
30,140 27,970
10,360 12,530

55,000 49,500
277.70
298.50
30,140 27,970
19,360 21,530

65,000 58,500
277.70 298.50 30,140 27,970 28,360 30,530

Notes: (a) house price less 10 per cent deposit.

(b) Australian Bureau of Statistics, seasonally adjusted, December 1980 (N.B. 70 per cent

of all male employees have incomes less than average weekly earnings).

.~

(c) assumes that maximum repayment does not exceed 25 per cent 6f gross weekly income

and that term of loan is 30 years.

(d) maximum advance on borrowing capital.

(e) sum required by home buyer over and above deposit and first loan.

Mr UREN-I thank the House. The tables that the deposit gap for a person on average

show that a $30,000 over

person seeking 25 years, at an

ina tehroeusst inragtelooafn11o+f

weekly $55,000

earnings seeking to buy a is $19,300 at an interest rate

ohfou1s1e+pfoerr

per cent, requires a weekly income of $284. That cent and $21,530 at an interest rate of 12+ per

excludes more than 73 per cent of male wage and cent. Where can a young person find such a de-

salary earners in this country. With a one per cent posit? A couple could rely on their joint incomes

increase in the interest rate to 12+ per cent, a rise to obtain a larger loan or to secure a high interest

that is likely under the present policies of this second mortgage. For most young people that

Government, the weekly income required to serwould involve deferring any decision to have chil-

vice that loan would be $303, which would exdren. For many it would involve a risk of over-

clude more than 77 per cent of all wage and salary commitment. In the event of one partner losing

earners. A one per cent rise in interest rates would his job, the couple would really be in difficulties.

increase the total amount payable on a $30,000

loan over 25 years from $88,210 to $94,790. That

increased repayment burden would either add to What does this Government have to say to

the monthly loan instalments or the length of the people who are locked into such. a situation?

term of the loan means that some people would What strategy does it have to ensure that people

default on their loans or their mortgage would be are protected against poverty and housing in-

prolonged over many years. The tables also show security? This Government offers no security. It

3344 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Housing

has no strategy except that of promoting corporLast year the Commonwealth took positive

ate investment in Australian resources. Meanaction to improve the lending capacity of the

while, present and future generations of Aussavings banks by abolishing the ceiling on their de-

tralians are left to suffer. I submit that this callous posit rates and allowing higher loan interest rates.

attitude is irresponsible and that this Government These imitations have contributed significantly to

is deserving of condemnation. For too long the a major upturn in savings bank lending for hous-

Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr ing. In the March quarter this year the number of

McVeigh), who represents the Government, has dwelling loan approvals for savings banks,

argued the subject and used cliches, but the fact is seasonally adjusted, rose by 9 per cent and ap-

that in the public sector the Government has cut provals in the month of March rose to the highest

back spending from 3.9 per cent in 1974-75 to less level since May 1976. Although total loan ap-

than one per cent this year. More and more, the provals by banks and permanent building societies

Government is helping the wealthy resource have eased recently, these movements need to be

companies and selling out the whole housing inset against the fact that the calendar year 1980

dustry. 1 say the whole housing industry because was the record year for aggregate number of

the private sector is doing it tough and, as interest dwelling loans approved by these institutions.

rates rise, more and more people will be affected. This is a sad situation and it is the reason why, after unemployment, housing is one of the most serious social problems in this country.

I submit that the noise and the recurring slogans which we hear from the shadow Minister and which can be compared with a flashing neon sign need to be exposed for their cheapness and

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

their lack of clarity and honesty. When the honourable member had custodianship of these important matters under the Labor Government interest rates increased in three years by 4 per

Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for cent-from 7 per cent to 11 per cent. Savings

Housing and Construction) (3.50)-One listened bank interest rates after five years of good, sound,

with a sense of keenness and anticipation hoping responsible government are only 11.5 per cent. that the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) , Let us look at how that compares with the situ~

the shadow Minister for Housing and Construcation overseas. Housing interest rates are 13 per

tion, would advise the House of some of the incent in the United Kingdom and 15.5 per cent in itiatives of the Australian Labor Party and more the United States of America. Only two hours ago importantly that he would indicate to listening I was advised that in Canada at the present time

Australia that he and his party showed a sense of concern for the ordinary Australian home seeker. I have to admit that I sat here for 15 minutes and did nothing but listen to his pressure cooker tactics. He let off a head of steam but he did not worry about cooking in the context of the Australian home owner. So I want to indicate to him, as he quite aptly said, the real facts of the situation and delineate the Government's policy.

they are in excess of 18 per cent. Therefore, that gives the lie to the words of trivia we heard uttered by the shadow Minister for Housing and Construction.
Obviously the Opposition does not care to remember that under its brand of economic management dwelling commencements fell by more than 46,000 in 1974-75. This Government had a tremendous job to do. It has restored confidence

I will start the Government's policy in respect and stability to the housing industry. The Labor

of housing interest rates. It is quite clear that we Party's deliberate decisions and policies have been

aim to encourage home ownership. Housing exposed. It was not interested in steering the poor

interest rates, therefore, should be as low as is conpeople to economic security. Let us look at the

sistent with the steady availability of loans to factors which have led to this sound underlying

credit-worthy borrowers. But surely it makes no situation that I have just described. The Govern-

sense to have low housing interest rates if it means ment has to take credit for its economic policies,

that funds available for lending dry up. Banks and for its continuing attack on inflation. The Oppo-

building societies unfortunately cannot be isolated sition does not like to recall that under the Labor

from the rest of the financial system. They have to Government inflation reached 17 per cent.

compete for depositors' funds in a maturing and highly competitive financial market. When funds

Mr Braithwaite-How much was that?

for housing tighten it is the low to moderate inMr McVEIGH-Seventeen per cent. The

come family that gets squeezed out of the market. honourable member for Dawson asks how much.

Our Government, of course, is concerned that this I know how shocked he is because he realises that

should not happen.

the Government now has it down to below 10 per

Housing

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3345

cent. Under Labor the cost of materials in one year rose by 22.9 per cent.
Mr Lloyd~What percentage?
Mr McVEIGH-It was 22.9 per cent. Under this Government last year the increase was 11.3 per cent. All of these things, coupled with the Opposition's overt support for the 35-hour week, will add $4,000 to $6,000 to the average cost of land and home for the Australian home purchaser. We are determined to resist the pressures which the Opposition seeks to support. We as a government are also determined to resist the selfish demands of the States and local government for excessive borrowings because those demands from the States, local government and statutory authorities cannot but lead to increases in interest rates. The honourable member for Reid does not like that sort of information because the truth hurts. The Opposition cannot stand it.
What does the future hold? As I said, we had a great year in 1980. Commencements in that year totalled 141,300-10.5 per cent higher than 1979. That was the highest total since 1976. We do not have any commencement data past 1980. But tomorrow I will be tabling in this Parliament the report of the Indicative Planning Council which suggests that the housing industry continues to have good prospects but only on the condition that sound policies and planning are adopted by all levels of government. We can face the future with a little bit of hope because this Government has an aim and a theme, and we do achieve.
Last week the Labor Opposition debated the Commonwealth-States Housing Agreement. I am delighted because again the Opposition is running away frightened. Members of the Opposition have verbal diarrhoea. They refused me, the Minister, the opportunity to reply in the debate even though an arrangement to do so was made with its Whip. I would refuse a person the opportunity to debate a matter only if I were scared of him. I thank the Labor Opposition for indicating to listening Australia that it is scared of me.
I want to correct a bad impression that was cre.ated in respect of the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. Opposition speakers continually come up with the old cry of $200m for the next five years. I have stated repeatedly that each year the total amount of funds will be looked at in the budgetary context. I can understand how they are upset because in 1974-75-1 am dealing again with facts and figures; the honourable member for Reid will not like it; he will squirm and wriggle but the record books indicate that my figures are right-the Labor Administration allocated $391,448,024 for housing. The next year Labor

allocated $377,717,123. This represented a cut of 3.51 per cent in numerical terms. However, with
the galloping inflation that took place under Labor, one can say that Labor cut funds for welfare housing by a mammoth amount of roughly 20 per cent. Members of the Opposition forget these figures.
The Opposition says that the Government wants to give more power to the States. Sure, that is our political philosophy. We do not want any meddling in the constitutional affairs of the States by high centralised government activity in Canberra. We want the States to stand equally and squarely with us in our desire to satisfy the aspirations of all Australian people. The Opposition, in quoting statistics, forgets that in 1976-77 the Commonwealth gave the States $3,722.6m in general purpose grants. In 1980-81 the Commonwealth gave $6,206m in general purpose grants to the States. Why does the Opposition forever cry about a base of $200m with the situation being looked at each year in the total budgetary context? In parallel with that we have made a meaningful and significant contribution to the coffers of the States. No wonder the States have money running out of their ears when they have a government in Canberra generous with finances.
We have listened to the points that the Opposition has continually brought forward. I have endeavoured to indicate-I know that can be very difficult indeed-that we have had an agreement running since 1945 and that part and parcel of that agreement is the requirement that funds be repaid each year for the next 53 years. But there is absolutely no connection or association with repayments by an individual State in anyone year with the totality of funds given by the Commonwealth Government. In effect, what the Opposition is inferring is simply that if someone is generous enough to take a person-on trust and give him a loan that person does not have to pay it back. I would like to be able to get the type ofloan which I did not have to pay back. The CSHA is a very generous arrangement. It indicates the concern of the Government and a determination to allow the States to look after their own affairs. I congratulate the Victorian Minister for Housing on getting out of construction, indicating that that is not what State governments are all about.
I am disappointed at the new policies of the State Government in New South Wales because, as the shadow Minister for Housing and Con-
struction, the honourable member for Reid stated the people who need assistance are the people getting about $284 per week. I look at the proposals
of the New South Wales Government. Guess who it is out to assist. It is out to assist the people on

3346 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Housing

$400 or $500 a week. There is no concern for the poor or the unfortunate. There is no concern for the lone supporting parent or for the woman who has been bashed up by her husband. The New South Wales Government is interested only in the wealthy, the $500 a week person. No wonder we are concerned about the situation. Why did not the New South Wales Government last year release land for home building? We find in New South Wales~the honourable member for Mitchell (Mr Cadman) will no doubt elaborate on this-that the cost of land is the highest in the Commonwealth. It is no wonder that the average cost of a home for the first home buyer in Sydney is $59,600. In Brisbane it is $37,700. Obviously in Queensland we have a government that does make land available for the poor and the person who wants to own his own home; whereas in New South Wales, because of this tight stranglehold that the Government has had on the availability of land, land prices have gone through the sound barrier.
I give a firm commitment on behalf of this Government that it will continue to encourage home ownership. I stand firmly and squarely on that proposition. To the marrow of my backbone, it is a solemn promise that we stand for home ownership. We are proud that the current rate of home ownership is 71.9 per cent. We were delighted last year, in the first week of the new Parliament, a Parliament which offers great hope for the future of all Australians, to see the then Minister for Housing and Construction introduce into this Parliament-it was agreed to by the Parliament-a new Home Savings Grants Scheme. This has obviously been of great attraction to the Australian people. As of last week, applications for home savings grants have increased this year by 40 per cent as compared with last year. Parallel with that, everyone knows that this home savings grant is designed to encourage savings to be channelled towards lending institutions for home lending. We are proud of that. I hope families realise that that legislation was pioneer legislation in giving important concessions to those greatest in need, in particular the families of Australia.
The housing cost inquiry developed a measure for ascertaining the cost of housing. It is all very well to talk about how housing costs have increased. Listen again to some of the facts. The cost of buying a modest 110 square metre new house and land package as a proportion of average annual disposable earnings-for those who do not know what annual average disposable earnings are, that is the income after tax of an average income earner with a dependent spouse and two

dependent children-in 1970-71 was the equivalent of 5.1 years income. I am proud to be able to announce that in 1979-80 this figure had been reduced to the equivalent of 4.2 years average annual disposable income. Of course this Government is out to contain costs. Of course this Government is interested in making home ownership available to all credit-worthy Australians.
The shadow Minister spoke about resources development. He tried to blame the problems of Gladstone in Queensland, the problems of the Yallourn Valley in Victoria and the problems of the Hunter Valley in New South Wales on the activities of the Federal Government. Under the Constitution, infrastructure for home ownership and development is the responsibility of the States. This Government has, through its spirit of generosity, endeavoured to help them. I share his concern that the resources development does not channel all available workers, resources and income away from housing. It is necessary for the Government to monitor the situation, and I assure the honourable gentleman that I will be doing this.
The Government is out to help in many other ways. It is fully aware of the need to have more skilled tradesmen. Its support for the apprenticeship scheme has been well received by the Australian population. The Government receives many letters of credit from people in the education sphere congratulating it on making money available for technical and further education and for school to work transition schemes, which are all designed and directed towards making more tradesmen available. Because it cut funds to those who want to be professional educators, I am jolly proud that the Government has its priorities right.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Order! The Minister's time has expired. I call the honourable member for Reid. Does the honourable member wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr Uren-I wish to ask the Minister a question in relation to the statement that he made earlier, that he will be tabling the report of the Indicative Planning Council tomorrow. Will he be making a statement when he does that?
Mr MeVeigb-Yes. I will discuss the matter with the honourable gentleman at a later stage.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (4.5)-Before we take the remarks of the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) too seriouslywe ought to refer to the issue of Australian Business of 18 June 1981, page 28, which deals with the availability of finance for the construction of homes over the past year. The article contains a table

Housing

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3347

showing building and loan approvals for dwellings for the March quarter 1981 which indicates that in terms of new dwellings approved in the March quarter this year we are down 13.9 per cent on the

previous year. I seek leave to incorporate the table.
Leave granted. The table read asjollows-

BUILDING AND LOAN APPROVALS FOR DWELLINGS March quarter 1981

New dwellings DweJ!ings given approval approved for loans

All dwellings approved for loans

Number of dwellings
March qtr 1981

% Change on March
qtr 1980

Number of
dwellings March
qtr 1981

% Change on March
qtr 1980

Number of
dwellings March
qtr 1981

%Change on March
qtr 1980

New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory

13,520 6,194 9,459 1,584 3,816
'1;38
474 626

3.7
~.4
23.8 -18.2
-4.4 -24.9 -12.4
33.8

5,576
4,200 3,575 1,084
1,817 338
182 539

-18.7 -9.5 -5.\ -23.3 -17.4
-15.9
-47.2 13.5

21,950
18,197 11,085 5,677 6,551
1,595 522
1,652

-13.5
~.5
+1.1 -6.6 -8.5 -5.5 -4.2
7.6

Australia

36,311

4.7

17,311

-13.9

67,229

-6.2

Mr HOWE-There is no area of Government policy in which there is clearer evidence of this Government's, the coalition's, ideological blinkers than in the area of housing policy. The evidence for this proposition is to be found in several key aspects of housing policy. The honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) has talked about the absolute reduction in funds which has occurred since the coalition has been in power. This Government, in contemporary terms, is the government that is providing the least housing funds, particularly for the public housing sector, of any government in the post-war period. I want to refer to two other aspects of what I see as the ideological prejudices of this Government; namely, its preoccupation since the war with home ownership as the single desirable form of housing tenure and its corresponding neglect of renters and tenants; and the distinction which it has maintained and reinforced as between public housing and welfare housing. The combination of this ideological prejudice in these two key aspects of Commonwealth housing policy has in my view bedevilled effective progress in the area of national housing policy since 1949.
With respect to the question of housing tenure, I wish to argue the proposition that it is not in Australia's interests, and certainly not in the interests of all Australians, that we continue to assume that universal home ownership is the single goal of our national housing policy, and that anything less than home ownership is evidence of failure. There are a number of reasons why I take

this view. Firstly, it is quite clear that the percentage of people either owning or purchasing a home peaked in the middle 1960s, and there has been no evidence of a resumption of the post-war trend of the rates of home ownership rising. Secondly, the preoccupation with home ownership tends to mean that at least 25 per cent of the population who are not buying a home are treated as secondclass citizens who do not merit government assistance, apart from the 5 per cent of the total housing stock which is rented to tenants by government.
Thirdly, there has been a dramatic change in the level of interest rates over the past few years, as well as equally dramatic increases in the price of housing, especially of established housing. The goal of home ownership, even with government subsidies, is absorbing and will in the future absorb an increasing proportion of people's real income, notwithstanding the concluding remarks of the Minister for Housing and Construction. Fourthly, while this dramatic change in interest rates and in housing prices has enabled people interested in speculating in property to make a great deal of money, most people are primarily interested in housing for social rather than economic reasons. Fifthly, one of the more important reasons why so many people prefer home ownership is the fact that it provides a security of tenure which is simply not available to people who are renting or leasing houses. Sixthly, the subsidies given to home owners are not given to renters, so that people renting are disadvantaged because of government policy. Seventhly, the housing needs

3348 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Housing

of people have become more and more complex over the past few years for a variety of reasons.
For economic and social reasons people are unlikely to want to live in the same area for the whole or even for a substantial part of their lives. There are clear differences between the housing needs of people at different stages of their lives so that people will need much more flexibility in housing policy to cater for different stages in their life cycle. It is also a fact that the social composition of the population is becoming more complex; so housing needs become more complex and housing policy needs to become more sophisticated. Finally, there is the pressure of structural change on housing needs with massive shortages of housing emerging in areas of rapid economic development such as Gladstone in Queensland, the Hunter Valley in New South Wales and the Latrobe Valley in Victoria. I would argue that for all of these reasons we should be moving to a complete revaluation of our housing policy. Firstly, that should include determining whether we need a national housing policy as opposed to a collage of State housing policies. In this area of housing, as in almost every other area of social policy, there is currently a danger that responsibility will be devolved to the States with the result that inequities will be built into policies. This can only mean that the quality of housing will vary from region to region.
Secondly, I believe we need to define national goals in housing which provide a basic commitment to quality housing and the maintenance of housing standards as a matter of right. The movement to reduce the standard of housing, for example, to force people into mobile or temporary housing ought to be resisted. It has not been resisted by this Government. Thirdly, people ought to be guaranteed security with respect to housing tenure irrespective of the choice they make whether to be home buyers or tenants. We should have nationally uniform landlord and tenant legislation and not a variation between security for tenants, between the public and private sector in housing or between States and/or regions. Fourthly, housing should be seen as more than a building but rather an environment which includes basic services and facilities. Governments should ensure that housing is available in desirable locations and that it is properly serviced environmentally in terms of access to basic facilities.
This brings me to my second proposition which concerns the distinction between public and welfare housing. The trend in government policy has been to reinforce the distinction between welfare housing and any other sort of housing. This can be

housing for the very poor and can be housing which does not meet commonly accepted housing standards. The movement towards market rents-part of this movement to welfare housing-in my view has been a retrograde step in Commonwealth policy. This policy has been adopted for basically budgetary reasons, but it also includes an ideological view of society which is one that can make a distinction between the indigent poor and those on low incomes. It has been a ruse on the part of the national Government to ensure that people on lower incomes pay for the very poor. In the absence of the housing allowance scheme, it has meant that people who are on very low incomes are forced out into a private market that simply will not and cannot supply enough quality housing for people on modest incomes. The price of housing for rent has been escalating rapidly and the quality of housing for low income people has been steadily deteriorating.
More and more people with families are forced to live in shared houses or in jerry-built flats which provide an unsuitable environment to raise children. Meanwhile there has been no real increase in the supply of rental housing in the public sector and what is there is often simply unsuitable for people with families or other special needs. The stigmatised housing estates become more so and tensions within housing estates must rise, as the population living on such estates is more and more representative of the extremely poor. In my own electorate people living in public housing suffer a number of problems of which housing is only a single factor. The level of services is totally inadequate and the pressure on teenage unemployment must grow. More and more older people are forced out of the work force to live dreary lives in inadequately serviced communities.
I want to argue a case for the Government to return to policies which emphasise a need for people to be given a great deal more housing choice, particularly in the choice of tenure. I believe we should seek to equalise subsidies for people whether they are renting or seeking to purchase a home. I believe we should seek to build and provide a wider, not narrower, range of public housing which is of the highest standard and which is available for rent. We should seek to ensure that people who are renting in the public sector are given much greater security of tenure just as we should seek to give people in the private sector more security. People who are renting should have a choice of some equity in a property

Housing

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3349

and not simply pay rent to landlords who can reIt seems that both speakers from the Oppo-

alise all the capital gain which may attach to the sition have argued strongly for public housing.

building.

Therefore the argument is that young people can

In public housing I believe we should be fixing rents in relation to the historic costs of the buildings, pooled, so we are not in fact exploiting people in public housing in a way we have done for so long. For too long housing in this country has been the instrument of outworn ideology on the one hand and anti-cyclical policies on the other hand. Its standing at the national level has never been lower. The portfolio does not merit a place in Cabinet. It was given last time to a retired footballer and this time, to the House jester. It has been separated from all those other programs which are so interrelated to housing and which were so important in the 1970s.

look forward to nothing but housing commission or housing trust accommodation and the elderly
people can look forward to nothing more than living in old people's homes run by the State. That is the automatic axiom of what the Opposition has presented here today. There is a much more diverse role for the States, the community, local government and welfare agencies. They should give flexibility and meaningful care to those in need if we are to have a sufficiently supportive welfare housing program in this nation. The answer is not to provide more and more public housing controlled from Canberra. The answer is to have a more flexible program controlled by a diversity of interests. The answer lies in having an

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- increased ownership because by increasing this

Order! The honourable member's time has the elderly are protected against old age and have

expired.

an investment they can use in the way which suits

Mr CADMAN (Mitchell) (4.15)-1 believe we
have just heard outlined a comprehensive program for another Australian housing corporation that would set not only rates of land subdivision and home building in Australia but also

them; so they can protect their own old age. By home ownership young people have a certainty of future. They have protection and a capacity to form their family where there is stabilility and security.

set, nationally, the level of rents, the movements If one goes into any suburb in Australia today

of tenants and the control of landlords. It seems to and takes a poll of people, whether they be renters

me that the proposals put forward by the honouror owners, one will find that 90 per cent of Aus-

able member for Batman (Mr Howe) very tralians will say that it is an Australian's right to

strongly support the propositions put forward by own his own home. If the Labor Party wants to

the shadow Minister, the honourable member for argue against that proposition I think it will be in

Reid (Mr Uren) although I have never heard the Opposition for the next 100 years, not the next 10

shadow Minister spell out in those terms those years. The propositions put forward today argue

ideas. I am disappointed there is not a more against that proposal. If one looks at the

innovative approach to housing from the AusHenderson inquiry one will see the proposals--

tralian Labor Party because what it is doing is going back 10 years and announcing policies held by that party 10 years ago. That is most unfortunate.

Mr Howe-I raise a point of order. The honourable member is misrepresenting my remarks. I did not suggest that it was not desirable. I said that it was not realistic.

First of all there should be clearly established the exact definitions of those areas in the housing field which governments need to give attention to.
I think all parties would agree that attention needs to be given to welfare housing and to home buyers who have an inability or a difficulty in purchasing their first home. In that regard the policies

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- The honourable member for Batman will resume his seat. It is not a point of order he is raising but when the honourable member for Mitchell finishes speaking the honourable member should make a personal explanation.

of the current Government have developed to a Mr CADMAN-For comment on those people

high degree the concept of welfare housing and of who occupy welfare accommodation one has only

assisting people to own their first home. Of to go to the Henderson report on poverty, which

course, in the area of welfare housing the statistics states that 50 per cent of people in welfare hous-

used by the honourable member for Reid are reling should not be there and that there are twice as

evant. There are going to be more young people many outside the welfare system who should have

and more elderly people. What could be more the advantage of welfare housing. Gradually the

simple than the observation that with a growing policies of the Commonwealth Government have

population there will be more young and more started to shift so that in considering proposals

elderly?

that have been put forward by State governments

3350 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Housing

today it places greater emphasis on need. A policy based not on need but on a universal program is a change from the concept of welfare and it cannot be presented as a welfare program.
One has only to look at the policies of the various State governments to ascertain the differences which exist between their attitudes in relation to welfare housing. The Victorian Government has an explicit welfare measure which is consistent with the Commonwealth and State Housing Agreement. It will provide significant assistance to low income earners. It has been developed carefully and has been given good attention. However, in New South Wales there is a program which infact, as I understand it, will mean that a person who has a normal building society first mortgage of about $33,000, paying an interest rate of 11.5 per cent, will need to acquire a second mortgage of about $15,000, again paying an interest rate of 11.5 per cent. A person would need a total income of $500 a week to afford the repayments. That is not a welfare program. It is not even an innovative program. It is a bit of window dressing that will assist very few people. The program has been whipped up for the forthcoming State election. The Victorian Government, on the other hand, has adopted a program that seeks to assist those in need. Mr Wran's comments over the weekend that 'we will do for housing what we have done for transport' make me feel only pity for the residents of New South Wales, if that is the basis of his policy. If he intends to do for housing what he has done for transport over the last five years then we are facing greater deficits and greater expenditure for no real benefit to the consumer.
The honourable member for Batman mentioned the movement of people from country towns and the way in which the housing situation is causing people to move around Australia. Certainly, people are moving their place of accommodation. There is a mobility in the community that is interesting to watch. The movement is for reasons other than housing. People are moving from New South Wales to Queensland, from New South Wales to Western Australia and from New South Wales to South Australia. They are moving from the densely populated cities on the eastern seaboard to the west and to those areas where development is taking place. One only has to study the internal migration that is taking place in Australia to realise that the Australian community is mobile. People know where their best interests are served and they are moving to those States which will serve their interests.
The new Commonwealth and State Housing Agreement, which has been debated in the House

in the last few days, for the first time offers a massive $l,OOOm guarantee to the States for welfare housing over the new five years. No other government in the history of this nation has made such a commitment, in length of time or in size, in terms of value for dollars. If one divides the $l,OOOm by five one will see that it amounts to $200m a year. That is a base only. It will be upgraded and changed with each Budget that comes forward. For the first time housing authorities know that they can plan. They know the minimum level of housing assistance that they will receive and they know that each year that will be adjusted according to need.
There seems to be a grave confusion in the Australian Labor Party between home ownership and welfare housing. If State governments in this nation are serious about welfare housing, as serious as this Government is, they will adopt different priorities to the priorities which they have at the moment. One only has to look at the proposals being but forward by State and semi governmental bodies to borrow massive amounts of money. This money must be repaid by the taxpayers of the States, which eventually compete for funds for welfare housing and funds for ownership of housing. It is no wonder that we have high interest rates in Australia today when one authority alone in New South Wales wants to borrow something like $800m. It is giving funds when in fact those funds could come from private enterprise. There should be no competition in welfare housing. There should be no competition for funds amongst the States in order to serve the needs of the people of the States. I can understand the confusion and difficulty that the Labor Party faces on this occasion. The Labor Party is not certain what the States which have Labor leaderships are doing. It is not certain how it can develop a policy to assist those in need of housing.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HOWE (Batman)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr HOWE-Yes. The honourable member for Mitchell (Mr Cadman) claimed that I put two basic propositions that I certainly did not put. Firstly, the honourable member said that I did not want people to own their own homes. Secondly-I guess it was the same kind of proposition which he was attributing to me-he said that I wanted to push everyone into houses controlled, I think, by State bureaucracies. I want to

Tasmanian Wilderness Areas

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3351

make it quite clear that I was not suggesting and I did not say either thing. What I did say was that home ownership had been made the single aim of national housing policy rather than one of the aims. Basically I was trying to explain that proposition by suggesting that people ought to have a choice of tenure; that there ought to be a real economic choice in this country as to whether people can own or rent a home. I was explaining that, given Government policies, that choice had been denied.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Batman, in making a personal explanation, should purely concentrate upon where he has been misrepresented and not debate the issue further.
Mr HOWE-I was simply explaining that I was speaking about choice of tenure. I was not attacking home ownership. Secondly, the honourable member suggested that I wanted to put everyone into public housing controlled by State bureaucracies. To the contrary, I was suggesting that there ought to be a choice of renting and that public authorities could playa role by providing cost rent housing, either themselves or through cost rent housing associations.
Mr Cadman-I raise a point of order. In claiming to have been misrepresented, the honourable member has given no specific instances. He is putting forward a generalised reargument of the debate that we have just concluded.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Batman claimed to have been misrepresented. As such he had a right to explain how he was misrepresented. As I pointed out to the honourable member, he did not have the right to debate the issue. He was at one stage tending to do that and I pulled him up. In raising his second point I do not think he was debating the issue. The discussion is now concluded.
TASMANIAN WILDERNESS AREAS Suspension of Standing Orders
MrWEST (Cunningham) (4.29)-I move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the member for Cunningham moving-
That, in the opinion of this House, the Government should instigate an inquiry under the Environment Protection (Impact ofProposals) Act 1974 into-
(1) the environmental value of the Tasmanian south-west wilderness and Wild Rivers area to Tasmania and the nation;
(2) the most appropriate way of conserving that environment, consistent with necessary State development, and
(3) whether Federal assistance is desirable and, if so, the nature of that assistance.

The motion I seek to move stands in my name under General Business item No. 96. This matter has bedevilled the Government of Tasmania since about the middle of last year. It concerns the whole future of the South West National Park and the wild rivers area of the Gordon, Franklin and Olga systems. That is arguably Australia's most beautiful area and certainly it is our last great wilderness. The Franklin River, Australia's last wild river-

Motion (by Mr Howard) put:

That the honourable member for Cunningham be not further heard.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr J. L. Armitage)

Ayes

64

Noes

42

Majority

22

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baumc,M.E. Birney. R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, 1. M.
Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N,A.
Dungey. M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian
Carlton. J. J. Chapman. H. G. P. Coleman. W. P. Cowan,D. B. Dean.A.G. Dobie. J. D. M.
Drummond, P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H, Good luck, B. J. Groom.R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, I. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Howard, I. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M. Jull.D.F. Katter, R. C. Killen.D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M, J. R. MacKenzie, A. J.
McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Millar,P.C.
Moore,l.C. Newman, K, E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peaeo<:k, A. S. Porter, J. R, Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury,M. E. Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, I. M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson. D. S. Tuckey. C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Blewett,N. Browfl,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,I. Cohen,B.
Cross,M.D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L.

NOES

Jones, Barry
Jones, Charles
Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay. Leo McMahon, Les Mildren. J. B. Milton,P. Morris, p, F.
Morrison, W. L. Mountford, 1. G. Scholes, G. G. D.

3352 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Tasmanian Wilderness Areas

NOES
Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R, Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)

Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis,L.G. West, S. J. Wil1is,R. Young, M.J.

PAIRS

Macphee, I. M. McMahon, Sir William Nixon,P.l. Viner, R. I. Anthony, J. D. Street,A.A.

Bowen, Lionel Campbell,G. Beazley, K. C, Hawke, R. J. L. Sectt, J. L. Hurford, C. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative,

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)-Is the motion seconded?

Mr HOWE (Batman) (4,38)-1 second the motion. There is no more important issue than that involving the south-west of Tasmania. It is one of the crucial issues facing this Parliament.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:

That the honourable member for Batman be not further heard.

Original question put:

That the motion (Mr West's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(The DeputyChairman-Mr J. L. Armitage)

Ayes

42

Noes

64

Majority
AYES
Blewett,N. Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D, N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Howe,B.L. Humphreys. B. C. (Teller) Innes, U.E. Jacobi, R, Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)

22
Jones, Barry Jones, ,Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. MeLeay,Leo McMahon, Los Mildren, J. B. Milton,P, Mor:ris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, 1. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Theophanous, A. C. Urcn, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S. I. Willi',R. Young,M.J.

Adermann, A. E. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, 1. W. Bradfield, I. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A.
Bungey,M.H.
Burr,M.A.
Cadman, A. G.

NOES

Howard, I. W. Hunt,R.I.D.
Hyde,J. M. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. KilIen,D.I. L1oyd,B. Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R.

NOES
Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D,B, Dean,A. G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, II. R. Falconer, p, D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. I, Groom,R.I. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MeD. HickB,N.J. Hodge., J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

MacKenzie, A. 1. McLean; R. M.
McVeigh, D. T. Millar,P. C. Moore,J. C.
Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, L McC. Spender, J. M. Tambling,G.E.J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C. W. White,P.N.D. Wilson,!. B. C.

PAIRS

Macphee, I. M. McMahon, Sir William Nixon,P,J. Viner,R.I. Anthony, J. D. Street, A. A.

Bowen, Lionel
Campbell,G. Beazley, K. C. Hawke, R. J. L. Scott, J. L. Hurford, C. J.

Question so resolved in the negative.

INCOME TAX LAWS AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981
In Committee
Consideration resumed from 5 June.
The Bill.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (4.46)~When this Bill was last before the Committee, the honourable member for Gel1ibrand (Mr Willis) moved a number of amendments. They were not designed to frustrate the purpose of the Government's changes to the law but rather, in the view of the Opposition, to make more effective the means chosen by the Government to effect the purpose of putting a general anti-avoidance section into the income tax law, During the second reading debate I indicated that the Government felt unable to agree to the amendments moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand, not because it does not welcome the Opposition's expression of support for the' broad thrust of what the Government is doing but rather because it believes that the path chosen by the Government is more appropriate and more likely to meet what it believes to be the twin objectives of this amendment; that is, to have an effective anti-avoidance section but, at the same time, one that does not interfere with ordinary family and business dealings.
Broadly speaking, the Government shares the notion expressed in the objects clause proposed by the Opposition that the legislation now before the

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3353

Committee is designed to ensure a fair sharing of the tax burden and to promote the functions of the Income Tax Assessment Act. That is surely an objective to which no member of the Committee can take exception. However, the recently introduced amendment of the Acts Interpretation Act which was introduced into another place by the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) does not require for its success the presence in specific pieces of legislation of an objects clause. The Government believes that the object of the Bill now before the Committee will be readily found in its provisions and that the courts, aided by the implications of the Acts Interpretation Act, will give due recognition and effect to that object. Recent evidence to support that belief has come to light only in the past few days. It is to be found in the decision of the High Court of Australia last week in the Cooper Brookes case.
The Opposition's objects clause refers to the achieving of the objects by preventing or countering tax avoidance. This leads us to the inevitable question of what tax avoidance means. That is, in a sense, at the very heart of this debate. It is a term that takes on a different meaning according to who is using it. It is a fundamental role of Part IVA to spell out objectively what schemes the new general measures will strike at. If the Opposition's use of the expression depends on the term 'tax benefit' as set out in its amendments, this would add little to the substantive parts of the legislation. It probably does not depend on that and the Opposition's objects clause could possibly, in the view of the Government, have a counter productive effect; that is, the controlling objects clause might well mean that there is no avoidance if the taxpayer has, even in a commercially unreal way, managed to come within a provision that causes him or her to pay minimum tax. That might conceivably take us back to the problem area of the choice principle which we are trying to eliminate in the new measures and which, I understand, the honourable member for Gellibrand also believes has bedevilled the interpretation of section 260. Having spent a great deal of care and effort in writing the anti-avoidance measures to define clearly what the new part is all about, the Government believes that it would be best to leave it to the courts to see for themselves the basic objective that the Government believes is apparent from the substantive terms of Part IVA.
The Opposition's amendments imply wider definitions of 'tax benefit', 'schemes', and 'tax avoidance purposes'. It is a matter of judgment, of course, as to the desirable width of these terms and as to how far parliament ought to go in defining them. This, of course, bears very much upon

how broad should btl the brush of this new section. Bearing in mind the fact that the legislation provides for heavy penalties by way of additional tax the Government is strongly of the view that no opportunity should be given for the legislation to be read down for unnecessary width. For example, it is the Government's view that a taxpayer would be caught under the Opposition's amendments if the Commissioner of Taxation were satisfied, firstly, in relation to a person's omission to act, that a taxpayer might be reasonably expected in the future to pay less income tax than he. would but for the scheme; secondly, that the person's omission to act had as one of its purposes-I say here that the concept of omitting to act for a purpose is a difficult one to grasp, being a non-incidental purpose-the purpose of tax avoidance.
Experience of section 260 has shown that wide definitions could lead to the develQpment of interpretive rules akin to the choice principle which produced results inversely related to the width of the provisions used. The Bill confines the concept of tax benefits to omission of assessable income and the creation of allowable deductions. The Opposition's amendments would make it cover any saving of income tax, and thus bring rebates, credits and withholding tax within the provisions of Part IVA. Advice to the Government is that non-inclusion of these does not leave a significant gap in the legislation. The Opposition's amendments seem to mean that a private company that paid dividends to its shareholders in order to avoid Division 7 tax would be taken to have obtained the tax benefit. That, in our view, would be so, even though the shareholders are taxed on the dividends. Under the amendments, the taxpayer's purpose need not be merely an incidental purpose to be within the provisions.
As indicated in the course of the second reading debate the Government does not agree that that behaviour ought to be subject to a general antiavoidance provision, particularly one with substantial penalties attaching, unless the purpose of tax avoidance is a dominant one. In a statement on 4 June last my colleague, the honourable member for Gellibrand, and Senator Evans made clear the Opposition's position. That statement said:
Our basic approach is different from the present Government's in that we believe that the most blatant schemes can best be dealt with by specific retrospective legislation, leaving more ambiguous arrangements to be picked up by broad discretionary provisions.
The Opposition has it in mind to use retrospection against blatant schemes and Part IVA against arrangements of the tax planning type in which tax

3354 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

saving is a significant but, apparently, not a dominant purpose. The Government takes issue on that point. We believe general anti-avoidance provisions ought to be reserved for schemes of the type that I have described and that they should not cast a pall over ordinary business or family dealings. In other words, a general anti-avoidance provision ought to cover the more artificial and blatant schemes but fall short of putting in jeopardy and in question what can fairly be described as ordinary business or family dealings. We believe the Bill achieves that purpose.
An important element of the Opposition's amendments seeks to strengthen the legislation by giving the Commissioner a discretion to decide whether a tax benefit has been, or might in the future be, obtained, and whether the relevant tax avoidance purpose is present. In our view, discretionary powers of this kind do not make a significant contribution to the solution of the problem. The Commissioner's conclusion must always be subject to full review by boards of review and the courts will always intervene to see that the Commissioner properly interprets the law and that he acts on appropriate and relevant grounds. On the whole, the Government prefers to avoid discretions and to leave key questions for determination as a matter of application of the law to establish facts. Some people are concerned about penalty provisions in the Bill. Penalties attaching to the provision that depend for their basic operation on the exercise of the Commissioner's discretion would, in our view, raise even more difficult issues and concerns, having regard to the presence of the penalty provisions in the Bill.
There has been some talk by Opposition members-in support of the Opposition's amendments-that the amendments would more effectively do away with the choice principle. I do not believe that in the Opposition's amendments there is material which is likely to better achieve the abolition of the choice principle than do the provisions in the Bill proposed by the Government. The Bill achieves this purpose by specifically, precisely and unambigously indicating the kinds of tax benefits to which the prohibitive provisions of the proposed new section are directed. In fact, as already noted, the use of unduly wide definitions of 'tax benefits', 'scheme' and 'tax avoidance purpose' could run the risk that the choice principle could get a new lease of life and would not be abolished. Indeed, it was-as the Committee knows-through the use of wide and uncertain expressions in section 260 that the choice principle emerged in the first instance.

One other comment I make on the Opposition's amendments is that I do not believe there is a need for a scheme to be treated as being void in the reconstruction process. The power to cancel the sought for tax benefit and to make adjustments in returns of connected persons ought, in the view of the Government, to be enough. I conclude my remarks on the Opposition's amendments by again saying that the Government welcomes the constructive attitude taken by the Opposition to this Bill. I note the support given by the honourable member for Gellibrand to writing into the law an effective general, anti-avoidance provision. I have stated now over a period of some two years that the purposes of the Government in this area are twofold: Firstly, to get an effective anti-avoidance provision and, secondly, to have an antiavoidance provision that does not get in the way of what can fairly be described as ordinary family or business dealings or does not cast a pall over normal family and commercial transactions. That has not been an easy task. The Government has consulted extensively and has taken the advice of a very significant number of qualified people in presenting the Bill that is now before the Committee. In rejecting the Opposition's amendments-I hope I do not do so in any arbitrary fashion, but rather in recognition of a commonality of approach and a desire to achieve the same objective, certainly so far as general, antiavoidance provisions are concerned-I must say that we have a number of significant differences along the road to achieving that objective. I believe the Government's proposal more likely will achieve the twin objectives that I described earlier and, therefore, it, is warmly commended to the Committee.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (4.56)-In the last few years the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has established himself as a man of good will on this question of trying to cut out tax avoidance. However, it appears that every time the law is amended new schemes are contrived and new methods are used to get around it. I was quite disturbed to hear that certain shady characters, whose whole livelihoods depend on constructing these schemes, have already developed methods of getting around the Bill which has been introduced by the Treasurer. It is for this reason and in this spirit that I believe the Opposition's amendments ought to be seriously considered.
In particular, I believe that the proposed Object and interpretation of Part clause is a very important one. The Treasurer said that the amendment is unnecessary because amendments to the Acts Interpretation Act have been passed in another place. He said that this Act will direct the courts

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3355

to interpret the Bill in relation to its general antito avoid taxation even if the Commissioner were

avoidance intention. But there is no guarantee satisfied that it was the dominant purpose. In that

that the courts will be directed in the way in situation people would be able to avoid tax. I do

which the Acts Interpretation Act supposes they not see what is to be lost by accepting our amend-

will be. Nor is there a guarantee that the courts ment and substituting the words 'not merely inci-

will find the intention of the Act to be the same as dental'. If it can be established that the actual

the intention expressed by the Treasurer in the avoidance was not an incidental consequence of

Parliament. There is no requirement in the Acts what was happening but was, in some sense, delib-

Interpretation Act that the statements made by erate, then this should be sufficient to bring it

the Minister in Parliament be part of what is inwithinthe ambit of the law.

volved in considering the intention and object of this Bill. When one considers the history and composition of the present High Court of Australia in relation to matters of tax avoidance one cannot be encouraged. One has to accept that the intentions of the Treasurer have been frustrated from time to time by determinations of the High Court in these matters. I am not as confident as the Treasurer is. I cannot see what is to be lost by the Government accepting the Opposition's amendment. He has not shown that there is any danger involved. He has simply said that the amendment is unnecessary. I put it to him that if we are really genuine about stopping tax avoidance we do not want to be amending this Act time after time because of loopholes being found by various scandalous entrepreneurs whose whole business it is to try to help people avoid their responsibilities to the Australian people.
The Treasurer did not satisfy me with his response about the role of the Commissioner of Taxation. Under the Opposition's amendment the Commissioner will determine whether there has been tax avoidance in the first instance. Of course, we recognise that this discretionary power would not completely block appeals to the courts. But I think there is a very significant difference in allowing the Commissioner rather than the courts to make initial determinations. Again, unfortunately we must refer to the history of the present High Court in these matters. There is absolutely no room for optimism that the court will, in fact,

The Treasurer made various comments which attempted to deal with this point. He said that the Government did not want to put in jeopardy ordinary business dealings. If he was trying to reflect on the Opposition on this point let me say quite clearly that the Opposition does not want to put in jeopardy ordinary business dealings and especially in small business. But at the same time it is quite clear that the amendments that we are proposing are not intended to deal with ordinary business dealings or with valid tax deductions. The amendments are intended to deal with those characters who still make their livelihood from helping many people, usually wealthy people, to avoid their taxation responsibilities.
Finally, I want to make one remark about retrospective legislation. The Treasurer said that the Opposition wants retrospectivity in respect of obvious schemes of tax avoidance and that the Opposition also wants retrospectivity in other shady areas which may not be so obvious and in relation to which it is not clear whether the Government will act. That is completely correct. We do want retrospectivity to apply to obvious schemes. The Treasurer has not given any reason why retrospectivity should not apply to obvious tax avoidance schemes. Why should it not apply? I remind the Treasurer that an estimated $3,OOOm in tax revenue was lost through tax avoidance in the last year. Under those circumstances surely we are facing a major question of the national interest. Why should retrospectivity not apply to

identify particular schemes as anti-avoidance obvious and blatant schemes'? There are

schemes or that it will be inclined to do so. Surely precedents for retrospective anti tax avoidance the Commissioner is in a much better position to legislation in other countries. Let us get really determine that and to give his reasons, if those tough with these schemes and wipe out tax avoid-

reasons are challenged, to a tribunal or court. It is a very different position from allowing the courts to make the determination in the first instance. So I commend the Opposition's amendments to the House.

ance. I want to put on record that it is a matter of regret that there are no retrospective provisions in this legislation. With those general remarks I commend the Opposition's ammendments to the House. The Treasurer has said already that the

I do not think that the Treasurer spoke sufficiently about the amendment which would change the words 'dominant purpose' to the 'not

Government rejects them. Perhaps in a year's time, when it is shown that the Opposition was correct, at least we will be able to say: 'We told you so'.

merely incidental' purpose. This is important. Mr LUSHER (Hume) (5.6)-1 do not want to

Again, the courts, in interpreting the legislation, tie myself down with responding to what has been

might rule that it was not the dominant purpose said by the honourable member for Burke (Dr

3356 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

Theophanous). Rather I shall make some general comments about the Australian Labor Party's attitude to retrospectivity and the Government's attitude to retrospectivity. This legislation really introduces an effective general anti tax avoidance provision in the Income Tax Laws Act. It is a provision that does not interfere with normal bona fide business or family transactions. That is something which all honourable members and members of the general public who are concerned about tax and the collection of tax have been concerned about for a long time. It has been apparent that for one reason or another the original section 260 was not doing the job that it was designed to do. There has been a need to try to rewrite it in such a way as to enable it to do what it is designed to do.
I commend the Treasurer (Mr Howard) for the significant amount of time which has gone into preparing the clauses which are before the Committee at the moment and for the extensive consultation process which he has entered into to ensure that, to the maximum degree possible, the clauses will achieve the intention for which they are designed. The Committee, I think, is fully aware of that process. The only thing that we may have some regret about is that the Bill did not lie on the table for as long as it might have. That is because of the sittings of the House. However, I accept the fact that this Bill needs to be passed into law as soon as possible.
Much concern has been expressed both from the other side of the chamber and from outside the chamber about the question of discretions in the hands of the Commissioner. I have been one who has not been in favour as a general principle of allowing too much in the way of discretion and of devolving the power and authority of the Parliament and the Executive into the bureaucracy any more than is absolutely necessary. I think in this case we are dealing with a situation where one must consider realities. The realities are simply that a proportion of the community is prepared to go to any lengths to avoid its proper and fair responsibility in the payment of income tax.
The reality is that the Government in applying proper principles of not making legislation retrospective must perforce put itself into a situation of being behind the eightball every time a new scheme is devised. That gives the perpetrators of and the participants in such schemes at least one year within which they can benefit from the arrangements that they are able to make which in most cases are totally artificial. It is really only by allowing for a system of discretion in the hands of the Commissioner that this can be overcome. I believe in the ciroumstances this is the only answer,

and those in the community who are honest taxpayers perhaps exercising their proper rights to pay no more tax than they need lawfully paynonetheless they are paying it-will also understand that we must not allow those who are irresponsible and who are trying to defeat the system and to act against the interests of the community at large must not be allowed to continue to do so. The honest have nothing to fear under this legislation. It is only the people who are engaging in artificial schemes who need worry about it-and so they should worry about it.
The reality is that the clauses before the Committee are designed to preserve the right'of the majority of taxpayers in Australia over those rapacious few who see their efforts not to contribute to the community coffers as some sort of sport. We must understand that the total amount of money that the Parliament appropriates for the Government to spend must be raised. Whether we raise it through taxation, through loans or through whatever other means may be available to the Government, the fact is that the amount of money has to be raised. The burden ultimately falls on the community to meet that bill, whether it be a bill in the form of taxation collected this year or loans that have to be repaid at a later date. We need to understand that those people who do not contribute their fair share to that pool of taxation are only transferring the burden to the rest of the community who must pick up the bill.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The Chair is bound to remind the honourable gentleman that the Committee is discussing the question that the amendments to the Bill be agreed to. The honourable member is dealing with the broad principles of the Bill. He will be required to be a little more specific on a clausal basis. The honourable member may proceed.
Mr LUSHER-Mr Chairman, I thank you for that friendly word of admonition. I will obviously have to make more reference to the clauses under disoussion. I think I have made my point in relation to this matter. These clauses are designed to ensure that everyone in the community makes a fair contribution to the taxation pool.
Mr Chairman, I do not deliberately want to transgress the ruling that you have just made but I think it is important to make a comment which I do not think has been made in the Committee. This matter really has come to light only this morning. Those who have seen this morning's Australian Financial Review will be aware of the High Court judgment--
Mr Jacobi-A good judgment.

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3357

Mr LUSHER-The honourable member for Hawker points out that it is a good judgment. The judgment bears very specifically on the clauses we are looking at. The High Court has made a fundamental change in the way it is interpreting the Act which we are proposing to amend. I can only make the comment in passing that if the High Court had been prepared to take this purposive-I think that is the correct expression-approach rather than the literalist approach to the interpretation of the Act, so much of the legislation we have had to look at in the House and in the Committee over the last several years may not have been necessary. I think this point needs to be made at the Committee stage.
The realities are that under section 260 and other sections of the existing Act there has been an opportunity for a significant increase in the number of totally artificial schemes-things like Curran, Slutzkin and bottom of the harbour schemes; the sorts of things we have had to deal with in this Parliament on earlier occasions and which have involved long and complex legislation. In some cases no one has been totally sure whether the legislation was effective. The clauses we are looking at today will, we hope, remove the need for that sort of thing and will provide a proper basis for the collection of revenue from all people in the community.
The retrospectivity angle has been mentioned in this debate by members of both sides of the chamber. I think it is proper that the approach taken by the Treasurer will continue to be taken in relation to these clauses as well as in relation to the general question of tax avoidance-that is, that there will not be any retrospectivity in the specific sense but that a proper procedure for making announcements has been developed and will be continued and that once an announcement has been made, even though the legislation may not be seen for some time after the announcement, it will still be effective from the date the announcement was made. I think that is a tool in the hands of the Government and the Parliament to ensure that schemes are stopped and that provisions can be made as soon as is possible after those schemes are identified.
I congratulate the Treasurer. I think the clauses before the House represent a significant improvement. I think the amendment proposed by the Government, together with the change of heart from the High Court, will see a far greater sharing of the taxation burden by the citizens of this country-that is where it should properly falland that a fair and proper contribution will be

made by all those who should be making that contribution.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (5.16)-1 regret, because of the way the Bill is being rushed through the chamber, that I did not have time to explain in detail all the amendments which the Opposition is proposing.
Mr Howard-Your mate from Cunningham wasted a quarter of an hour this afternoon.
Mr WILLIS-J would not have gained more than another 10 minutes. I will reply specifically to the points made by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) as best I can since I received no earlier notice of them. The Treasurer had about three days to look at my proposed amendments.
Firstly, let me say that the twin objectives mentioned by the Treasurer are objectives which are shared by the Opposition. We support the idea that there should be an effective anti-avoidance section and that that section should have no effect on genuine commercial or family transactions. That is something which we fully embrace. However, we believe what we propose is a much better proposal in that regard than what is in the Government's Bill. Our desired approach, of course, which is referred to by the Treasurer, is that firstly, there should be retrospective action against the most blatant and contrived schemes and that this kind of general anti-avoidance section in the legislation should be used against the more ambiguous schemes. That represents a difference in approach. It is one which we think is more effective.
Given that that is not what is before us, our second position is that the Bill which is now before the House, which is intended to be wide and embracing and at least to take in all the blatant contrived schemes, should be widened in its operations so that it has effect not just in respect of blatant and contrived schemes but also in respect of the more ambiguous schemes. That is the basic objective of our amendments.
The Treasurer mentioned that he did not agree with the sentiments of our objects clause, one of our amendments, and thought that it was unnecessary to have it in the Act. We do not share his rather blithe approach to the view that the Part as it stands makes quite clear what its object is. It seems to us that that is by no means certain. Although it is certainly clear to us, we are not by any means sure that we can rely on the courts interpreting it in that way, even though, as the Treasurer mentioned, the signs that are coming from the courts in recent judgments are more encouraging. We therefore believe that nothing would be lost by including an objects clause along

3358 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No, 2)

the lines which we have proposed in our amendment. Indeed, we believe positively that it would be a definite assistance in ensuring that the interpretation of Part IV A by the courts would be as Parliament intended,
With regard to the choice principle, the Treasurer stressed on at least a couple of occasions that the amendments as proposed by the Opposition would reintroduce the choice principle, He also said this last Friday, We totally disagree with that, because we have in fact indicated a specific proposed sub-section in our amendment to take out the choice principle; that is, proposed section 117D (4), which clearly and completely takes the choice principle away from the courts, The proposed sub-section reads:
The Commissioner may be satisfied that a person acted or omitted to act in relation to a scheme for the purpose of tax avoidance notwithstanding the scheme or any part of the scheme or any tax benefit obtained in relation to the scheme was or might be contemplated by another provision or other provisions of this Act.
That was put there specifically to make it absolutely clear and without doubt that the courts could not pick up the choice principle again and use it to destroy any such section, If it is not there, then we are allowing that possibility to occur. What the Treasurer is doing in his Bill is providing different wording from that which was used in section 260, and which was destroyed by the High Court of Australia last year by use of the choice principle, But that wording mayor may not succeed, If he were to accept that specific kind of section or sub-section in the Bill as we now propose there would be absolutely no doubt whatever that the courts could not use the choice principle, All the argument that our proposed amendments would reintroduce the choice principle just flatly fall to the ground, because the Government has totally overlooked the fact that we have that specific proposed sub-section there in 177D (4) to ensure that does not happen,
The Treasurer also said that our proposals would impinge, or there was a possibility that Part 4A would impinge, on genuine family or business arrangements, In his view our amendment in respect of changing 'sole or dominant purpose' to 'not incidental purpose' would bring about this result. This is a very important difference between us, The Government is confining the operation of this section to those schemes in which the purpose of obtaining a tax benefit is the sole or dominant purpose, In our view by so doing it is most certainly narrowing the scope of this Part so that many schemes will get through the net which would otherwise not get through the net if section 177A were amended, as we propose, to include

'not incidental purpose' rather than 'sole or dominant purpose',
In making that point, I draw to the attention of the Treasurer that the New Zealand antiavoidance provision, which has been there a long time and which has been far more succesful than our section 260, in fact has that wording, 'not an incidental purpose', We have taken our amendment from the New Zealand statute which, as 1 have said, has been a more effective statute than ours, It has not destroyed genuine family or business arrangements in New Zealand, Will anyone argue that family and business arrangements in New Zealand have been destroyed because of the fact that this wording is contained in the New Zealand income tax Act? Of course it has not, and it would not have that effect here, Indeed it is also ironic that the Treasurer attacks that kind of wording, despite the fact that it is already in the Income Tax Assessment Act under section 82KH (lA), For the benefit of the Treasurer, I will read it to the House, Section 82KH (IA), which relates to tax avoidance provisions, states:
In determining for the purposes of this Subdivision whether an agreement is a tax avoidance agreement, no regard shall be had to a purpose that is a merely incidental purpose,
The wording, which is almost exactly the same wording as we propose in our amendment, is contained in the Income Tax Assessment Act in this section dealing with the carry forward of losses from tax avoidance schemes, and therefore in a tax avoidance context it is currently used in the Income Tax Assessment Act. Yet the Treasurer says: 'No, you cannot possibly use that in relation to this general anti-avoidance section because that would mean that it would have the result of destroying genuine family and business arrangements', It has not done that in New Zealand, it is a term that is already used in the Act, and we cannot see that it would in any way have that result of it were interpreted sensibly by a Commissioner of Taxation who would have more discretion under our proposals than would be the case under the Bill, We are sure that it would not be the intention of the Commissioner of Taxation to bring about that kind of result, Nor would we in any way expect that any action by the Commissioner of Taxation would have that result.
We believe that the proposals that we have put forward in this regard in respect of changing the operation of this section from the narrow confines of 'sole or dominant purpose' to 'not incidental purpose' would widen its scope and bring many more tax avoidance schemes into the net which would otherwise escape, therefore enabling tax avoidance to continue at a substantial level. We believe also that the proposals that we have put

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3359

forward in other respects are very important as well and should be accepted by the Government.

I refer to one other point raised by the Treasurer. In regard to the discretion of the Commissioner of Taxation, I make the very important point that our belief that we need to give more discretion to the Commissioner is shared by Mr Frankel, QC., who made the point clearly recently that not to allow the Commissioner of Taxation to have this discretion means that Part IVA can be destroyed by the courts because, as he pointed out, it would mean that it would have to go through a long series of court cases before we could find out what the whole Part means. This is the process that section 260 went through. In the end it was destroyed by the courts and there is the danger that this would be the case again. By giving this discretion to the Commissioner of Taxation it is far less likely, even though his determinations are in the end subject to review, that that process would result.

Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (5.26)--Quite

a large part of the focus of the debate from the

other side on the question of the amendments

which are presently before the House has focussed

on the interpretation by the High Court of

Australia of section 260 of the Income Tax

Assessment Act and the antecedent provisions of

section 260. A statement about the High Court of

Australia made by the honourable member for

Hawker (Mr Jacobi) needs to-be taken up. I refer

to page 3284 of Hansard. He stated:

.

We have reached the stage. I regret to say, when the High
Court in Australia protects the property of the wealthy and not the liberty of the individual. Its attitude is one of contempt for the laws passed by this Parliament.

That of course is a very grave reflection upon the High Court. It is a very dangerous one, since if that view ever gained acceptance it would place the court in contempt. It is worthwhile spending one or two minutes going briefly over the way in which the court has approached section 260, since the criticism which has been put by the honourable member for Hawker either rests on a fundamental misunderstanding of what the court has been doing over the years or constitutes a deliberate misrepresentation of the High Court's position.

The history of the legislation was described by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) at page 3623 of Hansard when he moved his amendment. The High Court approach to section 260 has been known for very many years. When section 260 in its previous form-which was similar to its present form-came before the
courts it was realised that the language of the section was such that if construed without reference

to other provisions of the Act it would apply to almost every contract, agreement or arrangement entered into. As long ago as 1921 that difficulty was pointed to by Chief Justice Knox in Purcell's case. It has been taken up by other members of the court at different times. Twenty years ago it was taken up by Mr Justice Kitto in Newton's case. In fact, that decision was referred to by the honourable member for Gellibrand. Recently in Cridland's case, in 1977, Mr Justice Mason said:
Although the very restricted operation conceded to section 260 by the course of judicial decision and the generality of the language in which the section is expressed stand in high contrast, the construction of the section is now settled. It is therefore a source of some surprise that it continues to be relied upon when its defects and deficiencies have been apparent for so long.
The point is of course that the court has made perfectly clear that it has found the section a difficult one to interpret. It has also made it perfectly clear over the years that it was giving, and intended to give, to the section a restricted interpretation. In the course of the evolution of the court's approach to the interpretation of section 260 it evolved the choice principle which simply means that if there is a choice under the Act for a person to bring himself under one arm which would permit him to attract less tax than would be the case if he brought himself under the other arm then he would be allowed to do that. Again that has been clearly stated.
As I said, the court has invited amendment to a most difficult section. It is one which the Government has approached in a most responsible fashion and has come up with an answer which would seem to be as good an answer as one can get to a highly difficult problem. The court has never stated that it approved in any way tax avoidance. It has never suggested that tax avoidance was socially desirable. What it has said simply is that since tax avoidance is not proscribed by law individuals and companies can organise their affairs so as to avoid tax just as if money lending and high rates of interest are not proscribed by law, individuals can organise their affairs to lend money at high rates. That does not mean to say for one second that the court has ever regarded avoidance as socially desirable. Not one word in any judgment handed down by the courts on the subject of tax avoidance can be found which suggests that that is so.
Therefore, the honourable member for Hawker does great disservice to the chamber and to the country when he suggests that the High Court-a most distinguished court which commands respect not only through this country but elsewhere-would ever favour the rich over the poor and would ever give an interpretation to

3360 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

legislation which could be suggested was a perversion of its job. I certainly hope that the honourable member for Hawker will not again use words which perhaps he employed through an excess of zeal but which throw no credit upon himself and which do, as I say, a great disservice to this country.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (5.36)-1 will not take up the time of the Committee, but I must make some observations on the comments of my good friend, the silk, the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender). I have a rather primitive mind, I must confess, but will the honourable member tell me whether section 260, since it was placed on the statute book, has been changed at any time until the current legislation? I think he would concede that the answer is no. I will take the second aspect of the honourable member's comments. Can he explain to me the difference in the judgments and interpretations of Judges Dixon and Kitto in relation to two categories? Why were earlier cases such as Newton, Bell, Hancock and Mayfield about which the High Court of the day, with all due deference, had no difficulty at all in deciding that the facade built around the structure contravened and was caught by section 260-different? Will the honourable member tell me, because he is the silk, what the difference in the Hancock, Newton and Bell cases from the current case or the Slustzkin case? I will tell the honourable member what the difference is. It concerns the question of interpretation of the jurisdiction of the High Court by two Chief Justices.
Mr Spender-Which two Chief Justices?
Mr JACOBI-The honourable member has had a pretty fair bat.
Mr Spender-You asked the question.
Mr JACOBI-The honourable member can have another smack when I have finished. Take the Albion case. The honourable member referred earlier to judgments of Kitto and Mason. I refer to the judgment of Mr Justice Windeyer in Albion v. the Federal Commissioner of Taxation at pages 64 to 65. He said:
Without going into some accountancy aspects on which he addressed me I can only say that a company which is owed 41,000 pounds by another company which is solvent-the debt being either due and payable, or payable on demandand which does not in its balance sheet show it as an asset, does not in my opinion present a true picture of its financial position to its shareholders.
Counsel for the Commissioner described the document here as a sham. And in the sense of which the word 'sham' is commonly used in this connection I consider the description to be justified.

Justice Windeyer said that. Why does that judgment differ and how does it differ from the judgments of Barwick, Kitto and Dixon? Windeyer reached exactly the same finding in the earlier Peate ca3e. The same position applied as in the earlier case; the facade was a sham. I suggest to the honourable member and the Minister that the situation is regrettable. I advised my colleague the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) months ago to bury his nose in the New Zealand cases, Acts and judgments. I find astonishing the conservatism of the Treasury on this question. The honourable member for North Sydney should take the time to study the New Zealand Act, the judgments of the House of Lords and the judgments of the New Zealand judiciary. It should be a particular exercise for Treasury officers to ascertain the difference between the overall Uropa No.1 case and the overall Uropa No.2 case. I will tell the silk the difference if he likes. The first case was wiped out. In the intervening period between the first and the second case the lawyers got to the facade and restructured it. Lord Wilberforce never shifted. The rest of the High Court did. It was the same facade.
If I might say to the honourable member for North Sydney, there is the difference. There has been no change to the statute. There has been a change in interpretation. I promised to keep my speech short, but I say to the Minister in all fairness that on the question of retrospectivity we should be honest with people. The honourable member's reluctance and conservatism-I do not subscribe to his view, but I think it is most probably an honest view-are based on the fear of the Treasury that the courts will not countenance the right of a legislative body to deny a taxpayer the right to judicial arbitration. In other words it is a conflict between the legislature and the High Court. If the honourable member were fair about the matter that is why he would not want retrospectivity. He fears that. I confess that I do not. It is not a fear held in the English jurisdiction and it should not be a fear in this jurisdiction.
With the indulgence of the Chair, I wish to spend a few minutes dealing with a matter which, I regret to say, is not before the Chair. It is a matter which I want the Minister and the Treasury officers to consider. I believe that section 14 of the Income Tax Assessment Act ought to be strengthened to ensure that the Commissioner of Taxation reports regularly to parliament on tax avoidance schemes. I suppose that the subsidiary question which must be asked is whether organisers and participants involved in a scheme ought to be named. Section 14 of the Act states:

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3361

(1) The Commissioner shall furnish to the Treasurer annually for presentation to the Parliament, a report on the working of this Act.
(2) In the report the Commissioner shall draw attention to any breaches or evasions of this Act which come under his notice.

desirable to make it mandatory for the Commissioner to report to Parliament on tax avoid-
ance schemes. I also favour more frequent re-
ports. For this reason I would support the proI?osed am~ndment to add a sub-section (3) to

Sub-section (1) of section 14 is expressed in very
broad terms. It seems to me that the Commissioner interprets this in a very narrow fashion. He presents a mass of statistical detail in his
annual report which is presumably related to the
Act itself. Normally he does not draw the attention of Parliament to specific weaknesses in the Act with suggestions for remedial legislation to close the loopholes. My own view is that it is within the Commissioner's power to do so. I believe he qught to do so. If there are specific weaknesses within the Act it is the Commissioner's duty, pursuant to sub-section (1), to report to the parliament such weaknesses in the workings of ~he .Act.. Whilst sub-section (2) may be inoperatIVe m t~lS regard, the broadness of sub-section (1)

sectlOn 14. It 1S felt that the reporting period of six months ought to be adequate. I do not believe any shorter period is needed. I am less considerate of the feelings of tax avoiders than is the Treasury. I specifically require that offenders be named. We
ought to have no fear whatsoever about declaring them. In order to prevent the further use of tax
avoidance schemes, the Treasurer ought to inform
the Parliament at the time of reporting such schemes that amending legislation is being pre-
pared to close the loophole and that the new legis-
lation will commence from the date of the report to the Parliament. I concede that I have no mandate to make that suggestion. It is purely my own. I b~lieve we oUpht to look at it as another weapon agamst tax aVOidance.

leaves 1t open to the Commissioner, if he desires, Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter)

to report to the parliament. I believe he ought to (5.45)-The general point that I wish to make

do so.

about the amendments which have been moved

Disr~garding the question~ of direct reports, there 1S no doubt that penodically the Commissioner reports details of loophoes to the
Treasurer-but not to the Parliament. In some cases it is desirable to treat such disclosures dis-
creetly, otherwise premature publicity may alert
tax dodgers to alert their advisers and permit them to take appropriate action to avoid it. I con-
cede that. Premature disclosure may even encourage other taxpayers to take advantage of the loop-
hole. On the other hand, early publicity could have the reverse effect; it could discourage tax avoiders.

by the Opposition is that, notwithstanding any of
the replies that have been given by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) or by any honourable member on
the Government benches, the amendments would have the result of clarifying the particular sections
of the Income Tax Laws Act that are being ~mended and, at the same time, widening the net m relation to those tax avoiders who would be
caught by the implementation of these proposals. The fa~t that the Treasurer has clearly indicated
that ne1ther he nor the Government has any intention of accepting the amendments could be
due to the fact that the Treasurer is simply being
cussed about the amendments. I do not believe

What I am really suggesting is that it would be a that that is so. His refusal to accept the amend-

simple method to make it mandatory for the ments could be as a result of some personal pride.

Commissioner to report schemes of tax avoidance I would hope that good legislation would not be

to the Parliament. If it were desired to extend the damaged by that type of motivation; Perhaps it

principle and name offenders, a further amendcould be to ensure that the legislation does not

ment could be made along the following lines-I have the impact that it would have if the amend-

ask the Treasurer to look at it: The name and adments that are being proposed by the Opposition

dress of the taxpayer' concerned or any other perwere adopted.

son who is party to the scheme or arrangement shall be reported by the Commissioner to Parliament. As it would be mandatory under the law for
the Commissioner to report names to Parliament I do not think there would be any doubt that such information would be privileged as the Com-
missioner would be merely obeying the law. Similarly, such a provision could be added as a subsection (3) to section 14 of the Act.

t~e first aI?endment seeks to insert an objects

sectlOn. Desp1te the claims that think that the decision that was

hmaavdeebbeyenthmeaHdie~hI

Court of Australia last week as a result of con-

fus.ion i~ the income tax legislation and the re-

latlOnsh1p between two sections which together

had an effect which it was not intended that the

legislation should have, the High Court looked at

t~e legislation. an~ in the light of the total objec-

My own views-I suggest that the Minister tive of the leg1slation came down with a decision

look at the matter seriously-are that it would be which related to the purposes of the legislation

3362 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

rather than the literal interpretation of it. That situation obviously arose as a result of an oversight by the drafters of the Bill and by the Parliament when those provisions were enacted in the first place. The High Court indicated that its decision would be based on the totality of the legislation.
An objects section would certainly work in conjunction with the proposed amendments to the Acts Interpretation Act to make the purpose of the legislation very clear. The fact that there was quite clearly an oversight in relation to those two sections which were subject to the action determined last week indicates that the same kind of thing could quite easily occur in the future. By including an objects section the purpose of the legislation will be more clearly identified and the responsibility of the High Court in taking that into consideration will be more clearly identified.
Mr Howard-With very great reluctance I will have to move that the question be now put unless the honourable gentleman. opposite is kind enough to take action to preclude the necessity for that.
Amendments negatived. Bill agreed to. Bill reparted without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Howard)-by leaveread a third time.
INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 27 May, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
In Committee The Bill. Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (5.50)-by leave-I move:
(1) Clause 7, page 13, lines 42 to 44 and page 14, lines 1 to 6, omit proposed sub-section 80AAA (12), substitute the following sub-section:
" '( 12) For the purpose of determining whether a deduction is allowable to a taxpayer under sub-section (7) and for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of any such deduction, there shall be disregarded so much of the amount of any film loss deemed to have been incurred by,the taxpayer as would not have been deemed, for the purposes of this section, to have been incurred by the taxpayer if-

(a) the condition specified in sub-section 80 (6) were applicable for the purpose of determining whether the taxpayer is deemed, in any year of income, to have incurred a film loss and in determining the amount of any such loss; and
(b) Part IVA extended to schemes entered into or carried out on or before 27 May 1981.".'.
(2) Clause 13, page 26, lines 22 and 23, omit "1 October 1980", substitute "28 May 1981 ".
(3) Clause 13, page 27, lines 28 and 29, omit "I October 1980", substitute "28 May 1981".
(4) Clause 13, page 28, after proposed sub-section 124zAF (2) insert the following sub-sections:
"'(2A) Where the Commissioner is satisfied that, if subsections (1) and (2) applied in relation to the expenditure of capital moneys under contracts entered into on or after 1 October 1980, an amount would be, or would become, allowable as a deduction to a taxpayer in a year of income under sub-section (1) or (2) in respect of capital moneys expended by the taxpayer under a contract entered into on or after 1 October 1980 and on 'or before 27 May 1981, that amount shall be allowed as a deducation in the assessment of thcl'taxpayer in respect of income of the year of income in which the moneys were expended.
"'(2B) In determining for the purposes of sub-section (2A) whether an amount would be, or would become, allowable as a deduction to a taxpayer in a year of income under sub-section (1) or (2) ifthose sub-sections applied in relation to the expenditure of capital moneys under contracts entered into on or after 1 October 1980, section 124zAG shall be read as if references in that section to the relevant amount referred to in that section being expended in producing a film were references to the relevant amount being expended in producing the film before the expiration of the period of 12 months after the end of the year of income in which the relevant amount was expended by the taxpayer.
"'(2c) For the purposes of the application of section 124zAG in accordance with sub-section (2B), where(a) moneys are expended in producing a film; and (b) having regard to the benefit in respect of which those
moneys are expended, those moneys, or a part of those moneys, could reasonably be expected to have been expended at a later time,
those moneys, or that part of those moneys, as the case may be, shall be taken to have been expended at that later time.
.. '(2D) Where(a) by reason that the Commissioner was satisfied that, if
sub-sections (1) and (2) applied in relation to the expenditure of capital moneys under contracts entered into on or after I October 1980, an amount would be, or would become, allowable as a deduction to a taxpayer under sub-section (1) or (2) in respect of capital moneys expended by the taxpayer, a deduction (in this sub-section referred to as the 'relevant deduction') has been allowed to the taxpayer under sub-section (2A) in respect of the expenditure of those moneys; and (b) the Commissioner later becomes satisfied that, if subsections (I) and (2) applied as mentioned in paragraph (a)-
(i) no deduction would be, or would become, allowable to the taxpayer under sub-section (I) or (2) in respect of the expenditure of those moneys; or
(ii) the amount of the deduction that would be, or would become, allowable to the taxpayer under sub-section (I) or (2) in respect of the expenditure of those moneys would be greater than or less than the,amount of the relevant deduction,

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3363

the relevant deduction shall be deemed never to have been allowable or, as the case requires, the greater or lesser deduction referred to in paragraph (b) shall be deemed to have been allowable under sub-section (2A) in lieu of the relevant deduction.'.

timing of deductions-I stress that the modification means no more than that-the concession remains extremely generous and is unparalleled in our taxation laws. The taxation benefits conferred

Honourable members will recall that, in introducing the Bill on 27 May 1981, I announced that the Government had decided that deductions under the Film Incentive Scheme would become available when the relevant film had been completed and used to produce income. This represented a modification to the operation of the concession as outlined last December, when it was indicated that deductions would be available in the year in which the investor expended moneys in or towards the production of a film. The Government remains of the view that, all things con-

by the Scheme, plus the ordinary economic incentive to obtain a maximum return on any investment, should result in moneys being attracted to quality productions having the potential for significant box-office success. This incentive towards quality is in fact reinforced by the second limb of the concessions, the income exemption, which in itself is a strong incentive to investment in films with potential for success. Nevertheless, the operation of the Scheme will be carefully monitored over the next six to12 months and, if the need is demonstrated, appropriate action will be taken.

sidered, the modification is fundamentally corI take this opportunity also to clear up a mis-

rect. On the other hand, it has been put to us that conception that seems to have arisen as to how the

people who committed moneys to the production modification will apply in circumstances where a

of a film on the basis of the December statement qualifying film is produced and televised in parts;

were entitled to expect that deductions would befor example, as a mini-series of television drama.

come available at the time of expenditure.

In relation to such products a separate copyright

On review, the Government has decided that expenditure under contracts entered into on or after 1 October 1980 and on or before 27 May 1981 will qualify for deduction in the year of

exists in each complete part, with the result that expenditure in the production of a particular part will qualify for deduction when that part is completed and used in the production of income.

expenditure, on the basis outlined in the Turning in detail to the amendments, amend-

December statement. It is not necessary that the ment No. (1) is of a.purely technical nature made

amount contracted during this period be actually necessary by the introduction of the Income Tax

expended on or before 27 May 1981 for a deducLaws Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981. It represents

tion to be available on this basis. Thus, for the correction of a drafting oversight arising from

example, an amount committed under a contract the interaction of that Bill and the present Bill.

entered into during the transitional period but The amendment will ensure full effectiveness of

which is not actually out laid by the investor until the ban on the carryforward of losses of the type

the 1981-82 income year will, on the basis set out that would not have been available for deduction

in the December statement, qualify for deduction if the general anti-avoidance amendments in

in that year irrespective of when the film is proposed Part IVA were not limited to schemes

completed and marketed. If out laid before the entered into or carried out after 27 May. Amend-

current income year COf'leS to an end, of course, ments Nos (2) to (4) will give effect to the

the deduction would be available in assessments Government's decision on the timing of film de-

of 1980-81 income. For expenditure under conductions in relation to investments contracted for

tracts entered into after 27 May 1981 deductions before the Bill was introduced. Amendments Nos

will be available on the basis of the Bill as (2) and (3) will, as a first step, restrict the oper-

introduced; that is, deductions will become availation of the provisions presently in the Bill to

able when the relevant film has been completed expenditure under contracts entered into on or

and used to produce income.

after 28 May 1981. Amendment No. (4) will

I take this opportunity to note that representations have been made to the Government that the effect of the modification to the December statement will be to direct investment away from quality productions which may take some time to

authorise deductions in the year of expenditure for amounts expended pursuant to contracts entered into between 1 October 1980 and 27 May 1981, by inserting in proposed section 124zAF new sub-sections (2A) to (2D).

reach the market place. The Government has By proposed sub-section (2A), a deduction will

examined these comments carefully but does not be available in the year of expenditure to the

consider that, with the exception of pre-28 May extent to which the Commissioner of Taxation is

contracts, they should lead to any departure from satisfied that a deduction would have become

the approach taken in the Bill. It should be available, whether in that year or a later year,

remembered that even with the change in the under the ongoing rules that are to apply to

3364 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

expenditure under contracts entered into on or after 28 May 1981. By this sub-section, the Commissioner is effectively required to be satisfied that the film will be completed and marketed and that the investor's contribution will be genuinely out laid in the production of the film. These tests were foreshadowed in the December statement. Proposed sub-section (2B) will require, as also outlined in the December statement, that moneys contributed to a production account be actually expended in the production of the film within 12 months after the end of the year of income in which the moneys were contributed. In keeping with the December statement, and as a necessary safeguard, proposed sub-section (2c) ensures that the prepayment of an expense will not satisfy the requirement just mentioned.
I observe that the requirement that moneys be expended by the end of the next income year was originally proposed as a brake on the type of arrangements against which the ongoing modification is itself directed and became unnecessary in the context of deductions being available only after a film is completed and marketed. By proposed sub-section (2D) the Commissioner is to be authorised to alter the amount of any deduction previously allowed under the arrangements for pre-28 May 1981 contracts in the event that it becomes established that a greater or lesser deduction should have been allowed in the year of initial outlay. I commend the amendments to the Committee.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (5.58)-The Opposition does not accept these amendments. The reason it does not is that it believes they represent capitulation to tax avoiders by the Government. It is an opportunity which was opened up by the original promise itself and acknowledged by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his second reading speech. He made it quite clear that the reason for deviating from the original announcement of himself and the then Minister for Home Affairs, Mr Ellicott, in December last year was precisely that the Government was concerned that tax avoiders were getting into the industry and that the possible safeguarding provisions which he could have included in the Act would not be successful. He has now capitulated on that, in turn, and has gone back to the original announcement made by himself and the then Minister for Home Affairs. The result is that he is now capitulating to tax avoiders. The Opposition does not accept that and therefore opposes the amendments.
Amendments agreed to.
MrBARRY JONES (Lalor) (5.59)-1 move:

Clause J3, page 22, lines 22-26, omit proposed paragraph l24zAA (I) (b).
Paragraph (b) widens the definition of 'Australian film' to an unreasonable degree by including within it a film made pursuant to a coproduction agreement with a foreign government or an authority of a foreign government. Paragraph (b) gives an Alice in Wonderland quality to the definition of 'Australian film'. If we ask what is an Australian film, we get two answers. The first answer is that, under paragraph (a), it is a film with a significant Australian content, made wholly or substantially in Australia and subject to the specific qualifications found in section 124zAD. I will not go into the details. We do not have time now. The second answer is that an Australian film is a film made pursuant to a coproduction. No qualifications whatever are imposed. The qualification imposed in proposed new section 124zAD is specifically excluded. Under the heading 'Determination of Australian content', the proposed section reads:
Where, . . . the Minister is required by virtue of paragraph (a) of the definition of 'Australian film' in subsection 124zAA (1) to determine whether the film has, or the proposed film when completed will have. a significant Australian content, the Minister shall . . . have regard to . . .
Then follow the qualifications. They do not cover proposed section 124zAA (t) (b) relating to coproduction. The provisions for certification by the Minister, far from being a useful safeguard, are valueless in protecting the ostensible aims of the Bill; that is, the encouragement of an indigenous Australian film industry. Proposed new sections 124zAB and 124zAC refer to the issuing by the Minister of provisional and final certificates. A requirement is that the Minister is to be satisfied that the film 'is a qualifying Australian film for the purposes of this Division'. As we have already seen, 'Australian film' is defined in such an absurdly wide fashion as to include non-Australian films. It makes nonsense of the legislation. It makes the scope for tax deduction for films which are not fairly characterised as Australian in any meaningful way a fraud on the revenue and the community. I think the Committee would be grateful for the Minister's response. The legislation is bad enough Sub-section (b) of proposed new section 124zAA is the worst part of all.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (6.3)-The Government cannot accept the amendment. We believe that it would have the effect of excluding films that had been made pursuant to arrangements which had previously qualified for the Government's tax concessions for Australian films. 1 point out to the honourable

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3365

member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) that to qualify a film must be certified by the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment as having significant Australian content.
Mr Barry Jones-That is not really what the Act says.
Mr HOWARD-That is the effect of the Act. I indicated in my remarks earlier that we will be watching the operation of other sections of the Act as things proceed. I undertake to the honourable member for Lalor that we will watch the operation of this proposed new section. We do not want to be unduly chauvinistic and niggly. Equally, we want to see that in practice encouragement is given to the Australian film industry. We will certainly take that into account. I cannot accept the amendment.
Amendment negatived.
Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Howard)-by leaveread a third time.
Sitting suspended from 6.5 to 8 p.m.
HEALTH ACTS AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 2 June, on motion by Mr MacKellar:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (8.0)-After 18 months of what might be described as legislative constipation, and I will not continue the metaphor, the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) has presented to the House in the dying days of the session this massive omnibus health Bill, the Health Acts Amendment Bill, which amends in significant ways four major health Acts-the Health Insurance Act, the National Health Act, the Nursing Homes Assistance Act and the Therapeutic Goods Act. At the core of the Bill is the second stage of what I term the fifth Fraser health plan. The first stage, that is, the Commonwealth's abdicating responsibility for public hospitals while at the very same time compelling the States to increase bed day charges and outpatient charges and impose means tests, was introduced by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) a fortnight ago in the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill. The aim of the changes in that Bill was to frighten people back into health insurance.

At the heart of the Bill we are discussing tonight, the Health Acts Amendment Bill, is the second stage of the fifth Fraser health plan, that is, the insurance proposals. In it we find proposals for the classification of the disadvantages, the health insurance structure, the incentives for the private health funds, and the increased subsidies for private hospitals. Somehow the Minister, as if he were ashamed of the reactionary package at the heart of this Bill, has disguised and surrounded it with a host of extraneous and often irrelevent matter. For instance there are amendments in this omnibus Bill to the Therapeutic Goods Act, which has nothing to do with the fifth Fraser health plan.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member will refer to the Prime Minister as such.
Dr BLEWETT-I do not know how I can describe the plan as other than the Fraser health plan.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member is not free to do so.
Dr BLEWETT-The pathology amendments scattered through the Bill are the response to a report already three years old. The extension of the isolated patient's allowance has nothing to do with the health insurance proposals, and many of the nursing home amendments are only marginally relevant to the fifth plan of this Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser).
It is typical of this Government that it should now seek to inhibit and frustrate debate on the central issues of the latest health plan by including in the very same Bill a plethora of extraneous and peripheral issues. This omnibus measure is but one further example of the contempt the Government has for this House. We have, for instance, a Prime Minister who refuses to debate in this chamber. We have a gaggle of Ministers incapable of giving straight answers to questions. Now we have a Minister introducing an omnibus Bill deliberately designed to muddy the waters of debate on what the Government claims is critical and major changes, the most important health insurance changes of the Government.
The Opposition does not accept that this Parliament should be treated in such a way and so it proposes to move amendments to the Bill. The first point we make in our amendment is that the Bill be withdrawn and redrafted to enable those sections of the Bill dealing with the isolated patient's allowance, pathology services, nursing homes assistance, and therapeutic goods to be separately introduced and separately debated. If the Government adopts that proper course and

3366 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

thereby contributes to clear debate, the Opposition will facilitate the passage of such measures through the House in the dying days of this session. If the Government does not adopt that course, the Opposition will simply not participate in debate on those issues which in essence are irrelevant to the main intent and purpose of this Bill. We will not be distracted by them from our total opposition to the fifth health plan of this Liberal Prime Minister.
Let me make it perfectly clear, in case there is to be any future peddling of lies and half truths--- the staple electoral fodder of this Government--- that the Opposition supports, firstly, the extension of the Isolated Patients' Travel and Accommodation Assistance Scheme to orthodontic and associated treatment for the under 20year-aids, secondly, it supports the assumption by the Commonwealth of responsibility for all nursing home benefits; thirdly, it supports the updating and extension of the Therapeutic Goods Act; and fourthly, in general it supports the mainly technical amendments with reference to pathology services. Let me say again that the Opposition will not be conned by the presence of these reforms into giving any form of support whatsoever to a Bill which embodies the most reactionary and regressive health plan ever introduced into this country.
Let me now look at that plan. Last week the Government passed through this House the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill, which deprived the States of some $253m in health funds they would have received had the present agreements been maintained. The aim of that deprivation was twofold in the short run. Firstly, it was to compel the States to raise charges for in-patient and out-patient services in their public hospitals. Secondly, it was to impose a strict means test so as to widen the scope of those compelled to meet the increased charges. The immediate run purpose of both those changes was to compel Australians back into flat rate contributions to private health insurance funds.
That was last week's effort. The central task of the Bill before us tonight is to complement those changes, to revise the health insurance structure to receive those millions of Australians who will now be forced back into the private health funds. I will deal now with the two major features of the Bill--the central issues for discussion. Having last week denied universal free access to the public hospitals of this nation to all but the narrowly defined disadvantaged, this week in this Bill the Government is removing the other vestige of universality which has characterised all health schemes since 1975, that is, a universal medical

benefit for all Australians. Clause 8 of the Bill ensures that, apart from the disadvantaged and pensioners with health benefit cards, only Australians who have taken out a private contract with a health insurance fund will be entitled to the Commonwealth medical benefit. Only those Australians will receive the 30 per cent of the schedule fee. Only those Australians will be assured that the maximum gap payment will be only $10. Thus, although all Australians are taxpayers, the only Australians to receive from Commonwealth revenue the Commonwealth medical benefit are those who have made a contract with a private health agency. I know that the general system in Australia is characterised by tax allowances, by subsidies and by rebates, but I find it difficult to think of any other single piece of legislation which provides that the payment of a benefit will be dependent on a contract with a private agency. One of the major aspects of this Bill is to deny to all Australians a payment from taxation, a medical benefit, unless they have made an agreement with a private health agency. It would be difficult to find another parallel in the legislation of this country.
The second major feature of the Bill is that it defines those categories of people who will receive special assistance to cover their hospital and medical bills. Firstly, there are the eligible pensioners, those whose incomes do not exceed the permissible limits entitling them to fringe benefits. The Minister in his second reading speech said:
I would like again to reassure all those people who hold pensioner health benefit cards and their dependants that there will be no change in their position after I September next.
I repeat:
. . . there will be no change in their position after I September next. The Bill now before the House therefore retains the existing arrangements for eligible pensioners and their dependants.
As far as I know no member of the Opposition has suggested that this Bill does not retain the existing arrangements for eligible pensioners and their dependants. But we on this side of the House suggest that the position of those people, as distinct from what is provided in the Bill, after 1 September will change. Let me suggest that it will change because the context in which those people operate will change. Every honourable member on both sides of this House has seen pensioners in recent years fearful about losing their health benefit card. These fears will become nightmares simply because the protections that existed when they lost that card will be removed. There will be no free hospitals for any pensioner whose superannuation additions take him or her over that pensioner benefit level. There will be no doctors able to

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3367

define them as disadvantaged patients as there have been in recent years. The context has been changed utterly for these people. For the Minister for Health to say that there will be no change in their position simply because the formal provisions of the Act do not change it is basically incorrect. These people, if they are in a family situation, will be faced with a $10 to $12 a week family insurance contribution by the end of the year, offset to a degree by rebate, or if they are single people they will be faced with a $5 to $6 a week charge. But their fears now are very different because of the significant change that is made in the context in which they operate. They have already feared the dangers of losing their health benefit card. Those dangers will become much more real when free hospitals are firmly denied to them by definition and doctors are no longer permitted to treat them as disadvantaged.
Similarly, many of the ineligible pensioners, that is, those 300,000 pensioners today without health benefit cards, are only marginally above the fringe benefit level. Our calculation is up to approximately 100,000. In the past they have been cushioned by two things~firstly, the availability of free hospitals and, secondly, the willingness of many doctors to treat them as disadvantaged. For those people that cushion has been removed. I am talking in particular about pensioners who are just over the pensioner fringe benefit level, pensioners in that marginal situation, many of whom have opted for the free hospital provision and, in many cases, have been treated by their doctors as disadvantaged.
Next, we come to those who are defined in this Bill as the disadvantaged. There are four categories so defined: Firstly, migrants and refugees intheir first six months in Australia; secondly, unemployment beneficiaries with incomes below the pensioner health card level; thirdly, special beneficiaries, again with incomes below the pensioner health benefit card level; and fourthly, the working poor. It is very interesting to note that at last this Government in the late twentieth century has been prepared to admit that in this so-called affluent and fortunate society there are people who work who still are regarded as poor. I think it is a frank recognition of reality that there are in this society, as a condemnation of the type of system under which we live, working poor.
The Minister has made a great parade of governmental generosity with regard to the disadvantaged. In fact, his statements seem to have gulled the Australian Medical Association though, of course, that is no intellectual feat. This afternoon I was shown a June 1981 letter from

Lionel Wilson, President of the AMA, written to all doctors in this society, sending them a poster advising all their patients to get into health insurance as soon as possible. But there is a delightful single sentence in that letter which states:
The uncertainty of identifying the disadvantaged will be removed, and, as advocated by the AMA, they will receive substantially increased medical benefits.
I repeat that the uncertainty of identifying them will be removed and that they, the disadvantaged, will receive substantially increased medical benefits. Let me make three comments on that extraordinary sentence. Firstly, fewer people will be treated as disadvantaged under the fifth health scheme of the present Prime Minister than under the fourth health scheme of the present Prime Minister. The Minister made this perfectly clear on 29 April. Under the old scheme the disadvantaged were growing at too great a rate. Despite the increase in benefit payments to cover the disadvantaged from 75 per cent to 85 per cent the Government expects to save some $9m by reducing the numbers of disadvantaged. Despite this increase in benefit payments the Government expects a $9m saving. It will expect a $9m saving because the numbers of disadvantaged covered under the new proposals will be distinctly less than for those covered under the present proposals.
Secondly, let me take that statement from Dr Wilson's letter that the disadvantaged wiII receive substantially increased medical benefits. Where on earth, in the proposals of this Government, are there substantially increased medical benefits for the disadvantaged? Who receives the increase from 75 per cent to 85 per cent of the medical fee? It is not the disadvantaged. The disadvantaged do not get an extra payment. Who gets the extra payment? Dr Wilson and his friends do. Who benefits out of this? Of course, the doctors do.
Mr Hodges-What is wrong with that?
Dr BLEWETT-I am just correcting Dr Wilson, who has told every doctor in this country that somehow the disadvantaged are better ofT. In fact, he is saying that the doctors are better off by this arrangement, but he is not quite prepared to confess it openly. Thirdly, I think Dr Wilson should explain to his members also that they will no longer be able to identify the disadvantaged because the Minister does not believe that enough of them possess sufficient integrity to be able to do so. We can look for the reasons for that in the Minister's statement of 29 April. But none of those things are presented frankly or honestly in the letter circulated to all doctors in this country.

3368 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

Of course, the definition of the disadvantaged poses quite horrendous bureaucratic problems. This is evidenced by the Bill before the House. Something like 25 per cent of the material in this Bill relates to the definition and classification of the disadvantaged. It is so enormous a problem that something like a quarter of the total Bill is devoted to defining, classifying and providing penalty provisions for the disadvantaged. I suggest that anyone in this House with doubts about the bureaucratic complexity should read the definition of allowable income for the working poor. Honourable members should read clause 6, propposed new section 5B sub-section (12) and they will then recognise the quite horrendous problems of defining, in particular, the income of the workingpoor.
The problem for immigrants, refugees, unemployment beneficiaries and special beneficiaries is relatively straightforward. All of those people are already within either the bureaucratic social security systems or the immigration system. The real problem, of course, lies with the working ,poor, who now, in order to qualify, must submit to all the checks on income and lifestyle characteristic of the Department of Social Security. This Government, which is committed to small government, will subject that Department to quite an enormous work load-up to 800,000 potential working poor applicants. If most of them apply they need to be checked at least twice a year. So one has something like 1.5 million applications to be checked twice a year. Indeed, some of the provisions in the Bill suggest that there may be a need for further checking within each of those sixmonth periods.
Most of the working poor have no involvement with the Department of Social Security. They will not go to the Department of Social Security to secure a card prior to their hospital or medical treatment. That will mean that in a de-facto sense, hospitals and doctors will quite frequently have to apply a means test at the point of service.
In response to the Opposition demands the Governmerit has done something in recent weeks-in fact, the program has been changing in detail week by week-to modify the uncertainty of the disadvantaged provision. The Government has certainly eased the uncertainty but the essential difficulty remains. Again the Minister, in his second reading speech, said:
The Bill enables a person to apply for a health care card on the grounds that he or she fell within the low income category at the time a medical or hospital service was provided. The application may be lodged up to 13 weeks after the service was provided.

Let me say that that is some effort to come to grips with the innumerable problems in this field. But what happens if he or she does exactly the same in 12 months' time with the very same expectations and this time is over the income limits because of shifts in pay; that is, many of these people are going to have applied once, think that they are therefore covered, make a second application, say, in 12 months' time-they may be in hospital when they make the application-and then find themselves completely surprised by the decision that is made. That is, there will remain a real uncertainty in this field. Moreover, the income limits specified-$96 for a single person and $160 a family with $20 for each child-will become increasingly restricted over time. For instance, the single person figure is not indexed at all. So from the beginning the value of that figure, in real terms, will decline, whilst the family figure is indexed to the extent of only 70 per cent. Again these figures, from the instant of their application, will become increasingly more restrictive.
Another serious problem which touches on the disadvantaged is one that has been called by one writer the notch effect: That is, there is a single income cut-off point. I ask honourable members to consider the situation of a couple with two children. The cut-off point for them is $200 a week. If they receive $199 a week the Commonwealth will cover all their medical and hospital costs. If, on the other hand, they receive $201 a week they will have to pay $10 or $12 a week health insurance contributions. There is no effort made to taper these effects; it is simply a sharp cut-off point. On one side one has Commonwealth cover and on the other side one has the full impact of an expensive health insurance system. I have little doubt that Australian experience of the disadvantaged persons provisions will convince this country of the need for a health plan which will dispense with this form of categorisation.
I turn to what really are the more constructive aspects of this speech because it is pretty clear in my mind that this scheme will not last for much more than two years whether we are in government or not. I will suggest the criteria for judging the fifth Fraser health plan and at the same time the principles which will guide the Australian Labor Party in the formulation of its own plan. I wish to suggest to honourable members how they should judge this plan and any other plan devised by the Government and, at the same time, by using those criteria, we will imply what we see as the essential principles of a health cover system. These principles are five in number. The first is that the system should be simple; secondly, it should provide universal cover; thirdly, it should

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3369

remove the need for the categorisation and stigyears ago this Government published a discussion

matisation of the disadvantaged. Fourthly, it paper on paying for health care. On universal

should be an equitable system of health cover; cover this paper said:

and, fifthly, it should contain costs by effective constraints, not so much on the users of health services, because they are not the chief determi-

In view of its acceptance and theoretical advantages" it should be regarded as a permanent feature of health financing in Australia.

nants of costs, but on the providers of health services-the doctors, specialists and hospitalsbecause they are the chief sources of escalating costs.
In relation to the first principle, that of simplicity, I say that only through a relatively simple scheme can we achieve our equity aims, because the' more complex we make a scheme the more chance there is of inequity growing. Secondly, the simpler a scheme the greater is the chance of efficiency. Thirdly, the simpler a scheme the better and more effective ways there will be of controlling costs. Fourthly, and most importantly, as Nimmo pointed out 12 years ago, the health insurance system is unnecessarily complex and beyond the comprehension of many. People should be able to understand the system under which their health cover is provided. The fifth Fraser health plan does little to simplify-

Of course, that permanent feature has now been abandonded. On pre-1975 expectations, at least one and half million Australians will remain uninsured. If the conditioning of recent years has had any impact that figure may be considerably larger. Families and individuals unable to afford expensive flat rate insurance will be part of that group. People who take the risk with their own health will be another part of that group. No doubt the feckless and confused will also be part of that group. We have to think also of the children of the people in that group. This ending of universal cover will reintroduce the problems that plagued hospital doctors and social welfare agencies in the late 1960s-bad debts in hospitals, dunning of
people for medical bills, neglect by people of the~r early medical needs for fear of the costs. On thiS point I leave the House with the comment of the discussion paper:

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member again offends.

Under Medibank it immediately became apparent that the goal of basic universal cover had been attained with remark-

Dr BLEWETT-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish able administrative efficiency.

you could also treat the noise at the back of the chamber in the same way.

Thirdly, there is little need for me to say that any health scheme needs to remove the categorisation

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Yes, the Chair and stigmatisation of the disadvantaged which is

takes the point. Honourable members on my right so prominent a feature of the present Bill. I realise

will remain silent.

that that is made necessary by any government

Dr BLEWETT-The fifth plan introduced by this Prime Minister does little to simplify the system and much to complicate it. The hospital charges will do nothing to make for simpler system. The disadvantaged persons provisions, as I have indicated, though they may possibly be more rational, are far more complex than before. The

which depends for its health cover on the high levels of flat rate private health insurance. But there was no need, under a Medibank-type scheme, to do anything about categorising or defining these groups of poor in our society. That was worked out either through the income tax system or through the levy system.

same considerable number of private health funds will be competing and advertising against one another. At the lastest count 78 medical funds and 84 hospital funds are still in the field. It is true that the removal of the optional tables will reduce the bewildering array of table choices. But even this, I think, is likely to be temporary because the new scheme and the likely cost of health contributions at the end of the year will incite commercial insurance companies back into the field. So, very rapidly, we will have all the old front-end deductibles and low rates which the commercial companies will offer. Indeed, I think we will see an expansion of that form of activity.

Fourthly, and perhaps most importantly, there should be an equitable system of health cover. On this aspect I briefly make three points. Firstly, the Minister said that the system must be equitable, paying particular attention to the capacity ofindividuals to contribute towards their health costs. Let me say again, however one dresses it up with rebates and the like, a fiat rate health insurance
contribution is regressive and inequitable. Secondly, the Minister chattered a lot about the userpays principle. In fact, that phrase turned up fo~r or five times in every speech he made until, interestingly, this last speech. Indeed, the words are completely excised from his second reading

Secondly, we argue that any scheme should be speech on this Bill. Perhaps he has realised at last

judged on the universality of its cover. Three that it is a vacuous cliche. It is obvious that that

3370 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

notion of user-pays was undermined by the community rating principle which he also advocated. It was contradicted by the fact that increased insurance cover and increased percentage benefit will reduce the impact of payment at the point of service. No doubt his confidence in the user-pays principle has eroded further the growing evidence that the user pays means in fact the payer uses. Larger personal contributions to health insurance simply encourages a greater use of medical services. The evidence is mounting on that proposition.
Finally, an equitable system of paying for health cover demands an income related payment either through a fair tax system or through a health levy. The only significant difference between a near compulsory private health insurance contribution system and an income related health levy is that the insurance contribution system is regressive and inequitable, taking a distinctly higher proportion of the ordinary man's income than that of the well off. An income related health levy is equitable and progressive in that it places the bigger burdens on the broader shoulders. For all practical purposes both the system advocated by this Minister and the system advocated by the Labor Party are taxes. But in terms of equity and fairness, the health levy is superior. Moreover, it has advantages in terms of administrative efficiency and cost constraint. There is no doubtthe Canadian evidence completely establishes this, the Canadian scheme having run for 11 years-that having a single administrative agency without all of those problems of competitive advertising and competitive costs gives real administrative advantages. It provides a real role in cost constraint. The Canadians have managed much better to restrain the costs of their system. Their costs have been controlled; ours have risen year by year. I have great pleasure in moving an amendment which in principle rejects totally this Bill. I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'the Bill be withdrawn and re-drafted-
(I) to enable those sections of the Bill dealing with the Isolated Patients Allowance, Pathology Services, Nursing Homes Assistance and Therapeutic Goods to be separately introduced and separately debated;
(2) to delete all provisions dealing with the Government's health insurance changes, and
(3) to provide for a health cover system for Australians which will-
(a) guarantee universal cover, rather than the uncertain cover provided in the present Bill;
(b) provide a simple system rather than the complexity of the present Bill;

(c) remove the necessity for the categorisation of the disadvantaged, so prominent a feature of the present Bill;

(d) establish equity through income-related payments rather than the fiat rate regressive insurance contribution of the present Bill, and

(e) contain costs by effective constraints on the providers of health services, neglected by the concentration on inappropriate and ineffectual restraints on patient usage in the present Bill'.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Before calling for a seconder of the motion I would like to address the House briefly. During the remarks of the honourable member for Bonython the Chair was obliged to call the honourable member to order for a minor breach of the Standing Orders. The honourable member for Bonython quite rightly pointed out that if I was being attentive to the Standing Orders I might well have called to order honourable members on my right who persisted in continuing conversation. The Chair refrained from calling the honourable members to order because the honourable member for Bonython, in full voice, may have been unfairly disadvantaged as a consequence. I am sure honourable members are not mindful that in a chamber that is sparsely populated sound carries in a much more penetrating fashion. The honourable member for Petrie, with all kindness, would be surprised if he knew just how penetr~ting his booming whispers are. Is there a seconder to the motion?

Mr Mildren-I second the motion and reserve my right to speak.

Mr Hodges-Mr Deputy Speaker, I apologise if I was at fault while the honourable member for Bonython was making his remarks.

Motion (by Mr Hodges) agreed to:

That the question be now put.

Question putl

That the words proposed to be omitted (Dr Blewett's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

63

Noes

43

Majority

20

Adermann. A. E. Baurne,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, I. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown!N.A~'
Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A.

AYES

Howard, I. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M. Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Killen,D.I. Lloyd,B.
Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip

Health Acts Amendment Bill

AYES
Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan, D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W.M.

MacKellar, M. 1. R.
MacKenzie, A. J. Mclean, R. M.
McVeigh,D. T.
Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. PorterJ. R. Robinson,lan Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D.S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, 1. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Brown, John Brown, RoberL Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, 1. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)

Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J.
Kent,L.
Kerin,J.C.
Klugman, R. E.
McLeay, Leo McMahon, Los Mildren, I. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D.
Theophanous, A. C.
Ufcn, T.
Wallis, L.G.
West, S. J.
WiIIis,R. Young, M. J.

PAIRS
Macphee, I. M. McMahon, Sir William Nixon,P.J. Viner,R.I. Anthony, 1. D. Street, A. A.

Bowen, Lionel
Campbell,G. Darling, E. E.
Hawke, R. J. L.
Scott,J.L.
Hurford, C. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question put:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

63

Noes

44

Majority

19

Adermann, A. E. Baume,M.E.

AYES

Howard,J. W. Hunt,R. I. D.

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3371

AYES
Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W, Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A.
Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, I. I. Chapman, H. G. p, Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M.
Drummond, P.lI. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D.
Fife, w.e.
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O-H.
Good luck,B.J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MoD. Hicks,N.I.
Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Hyde,I.M.
Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. KiIleh,D.J. Lloyd,B.
Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. I. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M.
McVeigh, D. T. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shiplon, R. F.
Sinclair, 1. McC. Spender, 1. M, Tumbling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson,l. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. B1ewett,N.
Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, 1. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham,D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) innes, U.E. Jacabi,R. JeDkins, H. A.

Johnson,l.es (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman,R.E. McLeay!Leo McMahon, Les MildreD, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris, P. F. Murrison, \V. L. Mountford, J. G.
Schol"", G. G. D. Theophanous. A. C.
Uren, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S. I. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS
Macphee, I. M. McMahon, Sir WilUam Nixon,P.J. Viner,R.I. Anthony, J. D. Street,A.A.

Bowen, Lionel Campbell,G. Darling, E. E. Hawke, R. J. L. Scott,J. L. Hurford, C. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time. Message from the Administrator recommending appropriation announced.
In Committee The Bill. Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (8.45)-by leave-I move:

3372 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

(I) Clause 2, page 1, line 7, omit 'and 20', substitute', 20, 23A to 23H (inclusive), 24A and 24B'.
(2) Clause 4, page 2, lines 30 to 34, omit paragraph (b) of the definition of 'dependant', substitute the following paragraph:
'(b) in relation to a disadvantaged person in respect of whom there is in force a declaration under section 5 or SB-a person who is a dependant, within the meaning of section SB, of the disadvantaged person or would be such a dependant if section 5B applied in relation to the disadvantaged person; or'.
(3) Clause 6, page 4, line 32, omit '(other than a person who is a dependant of any person) '.
(4) Clause 6, page 5, lines 24 to 27, omit sub-section (7) of proposed section 5, substitute the following sub-section:
'(7) In this section, "applicant", in relation to an application under sub-section (1), means the eligible person to whom the application relates. '.
(5) Clause 6, page 6, line 5, omit' (other than a person who is a dependant of any person) '.
(6) Clause 6, pages 11 and 12, omit paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of the proposed section 5E, substitute the following paragraph:
'(b) the Director-General of Social Services is satisfied that, in respect of a period of 2 weeks commencing on the date of the grant, the person will not be a prescribed person within the meaning of section 83CA of the Social Services Act 1947,'.
(7) Clause 6, page 12,Iine 23, omit '2', substitute '3'.
(8) Clause 6, page 13, line 25, omit '(2)', substitute '(3)'.
(9) Clause 6, page 13,lines 27 and 28, omit '(3) or (4)', substitute '(4) or (5)'.
(10) Clause 6, page 13,line 30, omit '(2), (3) or (4)" substitute '(3), (4) or (5)'.
(11) Clause 6, page 14, add at the end of the clause the following proposed section:
Declaration not to be made in respect of dependant 'Sr. Nothing in section 5 or 5B permits the making of a dec-
laration with respect to a person under either of those sections in respect of any day on which the person-
(a) is, or was, a dependant, within the meaning of section 5B, of any person; or
(b) is, or was, wholly or substantially dependent on a resident of a country other than Australia.',
(12) After clause 23, pages 22 and 23, insert the following new clauses:
Interpretation '23A. Section 79 of the principal Act is amended by insert-
ing in sub-section (1) after the definition of 'Deputy Chairman' the following definition:
" 'document'inc1udes-
(a) a book, plan, paper, parchment, film or other material on which there is writing or printing, or on which there are marks, symbols or perforations having a meaning for persons qualified to interpret them;
(b) a disc, tape, paper, film or other device from which sounds or images are capable of being reproduced; and
(c) any other record ofinformation;'.
Appointment to vacant office '23B. Section 88 of the principal Act is amended by omitting
from sub-section (2) 'the Minister shall appoint a medical practitioner to that office and, before making that appointment, shall consult the Australian Medical Association' and

substituting 'the Minister shall not appoint a person to that office for a period of more than 3 months except after consultation with the Australian Medical Association'.
'23c. Section 96 of the Principal Act is repealed and the following sections are substituted:
Summons to practitioner to attend hearing, &c. '96. (1) For the purposes of this Act, a member may, by writing under his hand, summon the practitioner, or any of the practitioners, concerned to attend a hearing and to produce such documents (if any) as are referred to in the summons and to appear at the hearing to give evidence for the purpose only of identifying any such documents.
(2) Where a summons is served on a practitioner under subsection (I) at least 10 days before a hearing specifying the time and place of the hearing and giving particulars of the matter to which the hearing relates, the Committee is not required to cause a notice to be given to the practitioner under section 95.
(3) A summons under this section may be served on the practitioner personally or by post.
Attendance of practitioner at hearing
96A. (I) Where a practitioner is summoned under section 96 to attend a hearing, he shall attend in person, and may be represented by another person, at the hearing.
(2) Where a notice has been served on a practitioner under section 95 in relation to a hearing and the practitioner has not been summoned under section 96 to attend the hearing, he may appear in person, or may be represented by another person, at the hearing.
Rights of practitioner at hearing 96B. Where a practitioner attends, appears or is represented at a hearing in accordance with sub-section 96A (I) or (2), he or his representative, as the case requires, shall be giv\,n the opportunity to give evidence, and to call witnesses, on behalf of the practitioner, to examine other witnesses appearing at the hearing and to address to Committee.
Conduct ofhearing 23D. Section 97 of the principal Act is amended by omitting
from sub-section (4) ", book or writing" (wherever occurring) .
Summons to give evidence, &c 23E. Section 99 of the principal Act is amended by omitting
from sub-section (1) "document, book or writing as is" and substituting "documents (if any) as are".
23F.(l) Sections 100 and 101 of the principal Act are repealed and the following sections are substituted:
Allowances for witnesses at hearing 100. A person summoned (otherwise than under section
96) to appear as a witness at a hearing before the Committee is entitled to be paid allowances, fixed by or in accordance with the regulations, for expenses in respect of his attendance.
Failure to attend. 101.(1) A person served with a summons to appear at a
hearing shall not, without reasonable excuse-
(a) fail to attend as required by the summons; or
(b) fail to appear and report himself from day to day unless excused, or released from further attendance, by a member.
(2) A practitioner served with a summons to attend a hearing shall not, without reasonable excuse-
(a) fail to attend as required by the summons; or
(b) fail to attend and report himself from day to day unless excused, or released from further attendance, by a member.
Penalty: $1,000.

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3373

(2) Regulations in force at the commencement of this section for the purposes of section 100 of the principal Act continue in force as if made for the purposes of section 100 of the principal Act as amended by this Act.
Refusal to be sworn or to answer questions 23G. Section 102 of the principal Act is amended-
(a) by omitting from paragraph (1) (c) ". book or writing";
(b) by omitting the penalty set out at. the foot of subsection (1) and substituting the following penalty:
"Penalty: $1.000.";
(c) by inserting after sub-section (1) the following sub-section:
"(IA) A practitioner attending before the Committee shall not. without reasonable excuse. refuse or fail or produce a document that he is required to produce by a summons under section 96.
Penalty: $1.000.";
(d) by inserting after sub-section (2) the following sub-section:
"(2A) A document produced at a hearing by a practitioner is not admissible in evidence against him in criminal proceedings except in a prosecution under or arising out of this Act or the regulations or the National Health Act 1953 or regulations made under that Act."; and
(e) by omitting from sub-section (3) ". book or writing" (wherever occurring).
Recommendation by Committee 23H. Section 105 of the principal Act is amended-
(a) by inserting after paragraph (2)(c) the following paragraph:
"(ca) that the practitioner be counselled;"; and
(b) by inserting after paragraph (3)(a) the following paragraph:
"(aa) that the practitioner be counselled;......
(13) After clause 24. page 23. insert the following new clauses:
Establishment of Optometrical Services Committees of Inquiry
24A. Section 106B of the principal Act is amended by omitting from sub-section (5) "and. before making that appointment. shall consult the Australian Optometrical Association" and substituting "but he shall not so appoint an optometrist to that office for a period of more than 3 months except after conSUltation with the Australian Optometrical Association".
Recommendation by Committee 24B. Section 106F of the principal Act is amended by
inserting after sub-paragraph (2) (bHi) the following sub-paragraph:
'(ia) that the participating optometrist be counselled;-....
I deal firstly with the amendment to clause 2. Medical services committees of inquiry have been set up under the provisions of the Health 11).- surance Act in each State. One optometrical services committee of inquiry for the whole of Australia has also been set up under the Act, to serve a similar function in relation to optometrists. These committees, which consist of five doctors, form a peer review system which has

been designed to combat the provision of excessive services by medical practitioners and optometrists. The provision of excessive services is a prac-
tice indulged in by a minority of practitioners whereby medical services are provided to patients although such services are not reasonably necessary for the adequate medical care of the patients concerned. Doctors or optometrists who provide these services may claim Commonwealth medical benefits for them through the bulk billing facility provided. This means that by providing these unnecessary services these doctors or optometrists are augmenting their income at the taxpayers' expense.
The medical profession is well respected within the community and the Government will work with the profession in maintaining these high standards of ethical conduct. As a corollary to this, members of the profession who abuse or defraud financial arrangements put in place by the Government can expect no sympathy.
The amendments now before the Committee contain four proposals for increasing the effectiveness of the peer review system. These proposals have the agreement of the Australian Medical Association. The first proposal will enable the Minister for Health to appoint temporary members to casual vacancies. This will keep the committees fully operational during the time it takes to follow statutory procedures for filling these vacancies on a permanent basis. The second and third proposals, which are taken together in the proposed new section 96 of the principal Act, will require practitioners to attend hearings and to produce their clinical notes. Attendance at hearings will give a practitioner the opportunity, if he so wishes-and this will be without compUlsion-to explain to members of a committee why he or she felt it necessary to provide the services in question. The presentation of clinical notes will give committee members a factual basis for making professional and objective judgments as to whether the services in question were necessary.
Finally, the proposed amendments will allow medical services committes of inquiry to recommend to the Minister that practitioners be counselled. Sometimes a committee, whilst being satisfied that excessive services have been provided, is also satisfied that they were provided in good faith by the practitioner concerned. At present the Act does not provide an appropriate course of action which the committees may recommend to the Minister in these instances. This proposal is intended to fill this gap. Members may
rest assured that any information provided to committees under the provisions of this Bill will

3374 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

be treated in the strictest confidence. All persons involved in a committee hearing are bound by the secrecy provisions of section 130 of the Health Insurance Act, the hearings are private and details of individual patients remain confidential. I commend these amendments to the Committee.
I turn now to the amendments proposed to clauses 4 and 6. The purpose of these amendments is to make a technical change to the conditions under which persons in receipt of special benefit will be entitled to health benefits. The change affects the basis on which the pensioner health benefit income test will be applied during the first two weeks that a person is in receipt of special benefit. In the Bill as introduced it was proposed that special beneficiaries would be subject to similar income testing arrangements for health benefits as unemployment beneficiaries. That is, entitlement to health benefits during a period in respect of which unemployment or special benefit is paid would be determined on the basis of income received in a two-week period preceding the date of payment of the benefit. Whilst this formula would be satisfactory for the majority of special beneficiaries, it would not be appropriate for a limited number of them who are first granted special benefit without taking into account their income during the preceding two-week period. One example would be the case of a single pregnant woman who loses her job within six weeks of her expected confinement date and for whom special benefit might be immediately granted and paid.
The amendment would ensure that for all special beneficiaries eligibility for health benefits would commence from the first day of the period for which special benefit was paid, provided the Director-General of Social Services is satisfied that, during that period, the pensioner health benefit income limits will be met. This will mean that eligible recipients of either unemployment or special benefit will have health benefit cover from the effective date from which the benefit is paid. In addition, there is a drafting change which is intended to put beyond doubt that a dependant in Australia of a person who lives overseas is not entitled to a health care card.
The purpose of the amendment on page 12, sub-section (3), lines 23 and 24 is to make a technical change to the provisions specifying the period for which a declaration in respect of a person in receipt of special benefit on 1 September 1981 is to be made. In the Bill as introduced, it was proposed that the fortnightly periods of eligibility for health benefits for recipients of unemployment or special benefit would overlap the fortnightly periods in respect of which those

benefits are paid and on the basis of which entitlement to health benefits would be determined. The purpose of this arrangement is to ensure that a person, during any period of continuing entitlement to unemployment or special benefit, would not be left without a card notifying entitlement to health benefits during any part of that period, which would otherwise be the case if the two fortnights coincided and the cards were issued with each continuing fortnightly payment of unemployment or special benefit. The amendment would ensure that a person who is already in receipt of special benefit on 1 September 1981 would be treated on the same basis as a person who is either in receipt of unemployment benefit or who is granted special benefit on or after that date.
The purpose of the amendment on page 13, sub-section (9), lines 25, 27, 28 and 30 is to make a technical correction to sub-section (9) of proposed section 5E to change the references to sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) to references to subsections (3), (4) and (5) respectively of that section.
Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (8.55)-1 will address myself to clause 6 of the Health Acts Amendment Bill in particular, though 1think that the Bill has to be looked at as a whole because each component of it really has its major problems. There is no argument on this side of the chamber with the following statement in the second reading speech by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar):
. . . the Government's overriding goal in the health area is that all Australians should have access to the high quality health care services we now enjoy in this country.
No one of good will would wish to disagree with this motherhood type of statement. It is the substance of the Government's commitment with which we take issue. The fact that we have not gone very far and the Minister has already moved amendments indicates how shonky the whole show is.
In this fifth health scheme of the Government the true colours of the Government's current dominant ideology have been hoisted for all Australians to see. The social hierarchy served by the system is patently obvious. We are not looking at a system that truly places the emphasis upon the relief of the sick from the fear of extra burden of financial strain. Given the Government's rhetoric on this issue, the unwary would be forgiven for momentarily believing that it is genuinely concerned with helping the poor and the socially disadvantaged. Therefore, I believe it is important to sort out the real emphasis of this Government

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3375

from what it commonly asserts. There is a disparTrue to the traditional attitudes of the con-

ity between some of the pious statements of this servative mentality, this Government treats the

Government and the realities of its legislation and poor with suspicion. This is an undeniable truth.

actions. All too often the Government claims to Because of the necessity to administer the health

represent traditional values such as those approprovisions for the disadvantaged as a group the

priate to supporting a family. Likewise it claims to checks against misuse are more specifically

base social legislation upon concern and comdirected towards them than any other group.

passion for those whose financial situation leaves Truly this is a clear case of blaming the victim

them unable to meet normal everyday needs in once again. That, as we know, is a very notable

this highly competitive system.

conservative attitude. Of course, we cannot

The indicator of success for this Government is the degree to which a person is able to accumulate wealth. The exemplars of this are people such as Robert Holmes a'Court, Lang Hancock, Rupert Murdoch, et cetera. This Bill is a grotesque example of this Government's manic pursuit of a

expect a government which is so composed of elitists to do otherwise. It is just not in the Government's nature. Nor can it be expected to understand this phenomenon because it is the victim of a success-oriented doctrine where success is measured primarily in money terms.

totally inappropriate social doctrine under which This Bill is a step backwards, not forwards. As

the notion of ability to pay is interpreted in such a my colleague the honourable member for

way that health care is now contingent upon the Bonython (Dr Blewett) has said, there is only one

financial status of the individual. Many people are reasonable way out of this problem and that is to

forced to accept the status of second class citizens. create a health system in which there is a health

I wonder whether the application of the doctrine levy. A health levy is the only equitable means of

of user pays is about to be applied elsewhere, as it funding health care. I agree with the honourable

is in this Bill. Perhaps education is the next area to member that the health insurance system as cur-

be dealt with in the same way. I suggest that all rently practised and perpetuated in this Bill is in-

those people concerned with education should equitable and regressive. The simple truth of this

commence their vigil immediately. A government fact is so obvious that one wonders either at the

with a record such as this Government has will try inability of the Government to understand it or

anything in the name of its so-called ideological the callous arrogance of the Government to ig-

purity.

nore it. The Bill, as I have said, is a step back-

The Government's preoccupation with market forces as a dominant value base from which all good things stem results in the creation of a institutionalised social dichotomy. On the one hand is the group designated as having the ability to pay, though God help the lower levels of that group. On the other hand are people with a range of social and or economic circumstances, collectively called the disadvantaged. The disadvantaged are

wards, not forwards. It increases social divisions. Nothing it does is justified by the doctrine of the user-pays principle. The Bill should be withdrawn. I supported the amendment that my colleague put forward at the second ft;ading stage. The Government should re-examine its own narrow and elitist policies before it embarks upon socially divisive and corrosive legislation such as that before the Committee this evening.

seen by the more aflluent members of this Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) (9.3)-1 ex-

Government and the officials of bureaucracy to be press my concern about and opposition to the in-

social mendicants; Not for them the choice of clusion of clauses 60 and 61 in the Health Acts

medicos or the option of a private or public bed. Amendment Bill. I do so on the basis that 1believe

The poor, the pensioners and others classified as those provisions demonstrate that the Govern-

disadvantaged have no choice. I am certainly not ment is not treating equitably all the citizens of

disparaging the care given in public hospitals. It is Australia. The parent Act contains a section 73F

a concern that 1 have that these people are claswhich is to be amended by this Bill. The original

sified as not having the right to a choice. It is inapsection enables a medical benefits organisation to

propriate to introduce the market force to an area seek and obtain an exemption from the require-

of such great concern to all as health care. What ments of providing medical benefits for certain

must result-it is extremely apparent in this specified services which are described in the appli-

Bill-is the assumption that the disadvantaged cation made to the Minister for Health for that

will have to be subjected to a great deal of bureauexemption. In fact, in popular terms it is known

cratic scrutiny, the amendments foreshadowed by that this is an exemption from paying medical

the Minister notwithstanding, to ensure that they benefits for the medical procedure of abortion.

or others acting on their behalf do not attempt to This matter has raised a great deal of controversy

pull a swifty on the system.

in the community over. a good number of years

3376 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

and has created particularly uninformed opinion about this Bill as it passes through the Parliament. Unfortunately, some of the publicity has been extravagant to the extreme and has overdescribed -in fact, made alarmist-the provisions which are contained particularly in clauses 60 and 61.
I have no opposition to a society seeking exemption from the use of its funds provided by its members for a particular purpose and, if they so desire, for the purpose of performing abortions. However, J believe the Government should be even-handed in its contribution. If a fund does not, under exemption, pay medical benefits, the Government does not then pass on that normal contribution which would come from it to that fund as its proportion of reimbursement for the medical expenses incurred. Whilst it can be said that one can change the fund of which one is a member, nevertheless I believe it is a matter in relation to which the Government without any legislative backing is taking a lead from a private society on a moral question concerning the way in which it disperses its funds. Whilst this may apply only to a small and limited number of the total number of people in the community who are members of private medical funds, it is a principle from which I believe this Government should not side step. It should not have to face the community in any way in answering a question and say that it does not provide medical funds to a society that insures people against medical and hospital charges because that society does not pass them on. I believe it is an acceptance of the morality and social views of that society which this Government does not accept in other directions. I think that it is remiss of the Government, and it is reprehensible that it should take this step. Therefore, I would like to see some mechanism whereby the Commonwealth contribution could be provided for the patient, if it were so desired and if the patient applied for it, regardless of the fact that a society had paid such a benefit.
J think there is a clear division of responsibility of the Commonwealth. I believe clauses 60 and 61 exaggerate what already exists in the Act. The Act provides that a medical benefits organisation may be exempted from paying certain benefits and this amending legislation provides that hospital benefits organisations may be exempted. The Government is taking another long step down the path in agreeing to some other moral judgment made by a private society. I do not believe it is an even-handed way of dealing with the matter. As I have said, a society has those rights. In no way do I quibble with the rights of its members to determine how they may, after proper consultation with a Minister and a department, direct their

funds in this way. But, as I have said, it is not for the Government to agree automatically.
One can, of course, take another view that the matter of abortion is one of medical intervention, and that once accomplished, hospitalisation is a matter of providing succour to and nursing and nurturing a patient. It seems to me that there is a clear separation of responsibility in these two factors. I do not believe an organisation should lump them together. If an organisation does not want to payout for the medical intervention of abortion, at least it could say, after it is accomplished, that the welfare of the patient is paramount, and it should be paramount to the members of the organisation who have contributed money to the organisation. I think there is contradiction in this. I think it reflects on the organisation that it should, after the intervention, want to withdraw from the procedures of nursing that patient back to health.
I believe there are other factors which could be brought into a lengthy argument about this matter. A membership of such a society could involve quite a number of dependants who have a view different from that of the person who takes out the membership and pays the fee. The question of what may be desired by other members still covered by that membership of a society may be a large question in this matter. The overriding aspect to me is that the Government is not treating all Australians equally in this matter. It is not good enough to say: 'You can go away and join another society'. That may be the practical answer but it is not the answer to the principle of the matter. The Government should offer to those patients the same reimbursement for medical expenses that it offers to any other patient who is an Australian and a member of any other society. I think the ways and means should be devised to allow a private society to maintain its moral and practical stance. The Commonwealth should also provide the machinery to provide the normal medical benefits assistance to the patient involved.
I would have liked to vote against these two clauses being inserted in the Bill because I believe they are obnoxious. I have been a little confused by the procedurys here this evening. I believe, however, that there would not have been the numbers in this House to defeat the proposals but certainly I would have gone that way had there been the numbers. I believe the Government owes the community a clear explanation of what it is about. There has been an exaggeration of the impact of this legislation and a great deal of concern has been generated iri the minds of a great number of reputable people-some of them deeply involved in the medical profession-about the impact

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3377

of this Bill. I think the Government should explain the Bill's limited aspect and it should explain to the public and to this House its moral evaluation as to why some citizens are treated differently from others.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (9.11)-The fifth Fraser health scheme, like its four predecessors, is neither fair nor universal and like them it will be equally confusing and unsuccessful. The report tabled by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) was expected by most members of the community. Back in 1975 when the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) went to the polls on behalf of the Liberal-National Country Party coalition he made several promises in his policy speech that many people in the community expected him to honour. A couple of them were that the Government would stand by its commitment to abolish the means test on pensions-that was a fairy story if ever we have heard one,----"and that it would maintain Medibank and ensure that the standard of health care did not decline. The standard of health care will decline now that responsibility has been passed to the States. This Government is about to opt out of any responsibility whatsoever and any suggestion of retaining Medibank has gone with the wind. The honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) was right when he mentioned in his speech in this House earlier in the session that the Prime Minister services his word but dishonours his obligations-as the Premiers found out to their cost on the vote now, get diddled later plan.
I turn to proposed new section 5 which concerns 'disadvantaged persons, being immigrants or refugees'. This portion of the legislation provides that an immigrant has to make an application for a declaration in writing in accordance with a form approved by the Director-General of Social Services and lodge it with the Department of Social Security so that the Director-General can satisfy himself that the applicant qualifies for a disadvantaged health card. Remember that many of the immigrants who arrive in Australia neither read nor write English, and few will speak it well enough to understand what they are supposed to do. How will they find out that they are entitled to a free health card for the first six months if they cannot read, write or speak English? If the Minister could give some answer as to how this could be achieved I am sure we on this side of the House, together with migrants all over Australia who will be welcoming their families to Australia in the future, would be glad to know. The provision also presupposes that every migrant who comes to this country is in need of a health card. It hands to the migrant in the first few months of his life in a new

country a stigma of being disadvantaged. The Opposition does not accept this.
Proposed new section 5B involves 'disadvantaged persons, being on low incomes'. This new section takes four full pages, including 165 lines to define what is a disadvantaged person, how a disadvantaged person will find out that he is disadvantaged and having found out that he is disadvantaged, what his entitlements are and when he is likely to lose them, as well as the rest of the details pertaining to his position. One would need to be almost a Rhodes scholar to work out how to go about it. This Government will not give the Department of Social Security any extra staff to cope with the problems. The Department is still trying to cope with the backlog of cases of invalid pensions the Government wanted to take away from people. I do not know how Department of Social Security staff will ever work out who is disadvantaged and who is not. I am sure the disadvantaged themselves will be equally confused.
On the page circulated by the Minister relating to new health arrangements-I think it came from the Minister but it had no identification on it-a section says that sickness beneficiaries, pensioners and Pensioner Health Benefit card holders do nothing; there is no change. That is fine. But, it says non-Pensioner Health Benefit card holders and sickness beneficiaries possibly could be eligible as low income persons. How low does someone's income have to be before he can qualify for one of these cards? The next paragraph says that single parent pensioners possibly will be eligible as low income earners. Again, how low does the income have to be before a person qualifies?
The Minister has stated that the claims that 300,000 pensioners would be worse off under the Government's new health policy are misleading and sensationalist. He said that these reports completely misrepresented the Government's policy and caused needless concern to many pensioners. I claim that it is the Minister who is being misleading. Those pensioners who are ineligible for fringe benefits because they earn more than the amount allowed above the pension-it could be $21 above the pension if they are single, or perhaps $68 or $69 if they are married-find that by the time they have paid out the $10 or $11 a week for medical insurance they are well under the line at which the Government will hand out a disadvantaged health card. So it is obvious that at least 300,000 people will be heavily disadvantaged. It is not just the Opposition that comes up with this idea; the Uniting Church has put out a strong plea to the Government. It points out:

3378 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

The new card-carrying system will mean that those who have neither the card nor insurance will find it hard to survive the private medical system. The public hospitals, and the community health centres, who cahnot tum people away, will again accrue large amounts of bad debts.
It states further:
The inequity of private health insurance is in its fiat rate cover for all families and persons irrespective of their ability to pay.
A levy at least takes note of the fact that some people earn a huge income and some people earn a low income so one pays a percentage of one's income. With health insurance, one might earn $30,000 a year and pay $500 for medical cover; another person might earn $9,000 and still pay $500. To me,. the whole thing ifquite inequitable. In a letter published in the Melbourne Age on Tuesday, 19 May, the Minister for Health stated:
This health policy is understandable,-
That is certainly an overstatement-
fair and equitable and there is absolutely no deception in its aims.
I do not know what the Minister understands as being inequitable because, as I have pointed out, it depends on what one earns. If one family earns $240 a week and the next family earns $540 a week, they both pay the same in health insurance fees. 1 do not believe that is equitable nor do 1 believe it is fair. 1 believe the public has been deceived. We should remember that this Government promised to retain Medibank. 1 think a most outrageous deception is being perpetrated upon the people. They did not give a mandate to the Government to introduce this type of legislation. 1 think 1 heard my colleague the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) point out earlier that the Bill is absolutely full of bits and pieces relating to all sorts of things, including pathology services, amendments to the Nursing Homes Assistance Act and amendments to the Therapeutic Goods Act. I was very interested to read the details of that. It is a bit like a dog's breakfast.
Even if 1 could agree with anything in the legislation-but 1 do not; 1 oppose the Bill in its entirety-I believe that the method by which disadvantaged persons find out or do not find out that they are disadvantaged is quite iniquitous. 1 would be interested to hear from the Minister for Health just what the budget will be for the advertising campaign about which he has spoken. He said that he would be taking special steps to inform people of their rights. This will include forwarding information directly to pensioners now holding Pensioner Health Benefit cards and those in receipt of the unemployment benefit. That is fairly easy to do. Similar information is to be sent

to those receiving family allowances. Perhaps the Minister will get together with his colleagues to work out some method by which those family allowances can be increased, as their appallingly low level at the moment is adding to the alarming poverty in our community. I would like to hear a costing of this extensive advertising campaign. 1 presume it will be in all languages, because.we do have a multicultural society. I would say this campaign will be extensive and expensive. In addition, a pamphlet setting out the new policy will be available at all post offices and offices of the Commonwealth departments of Social Security and Health, as well as at doctors' surgeries and chemist shops. The pamphlets will all have to be in various languages. Certainly it will cost a lot of money and I wonder how the Minister got the proposal past the razor gang.
It is not just the Opposition that is totally opposed to tbis latest opting out of responsibility for health. Every Premier in Australia reacted very savagely to the Government's proposals. Sir Charles Court was violently outspoken against the Prime Minister and the Liberal Government, and Mr Bjelke-Petersen from Queensland was equally outspoken until he made an undercover deal with the Prime Minister which has now kept him pretty quiet. I urge the other State Premiers to get out and to try to get deals from the Prime Minister as good as Mr Bjelke-Petersen was able to get. Victoria got left well behind in that race. At least every other State is represented by some Labor Party members who will fight this Government to ensure that their States get a better deal. Tasmania, unfortunately, is in an extraordinarily bad position. The only members representing Tasmania are members of the Government parties. Therefore, they are part of the policy, they give their support to the policy and they endorse the policy which will disadvantage thousands of Tasmanian and Australian families. I oppose the Bill.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (9.21)-1 have been a member of this Parliament for sufficiently long to be able to recall what Australians might describe as the good old years. In the eady 1970s the debate in this chamber was about whether it was sufficient that 91 per cent or 89 per cent of Australians were covered by health insurance. 1 think the Government claimed at the time that 94 per cent or 95 per cent of the nation was covered. The Australian Labor Party said that the figure was about 89 per cent. If we settle on a figure half way between those two at least 91.5 per cent to 92 per cent of the population was covered. The Labor Party came to power. As a result of a Joint Sitting of the Parliament in 1974 the previously existing health system was abandoned.

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3379

The health system has been on a downhill run extending a principle that has already been estab-

since then in terms of how much it costs the lished when the Government introduced the legis-

nation for health care. After certain changes were lation, in 1978. Members of this chamber and

introduced following the return of my party at the members of the Senate supported it at that time.

end of 1975, a number of people opted to ride Members who are in favour of this amendment

alone. I hold the view that if the good old days may say what a bad ret1ection on this place it is to

could be returned Labor, with the wisdom of now criticise the 1978 amendment introduced to

hindsight, and the Government, with the wisdom the National Health Act 1953. I specifically refer

of having subsequent systems, would settle forto section 73F (1) on page 67. Honourable

ever for the system prior to 1974.

members can read that section. J will not use the

The comments I wish to make tonight are very much in support of the remarks of the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall). I am very pleased that the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) is at the table tonight to hear my observations. I note with some satisfaction that he has the most senior of his departmental advisers in the gallery to support him. I am not quite sure exactly what the Minister has in mind with regard to one aspect of the Health Acts Amendment Bill. Far be it for me to tear off the nasty scab which settles loosely from time to time on the abortion

little time given to me to read it out. One needs almost to be a drafter of legislation in the Attorney-General's Department to recognise the implications contained somewhere in section 4 something on page 4 of the Act. After 15 years I am not even able to work out its description because the Act has sections containing the letters
AA, BA, BB, DC (1) and (2). It then jumps to A (1) and (2). A small section in that Act suddenly ties in the sections between page 4 and page 67. The Bill passed through this place and the other place. It provides that if a woman belongs to

debate and which causes great heartburn and division in this country. Members of this Parliament who listened between 8 o'clock and 8.30 this morning to a program run by a government supported instrumentality-~the ABC-would have heard the observations of a woman who was being interviewed. She referred to some aspects of this Bill. Though the points she drew to the attention of members were slightly exaggerated, they are

one of the health funds in Australia which has opted out of contributing in the area of abortions, she also misses out on the Commonwealth benefit. Hardly anyone, unless he or she had been secretly advised at some stage of the implications and had agreed with the measures, would know exactly what was then going on. Tonight we are enshrining the principle that if a woman belongs to one of these health funds and is in the unfortunate pos-

worth mentioning in the debate tonight.
The honourable member for Boothby referred to the 1981 amendments. Clauses 60 and 61 cause concern. I suppose the Minister might say in relation to those provisions which virtually refuse the Commonwealth contribution to any health organisation which, on matters of conscience, has decided not to have anything to do with abortion operations, that the Commonwealth is simply backing those organisations. What itboils down to is that an unfortunate woman may be placed in a

ition of having to resort to that terrible operation the Commonwealth will say: 'One, two, three, king, jack, we hit you too'. That woman may be a taxpayer as are members of any other health funds. Many of the people who join the one or two health funds which do not pay benefits for this operation would never resort to such an operation. I see that the Minister is seeking the urgent advice of his advisers. I suggest to him that people never know what their future holds. Yet the Commonwealth is king-hitting those individuals.

position whereby she needs an operation. Since

1978 one or two health funds in this country have been exempted from making any medical benefits contribution for that operation. This Bill seems to enshrine the principle in terms of its extension to hosptail benefits. That means that if a woman belongs to one or two health organisations in this country to which I have referred and is put in a situation where, through no fault of her own or through a decision which is not to her liking, she has to seek such an operation she will be out in the cold. I repeat that she will be out in the cold.

Whilst I understand and subscribe to the rights of a minority of health funds to have special provisions to exclude them from paying certain benefits for moral reasons or reasons of conscience, I do not subscribe, particularly after the results of the Lusher motion two or three years ago, to the Commonwealth's doubly endorsing a principle which was rejected by this chamber. It is not my intention to sabotage this very important legislation. However, I ask the Minister, and J know he is uncomfortable about this subject, to

We have now extended that principle from give an undertaking to this Parliament and this

medical benefits to hospital benefits. It will be chamber that in the months ahead he will exam-

argued that we are simply being consistent in ine closely the principle upon which he has

3380 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

further embarked. He is regarded as being a Min ister with a future, and I hope that he will not be seen on this issue as being a Minister who is prepared to disadvantage doubly people who may have been placed in a most unfortunate situation. Finally, most members of this House are male, and we really would not understand the traumas suffered by those very unfortunate women who resort to the option of having such an operation.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMA N (Mr Armitage)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (9.31)-Very quickly, I want to reiterate my basic objections to the changes brought about by this Bill and then move on to specific points which I think are worth discussing. I hope I will be able to persuade the Government, when it next considers the anomalies arising from this Bill, to include those points in the 1982 amendments to the Health Act. Let me deal with the general proposition which I have stated previously and which I will read from a previous speech. It is to this effect:
Why does the Fraser Government keep changing the direc tion of its health funding policy? Because it allows extraneous political considerations to intrude. The policy reversal in the 1978 budget occurred because it was trying to fiddle the Con sumer Price Index.
The most recent reversal occurred because the government was using the health insurance tax rebate to allow it to bury indexation.
The government speaks of saving money but I have cal culated the cost of the proposed changes to the Commonwealth Treasury to be over $440m in a full year at current prices.
The figure is between $400m and $450m-
Additionally there will be a very significant extra cost to the Commonwealth due to the fact that all the 'new' patients losing their standard (public) ward status will now have to pay medical fees and the Commonwealth will pay 30 per cent of them.
The cost to the Commonwealth and funds of newly labelled 'doctqr of choice' patients having a battery of pathology tests, will be huge but will enable shrewd hospital administrators to balance their budgets.
Each change in the health insurance system is portrayed as a solution to problems (arising from previous 'solutions').
The Fraser Government defends the most recent changes on the basis of 'user pays' and therefore leading to lower costs.
But making insurance contributions tax rebatable is not 'user-pays', increasing the health fund pay-m:t on a doctor's bill from 75 to 85 per cent is nor 'user-pays'; not is increasing the private hospital subsidy.
In any case, the rationale for 'user-pays' loses much of its meaning when what you're really doing is forcing everyone to take out private health insurance. You don't discourage the over-use of doctors by forcing people to be insured, any more than you discourage arson by forcing people to insure their homes.
The changes will do nothing to discourage the over-use of doctors, nor will they discourage the insured from staying too

long in hospital. In any case, these decisions are much more in the hands of doctors than patients.
Let me now get down to specifics. If we argue for the user pays principle to discourage patients from going in for unnecessary services we cannot have gap insurance. We have to ensure that those patients who can afford to do so pay at least a small portion of the bill. I think the proposition that the patient knows how much it costs because he gets the bill and passes it on to his insurance company is meaningless.
Either today or on Friday the Minister in answer to a question dealt with health insurance by non-registered funds and argued that they have been covered because it is much more unattrac tive now for people to take out outside insurance. Let me disagree with him. In one scheme, and I am not trying to advertise it-it is run by FIA or FAI or something like that-the cost for a family is $108 a year. For that the family is covered for all amounts above $1,000 a year and up to $15,000 a year. If a family takes out full health in surance with a registered fund the minimum cost is well over $750 a year, for which a refund of ap proximately $150 a year is available as a tax re bate under the new proposals. Therefore there is a minimum cost, if a family takes out health in surance of $600 in a full year. There rnay be extra costs if the doctors charge more or if a private hospital charges more than the fixed fee. So there is a minimum cost, and I emphasise that, of $600.
On the other hand, if I join FAI then the maxi mum cost to me is $1,000 a year, less the $320 tax rebate for the $1,000 medical and hospital ex penses to which I am entitled, plus $108 for the in surance premium, which comes to a total of $788. That is the maximum cost, but the minimum cost is $108. So we are dealing with a very slight increase in cost, from $600 to $780. To take out in surance for $180 in a year, we would be risking an amount of $500. Anybody who did that would be stupid. I am not suggesting that many people in this country will not behave in that way, but any body who does so will be quite stupid. I suggest to people that if they have no insurance cover they do nothing, at least until l Steptember. Until such time as the changes are introduced and an nounced in the States there is no point in doing anything. People have until the end of October to. take out health insurance.
Let me now deal with some of the difficulties that will arise from these propositions. The honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child) referred to the problems that will be faced by mi grants when applying for a declaration that they are disadvantaged. She dealt with the case of a recent migrant, but the same application has to be

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3381

filled out by a person on a very low income. It is a who suffer from asthma, some chronic chest con-

difficult application to complete, and very few dition or some other chronic medical condition.

people will do it unless they have to go to a hospiThose people have to pay $2.75 every time they

tal or a doctor. As far as hospitals are concerned get a prescription from the chemist. They will not

there is no great difficulty. The hospital can be able to afford to take out health insurance. If

accept a statement from a patient that he or she is there are such people in the community as those

disadvantaged and say to the patient: 'If you are of us who have been associated with that particu-

disadvantaged, please produce that form to us in lar profession know-I see the honourable

the next few weeks after discharge or ask a relamember for Petrie (Mr Hodges) nodding his head

tive to bring in the certificate'. Alternatively, it in agreement in his capacity as a former

will try to chase the bad debt, although there pharmacist-there ought to be a possibility for

would be great difficulty in chasing a bad debt the doctor to accept a cut and to keep such a per-

from such people.

son at the 75 per cent rate of refund but to be pre-

pared to treat that particular person as

What about the people who have to see a medidisadvantaged.

cal practitioner? In replies to questions I have

directed to the Minister he seems to have suggested that there was no difficulty associated with this. Let us assume that a person considers himself to be disadvantaged according to the

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)-- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

definition of income. That patient goes to a doctor, but the doctor cannot treat the patient as being a disadvantaged patient in the first instance. He cannot get him to sign a slip or whatever to transfer payment to the Commonwealth. I assume that some sort of number will be associated with the certificate obtained from the Department of Social Security. It is up to the doctor to carry such a person as a bad debt, I take it. The Minister is shaking his head. I assume that he will tell us exactly what will happen when he replies. A patient may go to a medical practitioner and say: 'I am a disadvantaged patient but 1 have no certificate. 1 will produce it in the future'. The patient mayor may not produce the certificate. In the meantime, the doctor either has to charge the patient, who probably does not have any money, and then refund the money, or alternatively, regard it as a possible bad debt.

Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (9.41)-The Government's latest so-called health care program which gives rise to the introduction of the Health Acts Amendment Bill we are now debating has taken Australian health care back to the 1960s. Not only that but also the Government is once again trying to dupe the Australian taxpayers. As my colleague the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) has pointed out in debating these clauses earlier, the Government has been putting a point of view to the taxpayers which does not hold water. The Government has said that it is willing to give tax deductibility on health insurance premiums. But it has failed to spell out that it intends to give tax deductibility only to basic hospital and medical cover. If a person is insured for top private ward cover and all the options, that person will not be entitled to receive a 32c in the dollar rebate on the total

1 am not so concerned about the doctor from the point of view of bad debts. What worries me much more is that a significant proportion of people in the community, and I certainly was aware of them when I was in practice until about 10 years ago, are very significantly disadvantaged but they may not fall into one of the categories de-

amount paid. For example, if a person is paying $850 per annum to a registered fund that person will receive a rebate on only $430 of this amount. That will result in a tax refund of some $120 at the end of 1982-a far cry from the $300 per annum that taxpayers lose by the abolition of half tax indexation.

scribed in this legislation. The definitions are all

right as far as I am concerned, even though we The Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar), who

may wish to increase the amount of income from is at the table, asserts that the Government has

$96 for single people and $160 for married taken this course in order to make more people

couples. However, in addition, there ought to be aware of the cost of health services while at the

provision for another group of people to be classame time ensuring that all Australians have

sified by the doctor as disadvantaged because of access to high quality health care at a cost that all

the chronicity of their conditions. A family with a can afford. In my opinion the only people who

couple of kids and an income of $205 a week is will become aware of the cost of health care ser-

now excluded from the category of disadvanvices are those who already are highly aware of

taged. But a person may have a couple of children it-the low income groups.

3382 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

The Government's proposals will not ensure access to high quality health care for every Australian and the only people who will be able to afford health insurance and, therefore, health care are those people in the middle to high income groups who already have health insurance. The Government's health care proposals will not reduce the demand for services which is at the base of the spiralling health costs. It has been admitted by the Minister that the number of services is what is really costing a lot in the health service area at present.
I draw to the attention of the House a recently published survey of the use of health services which refutes some of the widely held but cherished myths about the pattern of medical health services. I have sought the permission of the Minister to incorporate in Hansard a table which outlines the age spectrum and the usage of health services. I seek leave to incorporate that table in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
EFFECT OF AGE ON COST AND NUMBER OF MEDICAL SERVICES

Age
0-9 10-19 20-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 70andover

Average number medical serv ices per 1000 persons covered

Average medical cost person covered

480 375 790 975 1,045 1,055 915 940

$
50.9 45.3 106.9 136.9 150.1 154.5 137.8 146.4

Mr LEO MeLEAY-I thank the House. The study to which I refer covered 30,251 people in
sured with the Mutual Health Hospital and Medi
cal Benefits Fund of South Australia. It found that as social status rose the following things be
came apparent: More use was made of general practitioner services. The highest social level used
general practitioner services. The highest social level used general practitioners 26 per cent more than the lowest level. There was a marked in
crease in the use of specialist consultations. From the lowest social level to the highest level there was a 71 per cent increase for all specialist services, 132 per cent for specialist physician services and 450 per cent for psychiatric private services.

The survey found also that there was a higher con centration of general practitioners in that area.
I believe Professor Opit, who conducted that survey, has shown that it was not the aged and the poor who have the greatest proportion of health care service usage; it is the middle aged, middle class who use medical services the most. Demand for medical services is related to socio-economic status rather than the occurrence of illness. By forcing lower socio-economic groups into health funds this Government is encouraging the expan sion of the pattern of medical service use revealed by Professor Opit. The lower socio-economic groups will continue to subsidise the health services used by the middle and upper economic groups through their health fund contributions. By doing that, this Government is encouraging a move away from public hospital salaried medicine which is more related to medical need and encour aging a move towards private medical practice where demand for service rather than medical need seems to be the motivating factor both for the doctor and the patient.
Education and preventive medicine will probably prove to be the most cost effective method of controlling spiralling health costs in the future. However, what has been the Government's re sponse to this? The proposals put forward by the Minister this evening and the earlier proposals put forward by the razor gang have cut community health funding to the bone. Education and pre ventive services are provided by community health programs. This is the less visible area of health services in this country. By providing the funding arrangements to the States rather than di rect Commonwealth funding the Government has ensured that community health programs will be put in the invidious position of having to compete with the more visible health services. When State governments are given the choice of deciding whether to close a hospital or a community health program one can bet one's life that the State governments will probably close down community health programes because it is easier and less visible to do that than to close a public hospi tal. State governments will be in an invidious position in this respect.
In my own electorate there are three large public hospitals. Every time the Federal Government sneezes in relation to health costs one of those hospitals thinks that it will have to close. I know that if that ever occurs that will be a great catas trophe for the people who live in the electorate of Grayndler. But it would be even more cata strophic if the community health service programs in the electorate of Grayndler were to close down. In many instances those programs

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3383

provide a greater health service to the people of basic level. This hardly constitutes-as the Minis-

my electrate than do the public hospitals. I think ter has said-free access to private surgical hospi-

it should be deplored that the Government has set tals and other areas for which we are supposed to

up a system of arrangements which will ensure be providing increased Commonwealth funding.

that that happens. Community health services None of the people who need that assistance will

will be forced to abandon their less visible roles of be able to do that if this administrative mess is not

education and prevention and concentrate on the cleaned up. In my opinion this is miserly legis-

more visible treatment role in order to attract lation by miserly people with a miserly intent. It is

funds. Under the present funding arrangements part of the Fraser Government's philosophy, once

the education and preventive roles will not be again, to taxing the poor to help pay for the rich.

taken over by the private medical practitioners. In my view and, in the view of the Australian

They will continue prescribing pills and will not Labor Party, the only real solution to an equitable

look at the real reasons that people have a need to. health care scheme for all Australians is a levy-

go to the doctor.

funded universal scheme such as Medibank with

the emphasis on service delivery through salaried

We have to look also at the general administratcommunity health services. That is the only way

ive mess which will be generated by the Federal we will get in this country a reasonable health

Government take-over of the labelling of the care program which will demonstrate a need to

disadvantaged. This. has 'been pointed out by a assist those who need it, not,-as has been pointed

number of previous speakers and I will not dwell out by Professor Opit, having the poor pay for the

on it. At no time has the Minister for Health satisrich to get better health service than they get now.

factorily explained how he will determine who is disadvantaged and who is not. He did not say how long one will have to'be disadvantaged, how one will get one of these precious cards which the Minister will be giving and for how long one will keep it. I know from experience how important health cards are to the pensioners who come into my office and to other groups in the community who have pensioner health cards. It gives them one of the few forms of security that they have in this life.

Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (9.50)-First of all I register my protest at the way this Bill is being handled by the Government. It is rushing it through this House. It is one of the most important pieces of legislation to come before this House and it concerns everyone in Australia. The way this Government is ramming it through with little debate is a disgrace. Having registered that protest I want now to speak in general terms about the legislation. The honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett), the honourable member

The Minister mentioned in his second reading speech that health funds will be required to admit without penalty and give irrilnediate cover to someone who loses his or her entitlement to a peI1~ sioner health benefit or health care card and then chooses to insure with a registered health fund.

for Henty (Mrs Child) and, a few moments ago, the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman), canvassed most of the issues. The honourable member for Prospect detailed certain matters that were very relevant. At this stage this Government has not answered the matters raised.

Whose responsibility is it to judge who is responWhy does this Government hate people so

sible at any particular time for the health care much? It does not like the young. It seems deter-

costs of someone who is in and out of work or on mined to savage the family unit, which is the

and off sickness benefits, et cetera? Will it be the backbone of Australian society, and it most defini-

Minister, will it be the health funds, or will it be tely has something against the aged. The Govern-

the doctor? Who will it be? No one knows. Most ment's attempts to cut unemployment benefit

particularly the people who will be involved in payments to 16-year olds and 17-year olds and its

this scheme do not know. The man in the street, continual condemnation of the young will be can-

the woman with a couple of children on a supvassed more in other debates. If this Government

porting parents' benefit, and the old pensioner do does not like the young, it simply detests the fam-

not know what will happen or what form of securily. Under this legislation families can pay up to

ity they will have in their lifetime; in particular, it $25 more a week than they are paying now for

will effect the man on a sickness benefit with a health insurance. As the honourable member for

family who is wanting to know whether he can Prospect said, one can work out any figures that

afford to send his children to the-doctor.

one likes. Even taking the lowest increase of about

$3 or $4 a week, families will be worse off. Be-

This kind of problem will add to the adminiscause of this Government's new health plan,

trative costs of health care. We should remember hospital fees, medical fees and health insurance

also that people are guaranteed COver only at the charges will rise. Let us not forget one thing: The

3384 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

family will get only one tax rebate for the whole family and that rebate will be on the basic health cover. Therefore, whilst the family may take out private health insurance to the tune of $700 a year-it can be in excess of $I,OOO-the tax rebate will be on a sum of around $400. Once again, the family unit is being squeezed by this Government. The family has suffered many knocks from this Government in many areas over the last 5+ years. This is another nail in the family unit's coffin.
If this Government does not like the young and detests the family, it simply hates the aged. This Government, over the last 5+ years, has battered the aged and presently is deliberately allowing inflation to take pensioners' 'other income' past the cut-off point for fringe benefits. That is happening in my electorate. Daily letters flood into my office about how pensioners have lost their fringe benefit, whether it be because of superannuation, a job at the local school crossing or whatever. As inflation takes their other income past the fringe benefit cut-off point pensioners are daily being disqualified.
Mr Hodges-That did not happen under the Labor Government?
Mr CHARLES-Not as much as it is happening under this Government. This reduces the number of so-called eligible pensioners. Many pensioners will have to pay up to $10 a week out of their pension. I tell pensioners who are listening tonight, who have just lost their fringe benefits and who do not have private health insurance that they are likely to be slugged through the policies of this Government $10 a week out of their pension so that they will be covered. In 5+ years, they have taken a battering from this Government.
Mr Hodges-What about the tax rebate?
Mr CHARLES-The honourable member for Petrie interjects. I am glad he is in the House because he is one honourable member who is at the forefront of knocking pensioners. When referring to what the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) said in this House about the pensioners and the disadvantaged, on 13 May the honourable member said:
She has spoken about the poor people, the pensioners and the disadvantaged. I would like her to come with me on some occasions to let her see how those people attend bingo games, use the TotaIisator Agency Board and go to hotels.
Mr Hodges-True, true, true.
Mr CHARLES-The honourable member says: 'True, true, true'. He says that the poor people, the disadvantaged and the pensioners should be unable to enjoy themselves. He says that they should be unable to have a bet or a

drink. He says that they should not have any fun as they are poor. He says that they should not be allowed to have what is considered the norm in life because he will not allow it. That is what he is saying. He says: 'How dare they want to enjoy themselves'. That is typical of the attitude of this Government.
Let us look at the disadvantaged area and the family. The Government has said that the families which earn $170 to $180 a week are earning too much. It has said that it will cut them back. At page 16 of the statement of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) which was read in this House on 29 April, the Minister stated:
However, it has decided that new arrangements should be introduced for the disadvantaged.
The statement continues:
The Government has decided to do so because of a dual concern, namely, that ,bulk billed medical services provided under the existing disadvantaged arrangements are growing at a rate which indicates that those services have been made available to persons who could not normally be regarded as disadvantaged;
In other words, poor families which earn $170 to $180 a week are told by this Government that they earn too much and because they may be able to put butter on their bread this week it will cut them off at the socks. It says that they are disad~ vantaged and that they are out the door. They will not take out health insurance and there will be massive bad debts because they will not be able to afford to pay for hospital and medical care or they will struggle along on their poor pay and in their poor circumstances and fork out anything between $10 and $20 a week in an attempt to cover their families. That is what this Government is doing to people. It is trying to split families and trying to put Australian against Australian. This legislation is just another marker.
This legislation does not take us back 10 years as some people have suggested; I believe it takes us back nearly half a century. It is an absolute disgrace. As the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) said, we believe that community health centres should be considered by this Government with a view to salaried operation. Community health centres are a viable concern. More funding should be put into this area, if the Government is committed to community health centres and funding public hospitals. They are for the people of Australia. They are not just for use by some people but are for use by all of the people of Australia. If the Government were to get over its philosophical blindness we might be able to have a decent health system that would benefit everybody. The honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) said that soaring

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3385

costs occurred under the Medibank system. Fair stated in the first paragraph of his second reading

enough, costs have gone up, but let us make no speech that the wide-ranging changes to our

mistake: This Government, on its own arithmetic, health Acts are being introduced to 'give effect to

said that this scheme will cost around $500m more the Government's philosophy'. He shamelessly

a year because by sleight of hand it has given the admitted that the whole exercise of dismantling

tax rebate and on the other hand it will balance Medibank and throwing our health and hospital

the books.

services into chaos was being done by the Govern~

Dr Klugman-With tax indexation.
Mr CHARLES-That is right. With tax indexation it will balance the books. So on its own arithmetic the Government has said that this scheme will be more expensive than any other scheme we have had.

ment for ideological and dogmatic reasons. It seems to me that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) did not know his party's philosophy in 1975 when he promised the electorate: 'We will maintain Medibank'. Was he deliberately misleading the people? Of course, it looks like, at least on the surface, that the Government does

Mr Hodges-Don't you want to balance the books?
Mr CHARLES-The honourable member for Fadden said that costs soared under Medibank yet this scheme will cost $500m more than any other health scheme we have had. Do not talk to me about costs. This legislation is an absolute disgrace. I agree with the honourable member for Bonython that we should not be debating all of this legislation under one Bill, because it is shocking that it has been lumped together. I want to ask the Minister one question about the National Register of Therapeutic goods about which I am concerned. What will happen with homeopathic medicines on the register? Two different registers are used in England and only one will be used

not know its own political ideology in the health field as five changes were introduced to health insurance in five years--on average, one a year.
'The user pays is our philosophy' declared the Minister. When translated into ordinary language, that means the sick will have to carry the burden. This Liberal Party philosophy is a cover-up for the plain fact that the Fraser Government is propping up the private health insurance funds and, through them, is imposing a further tax on the people. Through the system of private health insurance whose charges are not related to income, the poorer are subsidising the health insurance cost of the richer. The funds are charging the same those who can or those who cannot afford the high cost of insurance.

here. The Minister lumps all therapeutic goods The Minister, in his second reading speech; said

together. I hope that he does not intend putting that the measures introduced 'are designed to

anything over the people so far as vitamins and ensure that the waste, inefficiencies and unnecess-

minerals are concerned in getting anything ary duplication of costly equipment in State pub-

through the back door. I conclude by saying this lic hospital systems . . . are overcome'.

Bill is a disgrace. The people of Australia deserve This sounds as though, if the Commonwealth

better and will get .better under the Labor abandons its responsibilites in hospital financing,

Governmentin 1983.

it will somehow magically cost the taxpayers less

Consideration interrupted.

to provide the same services. Likewise, the Fraser Government argues that if the people are taxed

PROPOSED SITTING HOURS

more for health and medical services through pri-

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)- Since we are in Committee Mr Speaker has asked me to announce that the time for the closing of the ballot which he is conducting on the proposed new sitting hours has been extended from J0 o'clock this evening until noon tomorrow.

vate insurance they will use the services less and somehow it will be cheaper. The only way to reduce the ever-increasing health bill is to introduce salaried medical services. Insurance cover only escalates the cost of doctors. The fee-for-service medical practitioners know only too well how to use the system to maintain their high incomes.

HEALTH ACTS AMENDMENT BILL 1981 The introduction of a salaried service to compete

In Committee Consideration resumed.

with private fee-for-service medicine is the only solution to our problems. The Liberal philosophy of user pays is a perversion of social justice. It per-

The Bill.

petuates and sanctifies the continuous exploi-

Mr KENT (Hotham) (10.1)-1 wish to speak tation of the less fortunate in the community.

in this debate because proper health care is a vital The Minister used various phrases to cloud the

question in my electorate. The Minister for intention of the Government to slug the people

Health (Mr MacKellar), in introducing this Bill, with a health tax. The Australian people would

3386 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

not give a hoot about the Government's philosophy. All they want to know is what will happen to health care and how much is this Government going to tax them further or charge Australian families for it. Let me explain to the people what the Minister's speech means, how much it will cost to implement the Government's measures and what will we get for it. The most obvious result of this Bill will be to force everybody-those who want it or those who do not-into the arms of the private health insurance funds. This will cost every Australian wage and salary earner an estimated $600 to $800 annually, with a good prospect for future increases. While Australian families have to find the extra $10 to $15 a week to insure themselves the private health funds in Victoria only will receive a bonus of $60m. In this respect I will quote from an article in last week's Melbourne Age. The article states: .
Victorian health funds are offering thousands of dollars in new commission deals in the fight for an estimated $60m in extra business created by the Federal Government's new health scheme.
One fund, Australian Natives Association, is offering tax agents $5 for each of their clients who signs up with ANA . . .
The article points out that the Hospital Benefits Association Ltd is offering $7. The payment of $7 for a scalp is really a scandaL This Government has the morality of a pickpocket, with the difference that the pickpocket will go for a fat purse and not for a lean one.
In the few minutes remaining to me let me deal with a couple of other matters. The Minister announced that pensioners will not have to pay private insurance. However, he avoided to mention that an ever-growing number of pensioners-at present over 300,000-who have no medical cards because they earn a few bucks beside their pension are also up for $600 to $800 annually for private insurance as there will not be free treatment any more for them in our hospitals or outpatients departments. Besides the pensioners, according to the Minister there will be a million underprivileged disadvantaged persons entitled to free medical hospital care. This is the first time in our history that underprivileged people will be institutionally branded as disadvantaged or poor. They will be issued with a pauper's passport by the Department of Social Security. They will be institutionally and publicly humiliated as the card-carrying poor in our society. This Government is pointing a finger at those who are on a low income because of the very policies of the Government. Of course, the Act itself does not clarify how Social Security is going to administer the issuing of the pauper's passports. I will have

some comments to make about this if time permits.
I would like to add a few more words about how this ourageous Act will affect the people in my electorate. In simple terms, the Government's abandonment of its responsibilities means that the Bentleigh Community Health Centre will have to remain in its temporary premises as long as this Government is in power. The Health Centre will not be able to expand its valuable services to the community because of the Fraser Government and, indeed, it might have to reduce services or wind up altogether as a result of the Fraser Government's starving the State of finances for health care. The second stage of the Moorabbin Hospital will also remain a dream of those who wish to deliver proper health services to the people of Hotham. The empty site of the proposed Queen Victoria Hospital at Clayton will remain empty till 'the day that this Government is thrown out of office. All that has been done after eight years has been the erection of a sign indicating that this is the site for the hospitaL There has been an attempt to pass the buck. Whenever the State Premier calls for an election he says that the Commonwealth is responsible. The Commonwealth now says that the State is responsible. In the meantime the site for the Queen Victoria Hospital at Clayton, except for the erection of a board, remains empty.
I have just one question. I hope that the Minister will explain to me how this pauper's passport will work. We have a sheet issued by the Minister saying that it is not included in the Act, but probably there is a direction to the Department of Social Security that a married couple with a gross income of $160 a week, or an income of $180 per week with one child, will be entitled to a card for free hospital and medical services for the poor. He did not say that that income figure would be indexed. In three years time, anyone earning $160 per week will get the benefit. But in three years time, of course, $160 will not buy a thing. People will not be able to exist on it. Even people on the lowest income will not qualify if this Government remains in office, and inflation continues at the present rate.
Dr CASS (Maribyrnong) (10.11 )-1 want to talk against the whole concept behind the Health Acts Amendment Bill. Obviously we do not oppose some of the facets of health care which have been slid into the Bill to make it more palatable-a sort of Trojan horse affair. I want to talk about the problem of providing health care services and paying for them. To begin with, I should like to quote some facts to the House. From 1963-64 until 1975-76 there was an increase

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3387

in hospitalisation in Australia of 28 per cent, Medibank. Since the Government doctored

which was a little more than population growth. Medibank, the rate of increase in the very next

In that period also there was an increase in genyear jumped up to 0.29-not an incremental in-

eral practitioner services of 60 per cent. But crease of 0.01 but an incremental increase of

specialist services doubled, and diagnostic special0.9-which was a massive increase, a massive

ist services trebled in frequency. Hospital ad. jump in the rate of utilisation of these services. In

missions in 1963-64 were 95.4 per thousand, but in summary of this point, I think the Government's

1975-76 they were 125 per thousand. The point I strategy in trying to suppress the over-utilisation

want to make about that is that it will be noticed of services by forcing patients-by virtue of im-

that the level at which patients have a say, beposing a cost-to think carefully whether or not

cause they feel sick and they go to see a doctor, they will go to a doctor is simply forcing unnecess-

the increase in utilisation rate-if we count that as ary pain and hardship on people. The Govern-

the general practitioner services-was up by 60 ment is in essence saying to a woman or to parents

per cent. But thereafter the responsibility for the with a screaming child in the middle of the night:

services provided rests mainly with the doctor. It 'Do not go. It will cost you a lot of money. Take

is a rare patient who decides what is wrong with the risk that the child will be okay by morning'. I

him and demands to have a specialist consulthink that is an unreasonable burden to place on

tation. It occasionally happens, but the general parents. If they are worried they have the right to

practitioner does not have to respond to that detake the child to the doctor in the middle of the

mand. Whether or not people have consultations night and be reassured that the child just ate too

with specialists, and then all the batteries of diagmuch for tea. It is not their job to make the diag-

nostic services and then ultimately are admitted nosis, to decide whether it is a ruptured appendix

to hospital depends on the doctor, not the patient. or too much plum pudding. It is the doctor's re-

I think it is a fallacy to say that this massive insponsibility to reassure the patients.

crease in services is due to over-utilisation, ini-

tiated by patients.

But that is not where the massive increase in

Because the generally accepted theory is that patients are responsible, we are told that the way to cure that is to charge the blighters and make them pay for it and then they will not utilise these services so freely. In the period of Medibank, when we are told that this massive increase occurred, the price of the surgery consultation rose 98 per cent, and the home visit by 71 per cent. But that did not lower the rate of utilisation of those services. They still went up. In other words, the

costs takes place. What happens is that after the patients go to the doctor-they ought to be freely able. to visit a doctor to gain reassurance, they should not be expected to be doctors unto themselves-we have doctor initiated over-utilisation of services. Let me illustrate that by some other facts and figures. We are told that the cost of health services in Australia is massive because so much of the cost is in expensive institutional care. That is quite true.

community behaved contrary to market force predictions. The market in this area just does not function. It is poppycock for the Government to base its strategy on trying to get the market to help it control what is going on.
For the period from 1966-67 to 1972-73, the per capita rate of increase for services has been 0.01 consultation per year. It started off at 0.17 in the first year, and over that period it finished up at 0.19. In 1974-75 it was up to 0.19, which was an increase over the previous year. In 1975-76 it went up by 0.2. In other words, it behaved in exactly the same way as it had done in 1966. There was a gradual increase in the rate of utilisation. That was, in the Government's terms, the Australian Labor Party's horrendous Medibank that let everything loose. It made no difference to the rate at which people were increasing the utilisation of medical services.

Let us compare the figures for the United States of America and Australia. The United States is hardly a socialist country; it has a similar sort of free enterprise system to ours. In 1960-61, in America hospital care was 40 per cent of total health care costs, and in Australia it was 44.5 per cent. Doctors always claim that they are not the real cause of the cost increases; that after all their fees are only a small proportion of the total health care cost-and by golly they are right. Medical fees were 21 per cent of total health care costs in the United States in that year, and 15.6 per cent in Australia. Let us now turn to 1975-76. In the USA, hospital care had dropped to 39 per cent, but in Australia it had increased to 54.4 per cent. But still the doctors can claim that their hands are clean. Medical fees accounted for 19 per cent of health care costs in America in that year, and there was a small increase in Australia. But they

Let us look at what has happened since the still accounted for only 17.9 per cent. The prob-

Government has cured the malady by destroying lem is hospital costs. But I have not seen hospital

3388 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

administrators going out lassoing patients and dragging them to fill up their hospital beds.
Dr Klugman-They do in private hospitals.
Dr CASS-My colleague says that they do in private hospitals. I do not believe him. Patients do not get themselves into even private hospitals. It is the referring doctor who puts the patient into either a public or a private hospital. It is the doctor who has the incentive. If it is a public hospital, he will then collect the fee for treating the patient, because so many of the patients are classified under intermediate or private ward. In a private hospital the patient is obviously a private patient. Incidentally, I would say that far too many doctors have shares in private hospitals-not all, but a significant number. Even in the area in which it is claimed that the main problem exists, that is the area of hospital care, it is not the fault of the patients, I would claim. It is not the fault of the hospitals. Hospitals simply provide the beds and the facilities. It is the doctors who put the patients there. It is the doctors who order the treatments. It is the doctors who demand all the excessive services that are provided.
One of the criticisms, particularly of public hospitals, relates to the battery of tests which are imposed upon patients. Patients do not order them, the doctors do. We cannot get at the system by imposing restraints on the hospitals themselves, because the hospitals are not responsible. It is the junior residents at the behest of their consultant mentors, the visiting specialists, who order these things. When we look at the number of hospital beds that this country has, we find how terrible the situation is. It is a brave politician who can say: 'We do not need any more beds'. But we do not need any more beds. In Australia we have 6.5 acute beds per 1,000 of population. In America the figure is 4.6 per 1,000 of population and it feels it has too many already. In England there are fewer and it believes it has enough. The admission rates are as follows: In Australia there are 189 admissions per 1,000 head of population a year; in America there are only 63 per L,000 a year and in England and Wales only 105 per 1,000 a year. People then argue that in Australia we have pensioners and old people who demand more services. But Australia has a population where 9.2 per cent is over the age of 65. In America the figure is 10.4 and in Britain it is 14.3 per cent. Australia cannot even claim that as an excuse. It is not the elderly demanding the services; our doctors are providing them. The only answer is to remove the incentive doctors have for this overprescribing of unnecessary services, namely, fee for service.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member's time has
expired.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (10.21)-1 will take only another two or three minutes as I spoke earlier in the debate and I will not go over those points again. I will emphasise what the honourable member for Maribyrnong (Dr Cass) just said. I will also refer to a specific amendment proposed to the Health Acts Amendment Bill which we are considering tonight. I refer to clause 20 of the Bill which amends section 33 of the principal Act, inter alia, to increase the payment to a private hospital from $16 a bed day to $28 a bed day in the case of a surgical bed. I am referring to clause 20 (a) (1) (a). Clause 20 (c) (5) makes an addition to the principal Act. Let anyone tell me that he would not be scared to go to a private hospital and that he would not be particularly scared about undergoing surgery at such a hospital under this provision. The definition of the eligibility of a private hospital to receive an extra $12 a day is as follows:
(5) Subject to sub-section (6), where, at any time during the stay in hospital as an in-patient at the hospital of an eligible person, the eligible person has rendered to him a surgical procedure, any approved bed in the hospital occupied by the eligible person during that stay (whether the occupation was before or after the rendering of the surgical procedure) shall be deemed to be, for the purposes of this section, a surgical bed on each day of that occupation.
Can honourable members just see the happy removal of a ingrown toenail or whatever by the owners who often are also the surgeons operating at the hospital? These doctors get an extra $12 a day if they admit a person into hospital and go ahead and perform surgery-any kind of surgical procedure. Is that not a terrific temptation when there is the choice between treating a person with a possible appendicitis, conservatively or surgically, or a person with cholecystitis or some sort of gallstone attack by surgical treatment or some non-surgical treatment? Clause 20 (c) (6) states:
The Permanent Head may, having regard to the circumstances of the stay in hospital of an eligible person referred to in sub-section (5), declare that that sub-section does not apply in relation to the whole or a specified part of the stay in the hospital of the eligible person.
For practical purposes it is clear that the hospital will receive a much greater income-and in many cases the surgeon will receive a much greater income, directly from performing surgery and indirectly because he has an interest in the hospital-by having surgery performed on every patient who enters that hospital. That is similar to the encouragement now being given-I know there are difficulties associated with it-in relation to the classification of intensive care patients, or extensive care nursing home patients.

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3389

All of us who have practised medicine or who is performed--let us take a cholecystectomy-

have been involved with nursing homes are aware there will be an extra cost to the Commonwealth

that there are significant numbers of nursing in addition to the $12 a day of something in the

homes which because of the definition of 'extenorder of $130 for that 30 per cent share in the

sive care', which involves having the person to be medical costs. I suggest to the Minister that the

treated treated as a patient who is in bed, are givwhole aim to these changes in most cases is in the

ing numbers of patients excessive doses of wrong direction.

tranquillisers-I emphasise this-so that they can be treated as extensive care patients. There is no way for the Department of Health to check on that. I notice that a note was passed by Mr Carroll to the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar). There is no way in which the Department can overcome this.

The Government and the Minister-talk.a lot about discouraging unnecessary medicine. In fact they are encouraging unnecessary surgery and treatment because it becomes financially attractive both to the medical practitioners and to the owners of private hospitals. I strongly believe that it is completely unethical that medical I?rac-

It is a direct encouragement for ripping off Treasury but much more importantly to my mind for the practice of bad medicine, for unnecessary surgery and for risks involved with anaesthetics. We are all aware of the differences in the number of people treated under different systems of health insurance. Those facts have been repeated so very often. It has been shown in the United States where two systems operate side by side. People are insured under the so-called Blue Cross system where the doctor is paid. on the basis of services rendered or under the KaIser PeJ;manente or
HMA system where the medical pr~ctitioner .is paid on a fixed rate. We know the dIfference III numbers through the matching of patients for age, condition, previous history and for ~verything else. The only difference between them IS whether they are insured on a fee for service basis or on another basis. On a fee for service basis they have a 3.5 times chance of having a hysterectomy, three or four times the chance of having their tonsils taken out and three or four times the chance of

titioners should also be the owners of prIvate hospitals. I noticed, the other day-I think it was in the AMA Gazette-that one of the State branches of or one of the groups in the Australian Medical Association agreed with me on that point, that the ownership of hospitals by pra~ titioners is unethical. I know that people complaIll a lot about for example, the Hospital Corporation of America coming into Australia and taking over private hospitals. I do not particularly
support that but I would muc? soone! hav~ the Hospital Corporation of America ownmg prIvate hospitals in Australia than surgeons and doctors who work in Australia. I think that the chances of unnecessary and excessive profits going to hospitals is much greater if the surgeons are involved in the ownership of those hospitals. It is completely wrong. How would anybody in Australia like to go before a judge-after all, a doctor in t?at situation acts as a judge-if he knew that the Judge had a financial interest in the prison system of Australia?

having an operation performed on their back. The Progress reported.

only explanation for that can be the benefit a~cru ing to the medical practitioner and to the private hospital to which the patient is admitted.

CHRISTMAS ISLAND AGREEMENT AMENDMENT BILL 1981

Bill presented by Mr Newman, and read a first

Instead of trying to do everything possible we time.

can try to discourage the practise and to encourage medical practitioners not to perform un-

Second Reading

necessary surgery, what do we do? We add Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Adminis-

$21m-1 think that is the estimated cost for a full trative Services) (10.32)-1 move:

year-so as to encourage doctors and priva~e hospitals to perform as much surgery on theIr patients as possible. That is a completely wrong approach. Apart from anything else it costs the Government much more than $21m because It also pays 30c in the dollar for all medical fees arising from surgery. We do not know what that figure will be. There has been no estimate or costing on the part of the Department as far as those

That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to give effect to amendments to the Christmas [sland Agreement concerning essentially the mining function on Christmas Island and future arrangements for stockpiles of phosphate rock. The amendments have been agreed to by the Australian and New Zealand governments.

fees are concerned. We do know that if the patient Honourable members will recall that on 5

is admitted into hospital and unnecessary surgery March 1981 Tannounced in the House a number

3390 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill

of wide-ranging decisions concerning the future of phosphate mining on Christmas Island, and the purchasing and distribution of phosphate rock for Australia's requirements.
One of those decisions was that as far as mining on Christmas Island is concerned the British Phosphate Commissioners would be replaced on the island as managing agents for the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission by an Australian Government owned and controlled company. This is to be an initial step pending the winding up of the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission. Article I of the Schedule to the Bill enables these arrangements to be made by removing the requirement on the CIPC to employ the BPC as managing agents, and permitting the CIPC to engage such managing agents as are jointly nominated by the two governments. The intention is that as from 1 July 1981 or as soon as practicable thereafter the new company-the Christmas Island Phosphate Company-will be nominated as managing agent. A further decision given effect to by the Bill-Article 2 of the Schedule-is to enable the CIPC to transfer its stockpiles at manufacturers' plants in Australia and New Zealand to the respective governments.
Finally, paragraph 2 of Article I of the Schedule reflects impending changes in purchasing and distribution arrangements for phosphate by removing the requirement on the CIPC to dispose of Christmas Island phosphate in conjunction with phosphate supplied from other sources by the British Phosphate Commissioners.
As I indicated in my statement on 5 March, this responsibility will pass on 1 July from the BPC to the Australian Phosphate Corporation.
I emphasise that these amendments are of an interim kind. A completely new Christmas Island agreement is to be negotiated with New Zealand.
I take this opportunity to inform honourable members of developments which have occurred since my statement of 5 March. Action has been put in train to establish the Christmas Island Phosphate Co. which will assume responsibility for mining on Christmas Island. Coopers and Lybrand has been retained to advise on the establishment of the company generally, and the question of responsibility for the provision of municipal and similar type functions on the island. The company will operate in a commercial way.
The Australian Phosphate Corporation has been incorporated and is moving to assume responsibility for the purchasing and distribution of Australia's phosphate requirements generally. I understand that following discussions with a

number of shipping organisations, the superphosphate manufacturers are entering into an agreement with the Australian National Line to take over the three Australian-crewed ships currently under long term charter to the BPC.
In response to my statement on 5 March, the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) sought information on the stockpiles, in particular their value and the way they are financed. As at 31 March 1981, the stockpiles in Australia amounted to almost 1.2 million tonnes. Their market value at that date was nearly $79m. The stockpiles have been built up for two reasons: To ensure availability when production or delivery was disrupted, and to continue to achieve economies of scale in production when demand slackened. They have been financed over many years by way of surcharges placed on the price of rock to manufacturers, and in recent years, when prices of rock from various sources have been rising relatively quickly, by differences between the buying price and the selling price. Rock is sold to manufacturers at current market price rather than historic cost. The honourable member also displayed a breadth of knowledge about the booby bird. The Government still has under consideration the appraisal of the bird made by Professors Ovington and Cullen and Dr Nelson. In the meantime the current moratorium on particular mining areas of the island inhabited by the bird has been extended.
I should not let this occasion pass without paying tribute to the Commissioners and staff of the British Phosphate Commissioners, as one effect of this legislation will be to remove that name from what might be called Australian phosphate legislation. The BPC was established by the Nauru Island Agreement of 2 July 1919, the Agreement being signed for Australia by the Right Honourable William Morris Hughes, for New Zealand by the Right Honourable William Ferguson Massey--both signing in the presence of R. R. Garran-and for the United Kingdom by the Right Honourable David Lloyd George, each of these right honourable gentlemen being at the time his country's Prime Minister. Few bodies have started life with such distinguished
godfathers.
The BPe's original charter was to extract phosphate from Nauru and dispose of it in the three countries. As time went by, it also became responsible for extracting phosphate from Ocean Island, Banaba, and Christmas Island, and for purchasing and shipping to Australia and New Zealand all the phosphate and sulphur requirements for manufacturers in both countries. That it has discharged these responsibilities most efficiently is

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3391

indicated by the fact that Australia has in the past on 1 September when many of their present prob-

60 years never been without phosphate rock. I pay lems, including that of paying 15 per cent in

tribute on behalf of the Government to the BPC interest rates, will be relieved by the actions of this

staff who have achieved that record, and to the Government which will force ordinary Aus-

Commissioners, particularly the current Comtralians to contribute funds which, by the very

missioner Mr Maurice Timbs. I commend the Bill process of being taken through bank accounts

to the House.

will create funds on which those businesses wili

Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.

not have to pay interest. I think the Government is definitely pandering to private enterprise in a

HEALTH ACTS AMENDMENT BILL 1981 In Committee

way that is giving a certain section of the community a very great advantage over everybody else.

Consideration resumed. The Bill.

I think the Minister should make clear what the position would be if some of the people who take

Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (10.38)-1 wish to take a few minutes of the time of the Committee this evening,to raise a couple of points about the proposed changes to the Health Acts. People are now being virtually forced to take out a private contract with a private health insurance organisation. This is compulsory if they wish to be recipients of a Commonwealth benefit. In the Health Acts Amendment Bill the Government is virtually creating a situation in which some 3 million people in this country will be forced to pay contributions to private health insurance companies. On a very conservative estimate this will work out at a cost of approximately $5 a contributor, totalling some $15m a week. From indications that 1 have been able to obtain in many parts of the country, and in particular in my area of the country-McMillan-Many of these contributions will be paid through local chemists and local agents acting on behalf of the private health insurance companies.

in this money happen to default on payment. There is no doubt that after 1 September we will see the same sort of rush that occurred back in 1976. An amount of $60,000 did go through a business in a little town such as Warragul in four days, but in some other parts of the country hunderds of thousands of dollars could be involved. There should be some guarantee that this money would be protected. By passing this sort of legislation that forces people to contribute in this way, the Government is not lowering taxes in this country, it is just finding a more devious way of raising the taxes and calling it private enterprise. The honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) said in his speech that he did not know of any other instance of legislation in this country in which that stipulation applied, where people were ~or~ed to payout to a private contractor or organIsatIOn before they were entitled to receive back the taxes that they had paid to the Commonwealth.

I am concerned that with this massive amount

of .mo~e~ goi~g into private industry no stipu-

latIOn IS m eXIstence anywhere that this money

has to be paid into trust accounts. This means that

people working in private industry who are

collecting this tax on behalf of the Government

through private health insurance have the use of

massive funds interest free. It seems to me that the

Government is creating a very generous situation

for one section of private industry at a time when

interest having

aratceosnatirneuoausvertuyrnhoigvherlevoefl.fuInndfsacot ~

by a

monthly basis, many businesses can look forward

to having their overdraft situation very much re-

lieved, if not relieved altogether.

Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (10.43)-It is a relatively easy task for those on this side of the chamber to respond to this matter, given the almost complete silence from the Government bench in relation to the Health Acts Amendment Bill. This Bill, which has been described in many quarters as the most significant health change in the six years of Fraser Government, has brought not a single squeak from the National Country Party. Perhaps that is a sufficient comment on its concern for the health of this country. Apart from the secoIid reading speech of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar), there have been only two speeches from Government members, and they were concerned almost entirely with a tiny aspect of the Bill-clauses 60 and 61. I share the

As a result of the changes to the health inconcern of the honourable member for Boothby

surance system in 1976, a chemist I know of took (Mr Steele Hall) about those clauses relating to

~n $60,.000 in four days. He had that money placed th~ ability ?f certain health insurance organis-

mto hIS cheque account and it sat there for 60 atIOns to claIm on the ground of conscience to ex-

days. The chemists thought the change was marclude certain procedures from their hospital

vellous. They are looking forward to the changes benefits. However, I think basically it is a fairly

3392 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

marginal issue in this total Bill. It suggests to me that both the honourable member for Boothby and the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) in many ways lack perspective and, indeed, humanity.
They were concerned with problems for-young girls in relation to abortions in those funds which sought such exemptions. Problems such as those extend right across the board as a result of this Bill. Consider the situation of a dependent girl who seeks an abortion and whose parents are insured in an organisation which covers such procedures but who may for a whole host of reasons be unwilling to tell or reluctant to approach her parents. However, they provide the health cover. Will she be treated as a dependent person? It is a problem not just in relation to the organisations about which the two honourable members were concerned. It concerns a much wider group in the community. What about girls in a similar situation whose parents are uninsured but are not disadvantaged persons? Will there be provision for these girls? And let us not tie it to abortion. What about dependent children who require any other kind of procedure but for some reason their parents are not insured? What is to happen to these youths? If we are to express concern about this very narrow part of the Bill, if we are worried about the kinds of humanitarian issues that arise, let us look at the way in which it arises right across the board as a result of the ending of universal cover and free hospitals, in relation both to the particular issue with which the honourable members were concerned and the issues in general.
The honourable member for Fadden did make the one realistic comment from the Government side of the chamber. He said that the debate this evening reminded him very much of the debate that took place in the early 1970s about the different health schemes and the percentage of people covered by insurance. I think it is a great tragedy of the six years of Liberal rule that the pledge made by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in 1975 that the Government would preserve Medibank has been broken. I do not believe Medibank was a perfect system, but I believe the basic principles of that system were desirable for this society. It would have been of great benefit to this country if a Liberal government had devoted itself to refining, perfecting, improving and constraining some of the problems that arose specifically with Medibank. If that had occurred, then today we would be debating the real health

probleJl1s of this country, the major problems relating to the adequate provision of preventive services, the real problems of hospitals and overservicing which will now be put aside again because this legislation will provide no solution.
I go back 12 years to the time of the report of the Nimmo Committee of Inquiry into Health Insurance. The first of its recommendations stated:
The operation of the health insurance scheme is unnecessarily complex and beyond the comprehension of many.
And as that is true now of the present system, it will be even more true of the system to come on 1 September. The third recommendation stated:
The contributions have increased to such an extent that they are beyond the capacity of some members of the community and involve considerable hardship for others.
That is as true now as it was then and will be even truer by the end of the year. We will have to debate the whole range of issues again because the scheme introduced tonight and in the Bills of last week will provide no solution to the health problems of this country. It is a tragedy for this country that we have to continue a 12-year-old debate until the matter is properly and sensibly settled. Then we can get on with attacking the real health problems facing this country.
This is why the Opposition tonight in this Committee stage has expressed opposition to a whole range of clauses-the 21 clauses that embody the fifth Fraser health scheme; not all the other bits and peripheries of the Bill that have been mentioned, just those 21 clauses. The Opposition objects to these clauses on five grounds. We say, firstly, that this health insurance scheme does not meet the criterion of simplicity, which we must have if we are to have an efficient, straightforward and understandable scheme. Secondly, it will not provide the universal cover which, it has been pointed out in report after report, is the basic necessity of a proper health cover system in this country. Thirdly, it will not provide equity. It will not provide an equitable system of health cover because the flat rate insurance system, however much it is dressed up, will not provide a basically equitable system compared to some kind of income related scheme. The Opposition objects fourthly to this Bill and all these provisions because of the categorisation and stigmatisation of disadvantaged persons, although I agree that is necessary in a scheme dependent on flat rate private insurance. However, it is possible-we saw it under Medibank and the Canadians have seen it under their similar scheme-to provide this cover without the need for these categories. Finally, nothing in this scheme-as the Government will find out in the next two years-effectively constrains health costs for the total community. The

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3393

burden may be shifted from the Commonwealth Government to State governments or it may be shifted from the Commonwealth to individuals, but the total cost burden to the community will escalate as a result of these proposals.
Mr Hodges-Nobody has suggestep that it will not.
Dr BLEWETT-I had hoped to heat from the honourable member for Petrie in this de.bate. He could have brought his wealth of interest in this subject to bear on the issue and not just heckled. I leave him and the House with a final commentary, a comparison of the Canadian health scheme with that of the United States by a leading American health economist. The contrast he draws between Canada and the United States applies as a result of these changes to Australia and Canada. He said:
When the United States and Canadian financing mechanisms are compared, an important virtue of the Canadian approach becomes evident-its simplicity. The benefits of this simplicity are lower administrative costs and less strain associated with obtaining health services. Having a single reimbursement agency operating a single, universal, comprehensive plan without deterrent charges results in lower administrative costs for the reimbursement agency as well as for hospitals and physicians.
Mr Hodges-And greater waste by the people.
Dr BLEWETT-I will deal with that problem in a moment. The economist continued:
It is unnecessary in Canada to devote substantial resources to determine a patient's insurance company (if any); t6 determine the particular services that are insured for the particular patient, to determine whether the patient has already paid the requisite deductibles, or to collect any necessary bills from the patient. Moreover, hospital administrators do not have to spend valuable time scrambling to obtain financing for services rendered to people who cannot pay. Thus administrative costs are significantly lower in Canada.
Analogously, Canadian patients and their families do not have to wonder whether they are insured, whether the services are covered by their policy, whether some deterrent charges remain for them to pay, or how they will pay the uninsured part of their bill and cope with other living expenses after their health bills have been paid.
In answer to the question from the honourable member for Petrie, if he looks at the comparisons provided by this Government two years ago and the latest comparisons of the Canadian scheme with other countries, he will see that the Canadians have been more successful-lam not saying that they have been completely successful-than this country has been in restraining 90sts in relation to gross domestic product. All I am suggesting is that the path down which we are going will lead us to a dead end. We have to change the health cover system. One hopes that the last experience will prove finally and conclusively to the Australian people that the kind of

philosophy embodied in this scheme is no solution to the health problems of this country.
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah--Minister for Health) (10.52)-Initially I thank those honourable members who have taken part in the debate. A number of views have been put forward by the Opposition which, essentially, have centred upon the argument of equity in the provision of health care. Inadvertently, or perhaps with some foreknowledge, I think there has been a lack of total clarity by the Opposition in the case it has presented in relation to equity. Let me illustrate that statement. The cost of health care is divided amongst individuals and groups within the Australian community. It is quite misleading to suggest that the Government, by advocating membership of health insurance funds for those who can afford to contribute towards the cost of their health care is, in some way, being inequitable. As I have stated on a number of occasions, the costs of health care in any developing society, such as Australia, are such that the individual, in the vast majority of cases, would find the burden of paying all the costs of his or her health care totally beyond his or her means. Therefore, there must be a large contribution from public authorities. In Australia's case this must come from the States and Federal governments.
Of course, the revenues used for those contributions come from the taxpayers. With our taxation scales it is those more affluent within the society who pay more of their income in tax. That is one of the results of a progressive tax scale. Those more capable of paying do so. In addition, the Government considers that both the recipients and the providers of health care need to be more aware of the costs associated with its provision. This relates to some of the matters contained in the speech by the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) tonight. It is, we believe, enormously important that both the providers and the recipients of health care have a more accurate understanding of the costs of the provision of that care.
Dr Klugman-Why don't you do something about it?
Mr MacKELLAR-We are doing something about it by the introduction of these amendments to the various Acts. If the Government, whether it be a Commonwealth or State government, pays all the costs associated with the provision of health care there is no real constraint on either the providers of health care or those having health care provided to them in relation to the services being provided. We are seeking to bring an element of equity into the situation by making

3394 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

special provision for those in genuine need. I think would be a waiting time of years for elective sur-

most honourable members will applaud the propgery. This situation would derive from a

osition that those in genuine need should be asnationalised, socialised system such as that which

sisted. We are also seeking to keep the cost of others endeavoured to bring into this country in

medical and hospital insurance down to a level the past and which, if 1 read the honourable

which the general community can afford. We are member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) correctly, he

doing this by substantial government subsidisseeks to introduce yet again.

ation, particularly in relation to the Hospital Benefits Reinsurance Trust Fund and the cost of nursing home care. A significant element of equity is built into the total scheme. Government subsidies, both State and Federal, are provided to hospitals and medical assistants. Government

Opposition members interjectingThe DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! The House has had plenty of opportunity to consider this Bill in Committee. It might at least give the Minister-

subsidies are provided to those in genuine need in Mr Kent-Your are going back to 1960--

the community. We are taking care of the chronically ill and looking after the aged. We are encouraging those within the community who have the capacity to contribute towards the cost of their health care to take out health insurance.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! I warn the honourable member for Hotham that if he does not behave himself I will have to deal with him.
Mr MACKELLAR-If I could move to the

There is a genuine difference of opinion beindividual contributions made by honourable

tween certain members of the Opposition and the members, the honourable member for Ballarat

Government on whether tp.at is a proper method (Mr Mildren) used borrowed phrases in his

of bringing home to individuals and the comspeech tonight to the Committee in an attempt, I

munity as a whole the burgeoning costs of health suggest, to take a rise out of certain members of

care. It is ridiculous to suggest that suddenly we the Government. That was fair enough, I guess,

can cut the total cost of health care. We cannot do but it did not add much to his speech. However, I

so simply because, as the honourable member for was disappointed that he made an allusion to sec-

Maribyrnong (Dr Cass) pointed out to us, the ond class citizens. There is no suggestion and no

range of specialities and technology is increasing, evidence that the medical services provided to

medical procedures are becoming more sophistipeople who hold pensioner health benefit cards or

cated and the opportunities for additional services who could be classified as being in genuine need

are there for people within the medical fraternity are in any way inferior to the medical services

to take advantage of. In these circumstances we provided to anybody else in the community. The

cannot envisage a situation in which the total cost Government rejects utterly any suggestion that

of health care will suddenly come down. It will such should be the case. The honourable member

simply not happen in a sophisticated society.

for Henty (Mrs Child) said that in the amend-

What can be done about it? What is the best method of ensuring that there is a genuine appreciation of the costs associated with health care and a genuine attempt on the part of the providers and the recipients of health care to keep those costs within bounds which the country and the individual can afford? Let us have no misapprehension about this. Health care is a bottomless pit. We can keep pouring money into it until we have broken the economy of the country. That has been demonstrated in many situations. We are saying that a nationalised, socialised, centralised system is not the way to provide high quality, modern health care which encourages high medical standards at a cost that the community and the individual can afford.

ments moved by the Government in relation to those in genuine need in the community the income limits are not clearly defined. The honourable lady also brought into the discussion the inequity argument. I again refute the suggestion that the income limits in relation to those eligible to be classified as disadvantaged were ill-defined. I think they are very clearly defined, and they will continue to be clearly defined.
The honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) in his contribution talked about cost containment, and again I would agree with some of what he said about it being a very difficult task to bring about a situation where those providing the medical services do so in a totally responsible manner. There will always be situations where medical practioners will over-service. We are

We could, through a socialised, nationalised endeavouring to do all we can, in conjunction

system, keep costs right down but we would get a with the professional medical bodies, to bring

diminution of the standards of health care and about a diminution in that situation. Amendments

medical practice. Queues would grow. There moved tonight add to the opportunities the

Health Acts Amendment Bill

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3395

Government has, in conjunction with the medical profession, to cause doctors who we have reason to believe may be over-servicing to come before the medical services committees of inquiry to explain their treatment of individual patients. There is a continuing desire on the part of the Government to make sure that no unnecessary medical services are provided. I might say also that there is a continuing wish in that respect on behalf of the learned bodies within the medical professional and on the Australian Medical Association.
The other matter the honourable gentleman raised related to the $28 a day payment for those in surgical beds in private hospitals. These will be prescribed by regulation and obviously will not relate to ingrown toenails. The procedures will be related to surgical medical schedule items at the higher fee. They will be prescribed, and there will be opportunities to look at those schedule items that will attract that high subsidy in the private hospitals. The honourable member for Prospect also mentioned the insurance being provided by non-registered health insurance organisations, and in particular he mentioned the FAI insurance group. I caution people not to take the advice of the honourable member without looking very carefully at the regulations and requirements set out by that body and other non-registered health fund organisations. In many cases there are requirements in relation to the degree of health one enjoys at the time one takes out a policy with these organisations. Of course, the amounts of money required to take out a policy were determined in relation to the health scheme that was in place prior to the changes which will occur on I September. So one could find that the actual amounts required to be paid to such organisations will rise quite considerably after 1 September. The arithmetic set out by the honourable member might be totally out of date by the time the changes come into place.
The honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) said in relation to the tax rebate that there had been subterfuge in that we had not made it clear that the tax rebate would apply only to basic health insurance. Again, I refute that statement completely. In all statements made by the Government that fact has been made abundantly clear. The honourable member also quoted a study by Professor Opit and again the statements in relation to that study failed to take into account those people who were not members of health insurance funds. It would have been a more complete study, and the Professor himself admits this, if a wider cross-section had been taken and had included people who were not members of a health insurance fund.

The honourable member for Isaacs (Mr Charles) raised the costs of medical services, but in particular he asked me a question about homeopathic medicines. I advised the honourable member that the register will apply only to medicines that have been prescribed by the regulations as being medicines covered by the register, and it certainly is not my intention at this stage to prescribe homeopathic medicines. However, 1remind the Committee that the Parliament will have the opportunity to scrutinise any regulations that attempt to bring medicines within the scope of the register.
The honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent) coined some phrases in his speech which I thought were unfortunate and unfair and could do great damage to a number of people. He talked about the card-carrying poor. I remind the honourable member that pensioner health benefit cards have existed now for a considerable period--in fact during the time a government of his political persuasion was in power. I wonder whether he would have used that phrase in relation to pensioners carrying pensioner health benefit cards during the time his party was in government. I think it is most unnecessary to try to categorise people who are being assisted because of their need, to try to make them feel inferior, to try to suggest that the medical treatmeant they receive is somehow inferior. It certainly is not, and to try to bring about that impression is not only unnecessary but also it is tota\1y unfair. The honourable member also asked a question about whether or not these amounts would be indexed. I draw his attention and the attention of the Committee to the definition of 'allowable income' in sub-paragraph (a) (i) of proposed new sub-section 5B (12). In short, that provision specifies that one element of allowable income is the amount of income at which entitlement to unemployment benefit ceases. As that amount is automatically indexed each six months, the low income test for a person with dependants will also rise correspondingly. For single persons, the low income level is set as a percentage of the above amount.1t follows therefore that that income level will also be automatically indexed.
The honourable member for Maribyrnong (Dr Cass) introduced some interesting statistics, and he is always an interesting speaker to listen to. I cannot comment on the specific statistics that were mentioned, but he did concentrateJ understand this concentration-on the fact that doctors are the ones who prescribe services, doctors are the people who put patients into hospital, doctors are the ones who say what treatment will

3396 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

be carried out, and therefore doctors are the people who are the generators of costs in the medical provision area. To a great extent that is true. Of course, the costs of institutions is the largest single element in the cost situation in the provision of medical services. But, of course, it is the doctors and other health professionals who are using those institutions. We have to bring about a situation in which doctors are more aware of the costs that they generate. If they believe that they can go ahead and prescribe services willy nilly without let or hindrance and the Government will pay for them then, again, in my view, there is no real incentive for either the health providers or their patients to question what is being done.
I agree that it requires a degree of sophistication and a degree of integrity within the medical profession which unfortunately sometimes is lacking. But with the help of the profession, with the introduction of peer review, and with the introduction of more informed hospital administrators I believe that we can maintain not only a high standard of health care-which I believe is tremendously important-but also at the same time we can make sure that those services so prescribed are prescribed responsibly. I do not believe that this comes about necessarily with the introduction of a different system.
The only other matters that I have not mentioned are those raised by the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) and the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron). I simply make the point that there are a number of people within the community who do not wish their health insurance payments to be used for medical benefits for particular services. Again I make the point that there are a number of registered health insurance organisations which are available universally to the population at large. While I am talking about that matter, let me say that some honourable members-notably the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham)-made the point that we have gone back to the situation which obtained prior to the introduction of Medibank. That simply is not the case in relation to the health insurance organisations. Everyone, regardless of experience, and regardless of medical condition, is entitled to basic medical and hospital insurance with a registered health insurance fund. So there are no ifs and buts about the statement; they are entitled to basic medical and hospital insurance with a registered health insurance fund. That is a requirement of registration.
Dr Klugman-Was that not always the case?

Mr MacKELLAR-it was not always the case. Time draws on. Again I thank honourable members for the contributions to the debate. I will read the speeches and if there are individual points upon which I have not touched I will reply to honourable members individually.
Mr KENT (Hotham)-Mr Deputy Chairman, 1claim to have been misrepresented.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Does the honourable member wish to make a personal explanation?
MrKENT-Ido. The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. The honourable member may proceed. Mr KENT-The Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) stated that I used the unfortunate expression 'the card carrying poor' in relation to pensioners. Pensioners may be poor because of his Government's treatment of them, but I never used that term in relation to the pensioners. I used the words 'the card carrying poor' and the words 'paupers' passports' in connection with a new group created by this Government-the disadvantaged. That statement clearly related to the disadvantaged and not to the pensioners. Amendments agreed to. Bill, as amended, agreed to. Bill reported with amendments.

Adoption ofReport Motion (by Mr MacKellar)-by leave-put:
That the report be adopted.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes Noes . . .

. 61 . 42

Majority

19

Adermann,A. E.
Baumc,M.E. Birney,R.I. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, R. A. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H.
Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, I. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D.B.
Dean,A.G.
Dobie, I. D. M. Drummond,P.H.

AYES

Hodgman, W.M. Howard, J. W. Hyde,I.M.
Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd,B.
Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKeUar,M.J.R. MacKenzie, A. J.
McLean, R. M. McVeigh,D. T. Moorc,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe,F. L. Peacock, A. S. PortertJ. R. Robinson, Ian
Ruddock, P. M.

Health Acts Amendment Bill

AYES
Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller)

Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P. D.
Shipton, R. F. SinclairI I. Mce. Spender, J. M. Tambling, G. E. J.
Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.I.. Holding, A. C. Howe, B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Jacobi, R, Jenkins, H. A.

Johnson, Les (Toner) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,I.. .
Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Thoophanous, A. C. Wallis,1..G.
West,S.J. Willis,R.
Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Macphee,1. M. McMahon, Sir William Nixon,P.J. Viner,R.I.
Anthony, J. D.
Street, A. A.

Bowen, Lionel Campbell,G.
Darling, E. E. Hawke, R. J. I..
Scott, J. L. Hurford, C. J.

Questioh SO resolved in the affirmative.

Third Reading

Motion (by Mr MacKellar)--by leave-put:

That the Bill be now read a third time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

61

Noes

42

Majority

Adermann, A. E.
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W.
Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A. Bungey,M.H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian
Cariton, J. J.
Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P.

AYES

19
Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hyde,J.M. Jun,D.F. Katter,R.C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie,A.J. McLean,R.M. McVeigh,D. T. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L.

9 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3397

AYES
Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller)

Peacock, A, S. Porter,J,R.
Robinson, Ian Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender,J.M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. 1.. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H.
Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L.
Humphreys, B. C. (Tener) Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A.

Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, p, 1.
Kelly, R.J. Kent, I.. Kerin,J.e.
Klugman. R. E. McLeay.Leo McMahon, Les
Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Theophanous, A. C. Wallis,1.. O. West,S.J.
WilHs,R. Youog,M.J.

PAIRS
Macphee, r. M.
McMahon, Sir William Nixon,P.J. Viner, R. I. Anthony, J. D. Street, A. A.

Bowen, Lionel, Campbell,G. Darling. E. E. Hawke, R. J. L. Scott, j. L.
Hurford, C. J.

Question SO resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a third time.

ADJOURNMENT Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (11.25)-Mr Deputy Speaker-
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Original question resolved in the affirmative. House adjourned at 11.27 p.m.

NOTICE
The following notice was given:
Mr MeVeigh to move:
That, in accordance with the provIsions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the committee has duly reported to Parliament: Provision of army housing at Townsville, Queensland.

3398 REPRESENTATIVES 9 June 1981

Papers

PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 9 June 1981, pursuant to statute:
Defence Amendment Act-Interim DeterminationsStatutory Rules 1981, Nos 120, 121,122, 123.

Public Service Act-Appointments-Department of Employment and Youth Affairs, D. Curtis, J. H. von Senden, T. Tilmouth.
States Grants (Petroleum Products) Act--Amendments of the schedules to the subsidy schemes in relation to the States of Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and Victoria, dated 28 May 1981.


