House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 122, 1981 Wednesday, 13 May 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2287

Wednesday, 13 May 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Proposed Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembJed. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free, Mr Fry, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Morris and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs of life: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5,811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the

ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
11. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
1. Recognise the importance and place of the Australian hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
2. Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham and Mr Les McMahon.
Petitions received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And further, that annual Budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Klugman and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(1) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents

2288 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Petitions

of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has had serious adverse effects, namely:
(a) virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation;
(b) the varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilisers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers;
(c) the genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrCowan.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that "between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent".

It is your petitioners' sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrDobie.
Petition received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny Unemployment Benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.
That the level of Benefits for all unemployed people, and including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120 per cent of the poverty line.
That future employment policies be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.
Public acknowledgment of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Malcolm Fraser.
Petition received.
Discriminatory Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That currently discrimination in the provision of work, in appointment to jobs and in promotion exists in Australia on particular grounds including, inter alia, grounds of race, ethnic origin, marital status, pregnancy, sex and/or sexual preference; and
That currently discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits is exercised against particular groups of individuals-in particular, against married women.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:

Petitions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2289

That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employment, in employment of individuals under federal awards, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasigovernmental organisations, and in employment of all persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal opportunity legislation should have jurisdiction; and
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons without regard to sex and/or marital status.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFry.
Petition received.
Health Insurance
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That Federal Government proposals to shift the cost of health insurance onto the individual has placed a disproportionate and unfair financial burden on lower income groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes.
2. That an estimated 15-20 per cetit of Australians will not be able to afford insurance and will be forced to undertake extensive travel to avail themselves of outpatient services, the quality of which will be drastically reduced because of staff cuts.
3. That doctors, who at this moment are awaiting a fee increase, will inevitably become more and more expensive.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government (i) will re-examine the effects of health proposals and of the necessity for compulsory health insurance on lower income groups who do not presently meet the description of disadvantaged, and (ii) redefine the criteria determining the genuinely needy and disadvantaged to encompass the categories of persons mentioned in 1. above.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Hospital Funding Arrangements
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That the Federal Government's shifting of responsibility for funding of public hospitals onto the State Governments has placed a disproportionate and onerous burden onto lower income groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes.
2. That included in the undesirable effects on the public hospital system in Queensland will be:
(i) long waiting times for non-urgent surgery (ii) long waiting periods in out-patients (iii) services, e.g. x-ray and pathology, will be reduced (iv) staff will be reduced (v) possible abolition of teaching hospitals and centralis-
ation of training facilities for doctors and nurses (vi) closing down of small country hospitals

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will request the Government to re-examine its public hospital funding arrangements, the impact of these arrangements on lower income groups mentioned in I. above and increase funding to the States to ensure that the undesirr able effects mentioned in 2. above do not occur.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of cosmetic companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(I) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section \00 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.

2290 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Petitions

2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in'such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics On the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose;
(b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, Industry and Educational Research Laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys. Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored Public Inquiry.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys. Petition received.
Broadcasting and Television Act
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That because television and radio:
(a) affect our social and moral environment, (b) are family media watched and heard by many children
at all times, and
(c) present too much explicit violence and sex, they therefore need stronger control than other media and the existing standards need stricter enforcement in both national ABC, and commercial sectors.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray:
That the Australian Government will amend the Broadcasting and Television Act, in relation to both national and commercial broadcasters, to legislate:
(a) for adequate and comprehensive programs in the best interests of the general public,

(b) for a 'Dual System of Regulation' enforced by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal by internal regulation and external control.
(c) for an independent consumer body to represent the best interests of the general public, and
(d) for immediate and effective penalties to be imposed for breaches ofprogram and advertising standards.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hunt.
Petition received.
Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Owing to an overwhelming and continuous demand by the Australian people for a cruise service within the economic scope of the working man and his family, we request the Government to lift the ban placed on Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels entering Australian Ports.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions and the ACTU, the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our National Airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Australian Broadcasting Commission: Melbourne Showband
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the Australian Parliament in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth that:
As regular viewers and listeners of the ABC Melbourne Showband we were disappointed to learn of the dismissal of seventeen members of this outstanding orchestra.
We have had a great deal of pleasure over the past eight years viewing and listening to this band's fine music. It is the only full-time light orchestra in Australia and we are disgusted to think that such talented musicians should be dismissed in this manner.
We therefore calion the Federal Government to rescind this decision and make more money available for the continuance of the full Showband.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Questions Without Notice

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2291

by Mr Charles.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth:
1. That we are gravely concerned at the lack of Children's Services within the City of Northcote.
2. That we are dismayed at the refusal of the Department of Social Security (Child Care Division) to fund a Family Day Care Programme within the City of Northcote.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will ensure adequate funds for Children's Services will be made available so that Family Day Care may be provided within the City of Northcote.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howe.
Petition received.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
HEALTH FUNDING
Dr BLEWETT-I refer the Minister for Health to his firm statement following the Health Ministers conference on Friday, 8 May, when he said:
I went in there with a Cabinet decision and the announced policy as my position. I believe the Commonwealth's position is a fair and reasonable one and I believe the States will understand that.
I refer the Minister also to his statement last night that the reason for handing over an additional $16m to Queensland was:
. . . the basis of the Commonwealth's appreciation of the Queensland position.
Does this really mean that, after months of work and the wealth of statistics produced by the Jamison report, he did not appreciate Queensland's position last Friday but did appreciate it, to the extent of $16m, by the following Tuesday?
Mr MacKELLAR-As the House will know, there was a meeting of Health Ministers in Canberra on Friday. The Government had announced its policy on hospital funding. Aspects of hospital funding had been discussed in the Premiers Conference earlier in the week and the Prime Minister at that conference had suggested that further discussion should take place at the Health Ministers conference. I listened to what the States had to say at the Health Ministers conference. They put a particular point of view. I believe that the Commonwealth's basic philosophy and the thrust of its policy are fair and reasonable and the Commonwealth has not diverted from that view. I reported

back to Cabinet yesterday morning and Cabinet discussed the matter. The results of that Cabinet discussion have been made public.
The basis of the States' concern was that the assessment of potential revenue made by the Commonwealth was in fact not correct. Of course, this would have an impact upon the level of funding which would be divided up among the States in the coming year. There was really only one way in which the statement as to which was the correct assessment could be judged and that was on the actual result. The Commonwealth has decided, very reasonably in my view, that the States and the Commonwealth will come together towards the end of the next financial year and review the actual results of the imposition of charges and collection of revenue. If necessary, adjustments will be made. By that stage the relativities review which the Grants Commission will be required to carry out will be available not only to the States but also to the Commonwealth. The States have been invited to make a contribution towards the terms of reference for that Grants Commission inquiry. In all these circumstances I think this is a very reasonable way for the Commonwealth to behave in relation to aspects of concern expressed by the States. The basic thrust of the Government's policy remains utterly in place.
AIR SERVICES BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND UNITED KINGDOM
Mr JULL-I direct my question to the Minister for Transport. Because of my ongoing interest, I refer the Minister to Press reports this morning that a new air fare agreement has been reached between Australia and the United Kingdom and that a system of deregulation will now be introduced on that international route. I ask the Minister: Does the deregulation apply only to fares? Will there be further access for other international airlines on the route? Will there at last be some reduction for the long-suffering fare-paying public on that route?
Mr HUNT-The Press reports did not accurately reflect the outcome of discussions with the United Kingdom. I think I should inform the honourable gentleman and the House of the outcome of discussions that have taken place between the United Kingdom and Australia over the last few days. The Australian and United Kingdom negotiating teams met last week in London. They reached agreement on an Australian proposal that country of origin fares arrangements be introduced between Australia and the United Kingdom. The Australian proposal was developed in my discussions with the board of Qantas Airways Ltd over an extended period.

2292 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

Country of origin arrangements have been in place between Australia and the United States of America for some years now and they have worked well. The agreement with the United Kingdom represents an extension of this approach in the light of experience and in response to changes in the international aviation environment. The agreement does not represent complete deregulation. Arrangements for the filing of new fares by Australian and British carriers and for disapproval of fares filings still remain, but only in exceptional circumstances will filings by those carriers for their services be disapproved. The arrangements allow flexibility for the airlines to respond promptly to changed market circumstances. Existing fare arrangements with other countries remain unchanged at present.

Changes to existing fares and conditions between Australia and the United Kingdom were also agreed on by the delegations for consideration by governments. Most important will be the introduction of a new excursion stopover fare priced between the existing APEX fare and the Excursion fare. This is a long overdue introduction of a new fare regime. The new proposals would place Association of South East Asian Nations airline'S on an equal footing with Qantas Airways Ltd and British Airways in that they would have common opportunities to participate in the carriage of traffic on all available fare types. In discussions with the United Kingdom, Australia had regard to its obligation to consult with ASEAN countries. ASEAN views have been taken into account in formulating the new fare arrangements. Yesterday, the Chairman of the ASEAN committee on transportation and communications was informed by the leader of the Australian negotiating team of the changes agreed between Australia and the United Kingdom. Advice is being passed separately to individual ASEAN governments.

Mr Uren-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order.

I wish to ask two questions. First of all, is this a

question without notice? Secondly, Mr Speaker,

you have given a ruling time and time again that

Ministers should be brief in their replies. The

Minister for Transport persistently takes a long

time iIi his replies. I ask you to give us on this side

a fair go and to ask the Minister to shorten his

reply.

.

of their implementation. The report contained in a newspaper this morning was quite incorrect and I think the House needed to be informed of the actual situation.
HEALTH FUNDING Mrs CHILD-My question is addressed to the Minister for Health. I refer him to the assessments made by the various State Health Ministers as to why the amounts of money they will receive under the new funding scheme are incorrect in comparative and absolute terms. Is it a fact that these errors arise because: Firstly, Queensland's bed costs are lower than those of other States; secondly, Victoria's offer is wrong because its funds, on a popUlation basis, are lower than those for other States; thirdly, Tasmanian funding was based on an incorrect assessment, on the Commonwealth's part, of cost~sharing in the previous year; fourthly, for Western Australia the Commonwealth had overestimated the additional revenue to be gained; and, fifthly, South Australia saw the hospital charges increase as unrealistic? Can the Minister state whether these assumptions are incorrect and, if not, why he will not delay the changes and hold meaningful discussions with the States?
Mr MacKELLAR-The assumptions made by the Commonwealth are based on figures supplied. by the States. I made it quite plain in my replies to State Ministers on Friday that I was very happy for officials of the Commonwealth Department of Health to discuss with State officials individual questions which they may have to put forward. The fact of the matter is that the Commonwealth has announced its policy to move towards the inclusion of funding in this area in the general taxsharing arrangements. Those arrangements will have a transitional period while, as I have already stated, the Grants Commission looks at relativities and, of course, again as has been stated, the Commonwealth consults with the States as to the outturn results of the imposition of charges. I say again that the only way in which assumptions can be tested is to put the proposals into place. The consultations which will take place towards the end of the next financial year will enable both the Commonwealth and the States to have a realistic appraisal of the actual results of the imposition of hospital charges.

Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. However, I calJ upon the Minister to bring his answer to a conclusion.
Mr HUNT-In conclusion, Qantas will be meeting with ASEAN airlines later this week to discuss the changed fare arrangements and details

AUSTRALIAN ACCOMMODATION AND TOURS
Mr WHITE-My question is directed to the Minister for Transport, who will be aware that many private'bus operators consider that the bus line AAT-Australian Accommodation and

Questions Without Notice

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2293

Tours-operates under the umbrella of the privileged position which Trans-Australia Airlines holds in the transport industry. What is the total profit or loss made by AAT since its inception? Has the Government ever made a grant or a loan toAAT?
Mr HUNT-I am advised that AAT has incurred a loss of between $2m and $2.25m since its inception. The Government has not given any assistance to AAT in the way of loans or grants.
HEALTH FUNDING
Dr EVERINGHAM-I ask the Minister for Health: With the exception of Queensland, does he agree with the State Health Ministers' assessment of the Commonwealth Government's health funding offer as 'unrealistic, arbitrary and dangerously unfair to the people of Australia'? Has the Government said in effect to the States that the Australian federation, with regard to health funding, now consists of decisions made in Canberra which are not negotiable in any sense of that word as understood by the States? In the interests of cooperative federalism, will he be as flexible in discussions with the other States as he was with Queensland and will he table calculations on which the Government bases the expected takings by each State from proposed means-tested charges for standard hospital beds, as referred to by the honourable member for Henty?
Mr MacKELLAR-The answer to the first question is no; the answer to the second question is no; and the answer to the third question is that the Government has demonstrated its capacity and its willingness to consult with all the States, not just anyone of them. The answer to the fourth question is no.
AGE AND SERVICE PENSIONS

would be rather unkind and unnecessary to upset those arrangements and the expectations that have come out of them. If patterns change some years in the future, so be it. When we have a circumstance in which many people qualify either for an age pension or in some cases for a widow's pension, if those pensions did not exist those people would merely qualify for the unemployment benefit. There would then be no financial saving in that, but a social change would be forced on people which [personally would regard as most unfortunate. The issue is not in contemplation so far as the Government is concerned.
HEALTH FUNDING
Mr HUMPHREYS-l direct my question to the Prime Minister. Did the Minister for Health bring the proposal for $16m to be provided to Queensland for health assistance before Cabinet or was it put forward to Cabinet by the Prime Minister?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-These matters were put forward to Cabinet by the Minister for Health as a result of discussions. I think that it would be a very odd circumstance indeed if honourable members of this House expected the Minister for Health of the Commonwealth to go through a day's discussions and other bilateral discussions with Ministers for Health or Treasurers of various States and be prepared to ignore those discussions in their totality and take no notice whatsoever of what any of the States might have said. What was put to Cabinet was as a result of discussion on matters that the Minister thought reasonable and the Cabinet, in its judgment, thought to be reasonable.

Mr GOODLUCK-Will the Prime Minister give an assurance that age and service pensions will continue to be made payable to women when they attain the age of 60 years and that it was never under consideration by the Government to vary that situation?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-This matter has not been under the consideration of the Government. Because it had been raised in other forums, I not unnaturally consulted with my colleague the Minister for Social Security to see whether he had it in contemplation to put any proposals before the Government. It is not in his contemplation; it is not one of the matters on his desk. I think we need to understand that these payments have been made on an historic basis, because of a way of life to which many people have grown accustomed and which they have been led to expect. It

MIDDLE EAST
Mr DOBIE--I refer the Minister for Foreign Affairs to reports in this morning's media that tensions are growing at an alarming and urgent rate between the government of Israel's Prime Minister Begin and Syria's President Hafez Assad. I ask the Minister whether he is in a position to advise the House as to what actions he has taken to a~~ertain the true position and how it will affect Australia's interests in the Middle East. In view of the concern shown by the Government at the outbreak of the Iraqi-Iranian war, can we anticipate a statement to the House on the subject of difficulties which could arise not only for the war battered people of Lebanon but also because of 'the strategic wall of Syrian-Soviet friendship and cooperation' for the well-being of the whole area of the Middle East?

2294 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr STREET-I am sure that all members of system have been put off until we receive that re-

this House will be concerned about the increase in port. But even in that context a number of quite

tension in Lebanon particularly as a result of significant decisions have been made in advance

conflict between Syria and Israel. The subject of of the report, including in particular the decision

the unhappy recent experiences of the country of taken last December to deregulate the then exist-

Lebanon were recently a matter of comment in ing controls on borrowing rates by Australian

this House. So far as the most recent events in that banks. 1 do not believe that it would be a satisfac-

country are concerned, the Australian Governtory discharge of my responsibilities under the

ment has asked the Australian mission in the Banking Act, in the face of the mergers which are

United Nations to convey to the Secretarycurrently being contemplated, to say that the mat-

General of the United Nations our great concern ter was altogether too difficult for the Govern-

at the potentially explosive situation which is ment and that it ought to be put off until after the

developing there and which could affect not only receipt of the report of the Campbell Committee

the stability of the region but also stability of Inquiry. I think that obligations are cast upon

throughout the world. We have asked our mission the Government-myself in particular-under

to make clear to the President of the Security the existing provisions of the Banking Act and I

Council our concern and to urge on all parties inthink that it would be an inadequate discharge of

volved the need for common sense and restraint at those responsibilities to say that the matter should

this particularly difficult time. We have further be put off until we receive the report of the

said that any initiatives which the President of the Camphell Committee oflnquiry.

Security Council feels he can take in this respect

would have our support. I understand that there is

FOREIGN INVESTMENT

little or no prospect at the moment of a United Nations peacekeeping force being introduced to cover the whole of Lebanon because such a force would require a request from the Lebanese Government as well as a resolution from the Se-. curity Council of the United Nations. In respect of that possible development and others in the area, the Government is watching the matter closely and will take what opportunities it can to reduce tensions in the area.

Mr HAYDEN-My question is addressed to the Treasurer. I refer to the near record monthly private capital inflow for April disclosed today and the fact that 99 per cent of foreign investment approvals for the first half of 1980-81 were for takeovers of existing enterprises. Is it a fact that the huge volume and direction of this private capital inflow is blowing to pieces the Government's money supply target of 9 per cent to 11 per cent, is inherently inflationary and is applying

DISALLOWED QUESTION Mr Cunningham proceeding to ask a question a/the Prime Minister-

substantial pressures for further interest rate in~ creases? Is it a fact also that it is responsible for a large scale alienation of Australian ownership and control of established Australian industry? Fur-

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable thermore, is it a fact that it is forcing significant

member's question is out of order.

revaluations of the Australian dollar and accord-

ingly creating serious price disadvantages on com-

BANKING

petitive export markets for exports of Australian

Mr IAN CAMERON-My question is directed to the Treasurer. In the light of his having deferred most financial decisions until the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System brings down its report, why does the Treasurer not defer any decision on the possible mergers of Australian banks until then, especially now that there are reports that the

manufactured goods and farm products? Does he acknowledge that these effects are contrary to the best interests of Australian farm and manufacturing industries, stable economic management, and the promotion of the national interest? Will he therefore take immediate steps to haul back this damaging flood of foreign investment into a more manageable flow?

Bank of New South Wales wishes to merge with the National Bank of Australasia Ltd with, I believe, disastrous consequences to all Australians?

Mr HOWARD-The Leader of the Opposition has asked a very long and very important question. I will try to give it the detailed response

Mr HOWARD-In reply to the honourable that it merits. It is true that the most recent bal-

member for Maranoa I point out that it is not ance of payments figures have indicated a very

true, as his question implies, that this Government large increase in the volume of private capital

has deferred all financial decisions until receiving coming into Australia. It is true that that inflow

the Campbell report. It is correct that a number of contains a very high element of portfolio invest-

possible changes to the structure of our financial ment. It is equally true that all of the reasons for

Questions Without Notice

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2295

that very large increase can be a matter of conjechow this might be done in the light of our dom-

ture. It has something to do with the existing estic air policy. The consultants will report also

interest rate differentials between United States upon what measures should be taken to ensure

domestic interest rates and Australian interest independent ownership of Australia's trunk air-

rates.

lines. The consultants will be asked to report

I do not accept the description that the Leader of the Opposition places upon this situation; that is, that it is blowing the Government's money supply projections to pieces. The most recent indications for the 12 months to, I think, March show that the growth in M3 is about 11.7 per cent. That is up by about 0.7 per cent on the previous month's figures but, as the honourable gentleman knows from his earlier experiences, these figures can fluctuate very wildly from month to month. It would be a fairly brave person who tried to put a precise figure upon the final outcome at this stage of the year because at this time of the year the external account is always the wild card so far as the money supply outcome is concerned. It

within about 12 months. that the Government has

mIaedme pnhoadseiscei~ihoonwtoevseerli

any part of TAA to the private sector. The

Government will await the advice of the consult-

ants before taking a decision on the matter. In the

meantime, TAA will be established as a public

company with 100 per cent Commonwealth own-

ership. However, the memorandum and articles

of association will not inhibit the sale of TAA or

part thereof to the private sector. Of course, the

report will provide the Government with the

benefit of having the best advice possible before

taking a decision on the matter. We will also be

freeing TAA from the restraints imposed upon a

statutory authority.

appears that there was a stronger seasonal element in the most recent balance of payments figures than is normally the case. This is partly due to the fact that provisional tax payments are larger this year-by an estimated 30 per centthan was the case a year ago and that they are being paid earlier. Some of the information from the money markets suggests that arrangements for tax payments have been made earlier than last year and that more funds have been brought in from overseas for those purposes.
As the honourable gentleman knows, all of the

Mr Morris-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. As this matter is one of major importance to the Australian people it demands that there be a statement from the Minister so that the Government can explain its view. Question Time should not be so flagrantly abused. This Minister this timid little man, who is not able to present; case to the Parliament, should be required to come forward to state his case so that we can respond to it. The matter should be aired properly, not in this furtive way ofleaking statements.

matters which bear upon the external account are Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.

interrelated and the conduct of exchange rate pol-

i~y has an impact upon international competitlveness. Equally, of course, international competitiveness is a reflection of domestic success in controlling prices. To the extent that the external account is conducted in a way that reduces and does not increase the level of inflation, that has a beneficial effect on our international competitiveness.

MONEY SUPPLY: EXCHANGE RATE
. Mr ~EATING-I ask the Treasurer a question: Is It a fact that the Treasurer argued with his NatlOnal Country Party colleagues in the monetary ~o~mittee of Cabinet that continuing appreClatlOn of the exchange rate is required to keep the money supply in check and to mitigate inflationary pressures in the economy'? In the absence

TRANS-AUSTRALIA AIRLINES
Mr EWEN CAMERON-Is the Minister for Transport aware of a news report on the Australian Broadcasting Commission this morning outlining the Government's plans for Trans-Australia Airlines'? Can the Minister clarify to this House the Government's intentions'?
Mr HUNT-As I announced in this House previously the Government intends to establish

of any direct inhibition to capital inflow, such as prohibitions on portfolio share purchasing or the re-introduction of the variable deposit ratio scheme, does the Government intend to continue with its present policy of appreciation of the dollar which, as the Leader of the Opposition has indicated, is damaging the competitiveness of the mineral and agricultural sectors and placing pressures on import competing industries?

TAA as a public company. The Government will Mr HOWARD-I do not propose to comment

initially hold 100 per cent of the shares in the new on the early part of the honourable member's

public company. However, the Government will question. I simply repeat what I, the Prime Minis-

commission private consultants to examine the ter and other Ministers have said in recent

practicalities of selling shares in TAA including months: One of the areas of very great success in

2296 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

the conduct of economic policy by the Governbut at present we are in communication with the

ment in recent years has been the management of Government of the United States of America. My

the exchange rate.

colleague has written to the Secretary of State

AUSTRALIAN WOOL TESTING AUTHORITY

asking certain questions of the United States Government to put Australia in a better position to be able to make a final decision one way or the

Mr BUNGEY-I refer the Minister for other. If a decision is made it will obviously be

Primary Industry to the recommendations of the very fully debated in this Parliament.

Review of Commonwealth Functions concerning

the sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority and some parts of the Australian wool stores. I

SALE OF WHEAT

ask: Since these assets were purchased, developed Mr MacKENZIE-Is the Minister for Primary

and operated with wool growers' funds without Industry aware of claims that certain companies

recourse to Government finance, can the Minister are buying up wheat in New South Wales for sub-

advise where the sale proceeds are to be sequent resale in drought affected areas? Can the

allocated?

Minister ensure that the limited supplies of feed

Mr NIXON-The honourable member quite rightly draws attention to the fact that the Aus-

wheat in that State are retained for sale to farmers in genuinely drought affected areas?

tralian Wool Testing Authority and the wool

stores are owned by the wool industry through the Mr NIXON-There have been suggestions

Australian Wool Corporation. Following any sucthat a well-known stock firm has been cornering

cessful sale of either the wool stores or the Wool the market for wheat feed stock supplies in New

Testing Authority, any funds accruing will go, of South Wales. Following this matter being put be-

course, to the Corporation and thus to the fore me, I made inquiries and I found that there is

industry.

no substance to the rumour. In fact, the rumour

MIDDLE EAST PEACEKEEPING FORCE

may well have been founded on the fact that a great number of farmers and growers have been

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I ask the Prime Minusing cheques from that wheat firm to purchase

ister: Is he giving serious consideration to committhe wheat for their stock. As a result it has been

ting Australian troops to an American sponsored assumed that for some reason or other that firm

peacekeeping force in the Sinai Desert, despite has secured a great deal of wheat. In point of fact

objections from his Defence Minister and the Australian Wheat Board assures me that it has

National Country Party colleagues? Will he not entered into any wheat sales of that nature

assure the House that before any Australian since last October; so it is unlikely that there is any

troops are committed to any peacekeeping operfoundation for the rumour.

ations which are not under the umbrella of the

United Nations-a commitment without precedent-this matter will be fully debated in

ALUMINIUM PRICES

the Parliament because of its serious nature?

Mr HOWE-I refer the Minister for Business

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If the honourable gentleman wants to make any assumptions about the attitude that the Minister has expressed, he would be better advised to make accurate assumptions rather than inaccurate ones.
Mr Lionel Bowen-I am asking you a question.

and Consumer Affairs to the Government's decision to eliminate the Prices Justification Tribunal and therefore to cancel the inquiry into aluminium prices. Is.it a fact that domestic prices of aluminium ingot in Australia have failed to reflect falling international prices over the past 12 months? Is the Minister aware of the very wide-

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable spread concern amongst Australian manufac-

gentleman might be asking a question but implicit turers about the lack of a market price for alu-

in it were certain views. The honourable gentleminium ingot in Australia and the fact that they

man's question obviously raises a very serious are paying consistently higher prices-I might say

issue. The issue of peace and war in the Middle identical prices among all of the companies-than

East is also very serious. The survival and integthose on international markets? In view of the

rity of Israel within secure and defensible boundGovernment's commitment to free enterprise,

aries is clearly a very serious issue, as some colwhat steps does the Minister intend to take to

leagues in the honourable gentleman's party ensure that Australian aluminium ingot prices

would be ready to agree. In the light of reports reflect the interests of domestic manufacturers

that have appeared, it would be idle not to say rather than those of the monopoly producers of

that this matter has been before the Government, aluminium?

Questions Without Notice

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2297

Mr MOORE-It is true that the Government has recommended the abolition of the Prices Justification Tribunal. As a consequence of that, the preliminary inquiry that was taking place into aluminium prices will not now take place. People seem to assume that there must be government regulation to get a market price. I think that we would be far better off to encourage competition and, by ensuring competition between producers--
Opposition members inteJjectingMr MOORE-I can understand socialists not understanding what competition is all about. That is exactly what regulation is all about. Because of that, the Government's objective would be to ensure competition. Opposition members-How? Mr MOORE-There is a body called the Trade Practices Tribunal to which people can apply if they feel that undue or cartel operations are taking place. In the meantime it is the Government's policy to ensure competition. By ensuring that competition, the benefits to the individuals of Australia will be protected.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION REVIEW
Mr ROBERT BROWN-I direct my question to the Minister for Communications. In view of the fact that, when the Minister made his statement on 9 April on the amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act, he said that he wanted the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to be aware of the Government's intentions, I ask: On what basis, if any, is the Administrative Appeals Tribunal required to be aware of the Government's intentions as distinct from the Parliament's intentions; and, since the statement to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal differed in some respects from that made to Parliament, and since there have been subsequent undenied Press reports of changes, especially relating to Australian citizenship, will the Minister now fully inform the House of the Government's intentions?
Mr SINCLAIR-The statement made to this House indicated the general direction in which amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act were to proceed. I intimated then, as I have since, that I felt that, until such time as the legislation is tabled in this House, it was inappropriate for me to go too far down the track but appropriate to seek reactions from the community to that general statement. The Administrative Appeals Tribunal asked for a specific explanation of the statement made to this Parliament. This was given in response to a request from the AAT. The detail

of the amendments, as they will appear, will, of course, have no impact on any proceedings before the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal or the Administrative Appeals Tribunal until such time as they, in fact, have been passed by the Parliament. When they are ready for submission to the Parliament, of course, there will be adequate opportunity for members of this place and of the other place to debate them.
TELEVISION TRANSLATORS Mr TUCKEY-I refer the Minister for Communications to the recent amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act which allow community groups to erect national television translators. Can the Minister advise the House of the number of applications that have been received as a result of this legislation? Can he further state when the residents of Howick and Condingup in the Esperance Shire might receive approval of their applications? Mr SINCLAIR-The objective in introducing this procedure was to enable local community groups which are anxious for an early introduction of a translator facility to have a means by which they could achieve that end without it necessarily awaiting the allocation of a priority within the overall funding of matters encompassed by the Government purse. It is true that there have been very few, as I understand it, that have been implemented to date. However, I will find the exact information and provide the honourable gentleman with a response. The way in which the local community groups can proceed is in accordance with a procedure which involves a notification which is issued by the Minister. Again, perhaps the best procedure would be for me to respond to that part of the honourable gentleman's question as if it were a question on notice.
MIDDLE EAST PEACEKEEPING FORCE Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister a
question which is supplementary to that which he answered from the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and which relates, of course, to the proposal for a United States sponsored military force in the Sinai Desert. Is the Prime Minister aware that this proposal has been described in the Washington Post as 'smuggling United States forces into the Middle East' in order to establish a United States 'strategic presence . . . under the guise of a peacekeeping force'?
Mr Katter-What is wrong with that?

2298 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr HAYDEN-Morality has a discounted facMr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable

tor in the honourable member's political gentleman will make his point of order.

standards.

Mr Hayden-Sinai peace force, so called, the

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opsame sort of refugee exodus will take place there.

position will return to his question.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Op-

Mr HAYDEN-Does the Prime Minister position will resume his seat.

recognise, in the event of the force materialising Mr Hayden-This is nonsense.

and Australia participating, the possibility of a series of strategic events being initiated without any reference to Australia but involving Australia

Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat.

in circumstances which could do serious harm to Mr Hayden-Why does he not address himself

our national interests and which could involve Australia in military conflict in which Australian lives could be lost, but military conflict without any real Australian control existing over the course of events? Will he give a categorical assurance that Australia will not participate in any such undertaking and will avoid taking the lead in inciting the United States to misguided action, as an earlier government similar to this one did in

to the question and for a change be honest? Mr SPEAKER-Order! There are two points
to be made. The first is that if the Leader of the Opposition, in asking a question about one thing, intrudes comments about a separate issue it is in order for the Minister answering to refer to that. Secondly, I ask the Leader of the Opposition to withdraw his last remark.

pressuring the United States to escalate its involvement in Vietnam?

Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I withdraw it. He is a professional jingoist, collecting a third-class de-

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The assumptions in the last part of the honourable gentleman's question are false.

gree at Oxford while other people were in Korea and making sure that he took no danger to himself at the time of Vietnam.

Mr Barry Jones-Are they?

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. What the Leader of

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Yes, they are entirely false. Let those who take joy out of what happened in Vietnam say that to the one million refugees from Vietnam itself caused by the

the Opposition has just said is not unparliamentary, but it is an attack on a member of the House in rude terms which the honourable gentleman should not make.

present regime there and to the further one Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, I am

million refugees caused by Vietnam's invading arsure that it does not need me to say that the

mies in Kampuchea.

Leader of the Opposition is doing this under the

guise of points of order which he knows and we all Mr Hayden-You risked the lives of other know are not points of order. people's children in Vietnam, not yours.
To continue with the answer to the honourable

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opgentleman's question, the Camp David Accords, I

position will remain silent.

thought, had the approval of all members on both

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Leader of the Opposition knows very well that the communist victory in Vietnam has led quite directly to one million refugees being forced to leave that country. He knows very well that tens upon tens of thousands of them have died at sea as a result of their forced exodus from Vietnam. He also knows very well that there are further hundreds of thousands of refugees from Kampuchea as a result of Vietnam's invasion of Kampuchea.

sides of this Parliament. They certainly have the approval of the honourable member for Wills, even if they have not the approval of the Leader of the Opposition. We have supported the Camp David Accords. We have supported them here and, where possible, in other places and in international forums.
The Leader of the Opposition is jumping far too fast in this matter. It seems that he is much more concerned to oppose any initiative of the United States than he is to seek peace and security for all

Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of peoples of the Middle East, including the people

order. The Prime Minister seems to be arguing of Israel. If that is the view he is going to take on a

that unless Australia becomes part of this United very important subject, and if that is the way in

States sponsored--

which he wants to behave on these issues, then so

Alternative Delivery Systems for Public Works

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2299

be it. As for this Government, we will assess the factors put before us and we will consult with like-minded countries such as Canada and New Zealand, and including the United States. We will see what other nations think of this project and we will make an assessment based on our own national interests and in the interests of peace and security in the Middle East.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER--Order! Honourable members on my left will remain silent. The honourable member for Hotham continually interjects. I ask him to cease.
Dr Cass It is excessive provocation from the Prime Minister.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Maribyrnong will remain silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER--Mr Speaker, how can honourable gentlemen on your left remain silent when they are set an example by the Leader of the Opposition?
Mr SPEAKER--I ask the right honourable gentleman to return to the question.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I ask that further questions be placed on the Notice Paper.
LIMMEN BIGHT ABORIGINAL LAND CLAIM
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)--Pursuant to section 50 (1) of the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 1 present a report by the Aboriginal Land Commissioner on the Limmen Bight land claim, together with the text of a statement by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Senator Peter Baume) relating to the report.
COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO EDUCATION AND TRAINING
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- For the information of honourable members. I present the report on follow-up during 1980 of the report of the Committee of Inquiry into Education and Training.
ALTERNATIVE DELIVERY SYSTEMS FOR COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC WORKS
Ministerial Statement
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs--Minister for Housing and Construction)--by leaveFollowing a request from the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works, the House

of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure conducted an examination of alternative delivery systems for Commonwealth public works. The Expenditure Committee's report was tabled in this House last year. It contained conclusions and recommendations that addressed the need for flexibility, efficiency and accountability in relation to public works. The Committee concluded that:
(1) The choice of a particular delivery system for a particular project has to be made in the context of the circumstances of that project and hence is a matter for the judgment of administrators.
(2) The choice of delivery system for a project should remain with the organisation that has prime carriage for the planning, design and construction of public works.
(3) It is not practical to formulate guidelines for the selection of a particular delivery system.
(4) Since a government department or agency is responsible for the efficient administration of public works, that department or agency should always have overriding authority over project management companies and others on these works.
I am pleased to inform the House that the Government fully endorses these conclusions. The report went on to make three recommendations:
(1) The Department of Housing and Construction either include in its annual report or supply the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for inclusion in that Committee's general reports information relating to tender price, costs of rise and fall contract clauses, design alterations and other costs, and the particular delivery system used for each completed major capital work.
(2) The Department of Housing and Construction expedite the preparation of design and supervision costs for major public works and publish these costs in its annual reports.
(3) The Department of Housing and Construction assess the advantages and disadvantages of contractual project management and use this delivery system when circumstances permit its use.

2300 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Alternative Delivery Systems for Public Works

I am also pleased to inform the House that the Government accepts these recommendations. Action is in hand to publish this information on tender price and other costs in the Department of Housingand Construction's 1980-81 annual report. It will cover major works completed during that year and will cover all projects referred to the Public Works Committee and those exempted from that Committee's scrutiny on the grounc,ls of expediency. Works exempted on security grounds will not be covered. The Government has taken and will be taking other steps to enhance the efficiency, flexibility and accountability of the Commonwealth's works programs, particularly in relation to the works of statutory authorities. Amendments to the Public Works Committee Act will extend that Committee's scrutiny to cover many statutory authorities.
The Government has also introduced new public works procedures aimed at achieving more consistency and better value for money from the Commonwealth's works expenditures. The Department of Housing and Construction is working on the detailed arrangements to apply these procedures. These procedures will result in consistent conditions of contract for all Commonwealth works, including works of all statutory authorities. Those statutory authorities which are or will be subject to the Public Works Committee scrutiny under the proposed amendments will be required to consult with the Department of Housing and Construction on design and cost aspects to ensure that soundly based and consistent estimates of cost are prepared and presented to the Government and the Public Works Committee. The recommendations made by the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, in conjunction with other initiatives the Government is taking, will in no small measure help to ensure that the Commonwealth receives value for money from its construction expenditures and that the Parliament, the Government and the public are better informed about those expenditures. Finally, I would like to congratulate and thank the Committee for this report. I commend the report to the House. I present the following paper.
Alternative Delivery Systems for Commonwealth Public Works-Ministerial statement, 13 May 1981.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:

out of the request by the Joint Standing Committee on Public Works and the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure which conducted an examination of alternative delivery systems by Commonwealth public works. Of course, we know that the Expenditure Committee report was tabled in the House last year. I wish to briefly make a few comments in regard to the report. The three recommendations accepted by the Government are welcome in particular, recommendation (1) which deals with information relating to tender prices. As the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) knows, and would have heard prior to taking over his ministry, there was a great deal of criticism during the last Parliament in relation to the tender prices for the purchase of a computer for his own Department and the manner in which those tenders were carried out. We know that as a result of pressure, both externally and later internally, within his Department the lowest tender and even the tender with the greatest Australian component in the project were not chosen. Therefore, it is important that tender prices be made public and that a section of this Parliament should be able to examine such tenders.
Recommendation (3) deals with contractual projects of management. For instance, in examhiing the day labour force under the control of the Department of Housing and Construction it can be seen that the number of people employed has actually fallen from 6,592 in 1977-78 to 4,995 in 1978-79. I have no doubt that the Government is very proud of the cuts in the day labour force. What will happen, particularly when contracts are given out to private enterprise? It will be revealed that we certainly can ill afford such drastic labour cuts in the Department particularly in relation to supervision by the Department in policing and making sure the work is done properly. Page 3 of the Minister's statement deals with Commonwealth works expenditure. This is where the real cuts have been made. The situation concerns us because if we look at the report of the Department of Housing and Construction we find that in 1976-77 an amount of $683.6m was made available but in 1979-80 that allocation had been cut to $496.4m. I seek leave to have a table which outlines this position incorporated in Hansard.

That the House take note of the paper.
Mr UREN (Reid) (3.12)--The ministerial statement on Commonwealth public works arose

Leave granted. The table read as follows-

Alternative Delivery Systems/or Public Works

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2301

FINANCE Works Expenditure
($m)

AppendixH

1979-80

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

(est.)

Civil DepartmentsCapital Works
Furniture and Fittings Repairs and Maintenance
Overseas Defence Departments-
Capital Works
Furniture and Fittings Repairs and Maintenance Malaysia
OtherTelecommunications Commission
Postal Commission Darwin Reconstruction Commission National Capital Development Commission Reserve and Commonwealth Banks
Recoverable Works: Foreign Aid Other Governments
Other Sub-Total Purchase ofDepartmental Plant

70.1 5.9
78.1 15.4
69.4 3.7
43.2 1.0
88.0 13.5 139.3 90.5 7.8
5.2 5.6 42.3 679.0 4.6

86.0 5.7 92.1 17.8
68.5 5.4 49.2 0.9
68.3 13.5 89.1 70.2 7.2
8.8 2.7 23.2 608.6 4.8

88.9 -(a)
53.9 3.4
63.1 -(a)
50.4 1.2
58.3 18.0 -(b) 42.7 15.5
8.3 8.8 19.9 432.4 3.5

102.9 -(a)
64.2 3.8
76.8 -(a)
61.7 1.5
66.7 13.7 -(b) 26.0 24.7
22.4 2.6 25.2 492.2 4.2

Total

683.6

613.4

435.9

496.4

Notes(a) Department of Administrative Services assumed operations on 1 July 1978. (b) Darwin Reconstruction Commission ceased operations on 31 December 1977.
Expenditure on Consultants ($m)

NSW Vic. Qld

SA WA Tas. NT ACT

CO Total

1976-77
1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 (est.)

.3

1.6

.1

.1

1.2

1.5

.2

5.0

.8

3.1

.2

.1

.1

.9

2.1

.2

7.5

1.5

3.0

.4

.4

.1

.1

.6

1.3

.37.7

1.2

3.0

.5

.2

.2

.5

.8

1.1

7.5

The above figures do not include expenditure on consultancies placed and managed by the Department on behalf of Commonwealth agencies and authorities; expenditure was approximately $3m for 1978-79 and estimated to be $3m to $3.5m for
1979-80.

Mr UREN-I thank the House. Those figures demonstrate that public works expenditure, expressed in constant prices, has been cut from $884m in 1976-77 to $496m last year. That is a drop of something like 44 per cent. We can go back still further in respect of the cuts proposed by that violent group of this violent Government which so proudly calls itself the razor gang. Page 29 of its report states:
Expenditure on capital works is an important item in the Commonwealth Budget.
I want to stress that we on this side of the House agree that public works expenditure is an important item of Budget expenditure. But, as I have just pointed out, there has been a cut of 44 per cent

since 1976-77. We can now see the philosophy behind why the cut has been made. The razor gang report goes on to state:,
With the boom in the private investment associated with resource development there is a need to avoid overstretching the capacity of the building and construction industry. We have accordingly decided on major reductions in this area.
The interesting aspect of this is that since May 1974 there has been a cut in employment in the building and construction industry of over 60,000 people. Today, 60,000 fewer people are working in that industry than were working in it in May 1974. The fact is that this Government is still drastically cutting back a sector of the Budget which is particularly important. We must consider the importance of public works as a whole in

2302 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Alternative Delivery Systems for Public Works

the development of our nation. To a great extent it is cutting back in cities and regional areas, particularly in the old, established areas. They are being cut back to a great extent and yet employment is being created in isolated areas which sometimes have difficult social infrastructures and so on. It seems to me that again this is a part of the Government's policy of which we should be highly critical.
The technical aspects of the Minister's statement probably will assist the Parliament to police actions more thoroughly. Certainly I hope that public works carried out, particularly the tendering aspects, will be policed more strictly in the future. 1 hope the skulduggery that went on-I use the word 'skulduggery' deliberately-in the tendering for a computer for the Minister's own department does not continue. The tendering process was so bad that I believe something was very wrong. I think that there was collusion between certain sections of the bureaucracy and the IBM company to allow that computer to come through. I must say that the Government and the Department will find it extremely difficult to carry out a lot of the supervision on the work that has to be carried out because of the drastic cut which has occurred in day labour.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (3.20)-1 wish to take a couple of minutes to comment on some aspects of the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure. Perhaps more importantly, 1 express my pleasure that a report of one of the House of Representatives standing committees, of which I had the pleasure to be the Deputy Chairman in the last Parliament, has been accepted by the Government. I think that it is fairly honest to say that some of these committees find great frustration inasmuch as they put an enormous amount of work into formulating a report which they believe to be honest, accurate and forthright, and then find that the report is largely ignored by the Government. So it is pleasant to find that the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) and the Government have seen fit to accept fully the recommendations made by the Expenditure Committee in this report which is entitled 'An Examination of Alternative Delivery Systems for Commonwealth Public Works'. I express my pleasure also on behalf of the members of the Subcommittee. By some strange quirk of fate 1 am the last remaining vestige of that Sub-committee. My colleagues, Mr Kevin Cairns and Mr Ken Aldred, unfortunately for them, have passed into early retirement. I am sure that, even in their retirement, they will find some satisfaction in that the hard and diligent work which they and other members

of the Committee put into this report has been accepted, honoured and put into practice by the Government. On their behalf, may I express pleasure at that event but, more importantly, that the honest and difficult work of committees of the House is not altogether ignored. That represents a watershed.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Customs Amendment (Tenders) Bill 1981. Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Bill 1981. Customs Securities (Penalties) Bill 1981. States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Bill 1981. States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill 1981.
HOSPITAL FUNDING
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Mr Speaker has received letters from the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) and the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) proposing that definite matters of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion today. As required by Standing Order 107 Mr Speaker has selected the matter which, in his opinion, is the most urgent and important, that is, that proposed by the honourable member for Bonython, namely:
The detrimental impact on State and personal finances, and the inevitable decline in hospital standards arising from the Government's ill conceived proposals for hospital funding.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number afmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their place.\'-
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (3.24)-There should, after the farcical events of the last four days, be very little reason to argue the iIlconceived nature of the Government's hospital funding proposals. What was non-negotiable on Friday has become highly negotiable, at least for one of the States, by Tuesday. Indeed one might now describe the new federalism as simply a surrender to the noisest and most obstreperous of the little Australians, Joh Bjelke-Petersen, without regard for the interests of the other States or for the logic of the agreement, if there be logic to it, which was presented to the Health Ministers last Friday. However, it is not simply the flaws in execution of the agreement that we on this side of the House are attacking. We believe there are far deeper flaws than the farcical events of the last

Hospital Funding

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2303

few days regarding the hospital funding agreement.
We believe the fundamental principles of those funding proposals are wrong. It is, first of all, simply a reactionary step in late twentieth century Australia to abandon a national government role in determing priorities for the hospital sector. We believe that it is simply a backward step to abdicate at this point in the development of the nation responsibilities of the Commonwealth Government towards the hospital sector. Although the Minister for Health eMr MaCKellar) often in very vague ways clothes his arguments for his new policies in the report of the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals, it is quite clear that the Jamison Commission opposed the proposal to hand back hopital funding to the States through general purpose grants. This is what the Commission had to say:
The Commission's view is that the existence of some form of identified funding for health services has come to be generally accepted as a means of ensuring that a high standard of health care is available across State boundaries for the Australian population.
Although transitionally there may be some identification, it is clearly and explicitly the intention of the Government simply to include hospital funding in the general purpose grants to the States so that it would be unidentified, untied and quite contrary to the beliefs of the Jamison Commission. The ideal of that Commission was that there should be a rough equality of services across State boundaries. It did not believe that this could be achieved unless there was a significant contribution by the Commonwealth Government. The ideal of a Commonwealth contribution to maintain a rough equality of services across State boundaries was supported by most of the national health agencies in this country. That ideal is now being undermined by the present policies to which the Federal Government is committed. Indeed, the Federal Government's position is basically an abdication of responsibility for the public hospital sector.
I have argued before that this will ultimately lead to a fragmentation of service provision. For example, it is already apparent that quite different means test proposals will apply in most of the States. Queensland has indicated quite clearly that a means test will not be introduced into the free hospital system which it has had for a generation. New South Wales and Tasmania are both looking at applying more generous means tests than those propounded by the Commonwealth Government, which has a very narrow definition of need. No doubt some of the other

States will simply follow the Commonwealth plan and have a fairly narrow definition of 'socially disadvantaged'. Quite ditTerent sets of means tests will apply in some States. In one State at least there probably will be no means test at all. This will lead to quite different health cover provisions in each of the States; the health cover needs in each State will be different. We are then left with questions concerning not only the variety of health covers but also the mobility of Australians: Will Australians need to adjust their health cover as they move from State to State? The whole of t~~ implications of this abdication of responsi- ?II.lty are really quite foreign and quite antagonIStiC to the development of society in the late 20th century.
When honourable members on this side of the House make these points they are often subjected to quite false reasoning from honourable members opposite. Members of the Australian Labor Party are not suggesting that a rigid uniformity should be imposed by the Commonwealth on the States. We are suggesting that the Commonwealth should participate with the States in the determination of priorities for public hospitals in this country. It should do so not just on one occasion; there should be regular participation by the Commonwealth Government with the States in determi.ning national priorities for public hospitals in thiS country. We are not suggesting that the participation should be practised as it is presently being practised by the Minister; that is, simply at the crude level of squeezing funds and letting the States pick up the burdens. We are suggesting that there should be genuine co-operative federalism in the health field, not the unco-operative federalism that has characterised this federation in recent weeks. Indeed, the whole evolution of the present hospital package is a classic example of unco-operative federalism. There has been no effective give and take. There has been no genuine consultation between the Commonwealth Government and the States on the Jamison proposals. In order to support the statement. I have just made. I will quote the statement made by all the State Health Ministers: It states:
We observe that we have never been consulted in the real sense of the word and at no time prior to its recent decision has the Commonwealth indicated any clear intention to the States.
Unless the Government is going to say that all these State Health Ministers are simply money grabbers, that they have simply got no care or

2304 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Hospital Funding

concern for health issues, then that statement is a very clear repudiation of the whole uncooperative approach that has been adopted by the Government in response to this matter. Indeed, I think it is true to argue that there has been more consultation with powerful vested interests-the private health funds and the Australian Medical Association-than there has been with the States. I am confident that the Government and the Minister have talked more with those vested interests who have done very well out of this package than th-::y have with the States. Indeed, in many ways the package was designed to serve the interests of the vested interests in the health sector rather than to serve either the interests of the States or the people of this country. Our first major objection to those proposals-these inefficient and ill conceived proposals-is that we oppose the abdication of the Australian Government from any responsibility in the public hospital sector.
The second principle that we oppose is the imposition of the means test at the point of service delivery. The Government, of course, is now attempting to ensure that a means test is imposed by the financial sanctions that it is using against the States. I will come back to that point. The Minister often clothes his rhetoric in the words of Jamison. The Jamison report is a conservative report, very sympathetic to the values of Government. Yet this report referred to the means test. First of all, the report echoes the views of the Minister on the principle of the user pays, so it is very much sympathetic with his line. The report states:
Because the Commission believes that those able to pay should do so, and that they should be encouraged to do so through insurance, it gave much consideration to the reintroduction of a means test for free access to both inpatient and outpatient services at public hospitals. In dDing so, it recDgnised:
that sickness Dften generates CDstS other than medical costs -for example, cost of the breadwinner's income fDr part or all of the term of incapacity;
that hospital administrators who gave evidence to the Commission were almost unanimous in their opposition to such a proposal;
that collection of debts has been a difficulty in the past.
It considered variDus propDsals for formalising such a means test. It found majDr objections to all of them.
The best it could suggest was possibly an informal income test without sanctions. That is certainly not the view of the Government. The Jamison committee looked at it and discovered, therefore, that not only did most hospital administrators oppose it, not only did it create enormous inefficiencies in relation to debts, but also it recognised, of course, that with sickness there are a

whole lot of after costs besides simply the medical bills. Therefore the Jamison committee opposed the kind of rigorous means test which this Government is trying to impose on the States.
Of course, if the Government is successful it will create in the hospital sector a two-tier system. We will have the public sector primarily catering for the poor, the disadvantaged, and also, of course, for the high cost technology activities. All the straight forward, high profit surgery will be channelled into the private sector, which, of course, has received increased subsidies for those very types of surgical activities which the Jamison committee pointed out were one of the major cost problems in this society-the excess elective surgery in Australian society. Yet, this Government, supposedly worried about costs, provides a specific subsidy to encourage that activity in the private hospitals. All of the double talk of the Minister cannot cover that up. Indeed, on this issue of the means test we have really had the most extraordinary double talk from the Minister. During the election campaign, when of course, it might have worried the voters if they were told that in six months time the Government was going to endeavour to impose on the public hospitals a means test, the Minister was very strong on this point. He stated:
. . . there was absolutely no truth in the statement that the Government was planning to restrict patients' free access tD public hospitals by reimpDsing a means test fDr hDspital care.
With the need to win the election only six months ago the electors were assured that no means test would be imposed. Six months later the Government is going all out to compel the States to impose a means test. But when questioned on this the Minister said:
A decisiDn as to whether a means test will be impDsed for access to public hospitals in entirely a matter for the States concerned.
That does not have anything to do with the Minister. That is no explanation whatsoever. If one had read the Minister's statement of a fortnight ago, one would see that it clearly implied that unless the States imposed a means test they would have financial sanctions imposed upon them. The Minister deliberately set out-whatever he said yesterday-to compel the States to impose a means test. Let me just show how this is to be done. First of all, each of the States has had a very significant cutback in funds. I ask the permission of the Minister to incorporate a table in Hansard to try to suggest some of these fund cuts that have been made.

Hospital Funding

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2305

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-ls leave granted?
Mr MacKellar-It is wrong, but leave is granted.
Dr BLEWETT-In order to encourage a proper debate in this country I would be very

happy for the Minister to come forward and provide us with a correct table.
Leave granted. The table read as jollows-

SUMMARY OF ESTIMATED HOSPITAL GRANTS TO STATES UNDER NEW HOSPITAL ARRANGEMENTS

Table

2

4

6

7

9

1980-81 est. Com.
exp.for Hospital CHCand and School
dental

New revenue raising capacity

proposed by Commonwealth.

. with by source

add 10%

for

Bed

Outpatients

1981-82 charges

Inc. in and com-

(full up to $80/ insured pensation

year) $115 p.d. patients charges

Total revenue
raised

Com. clawback
(60%)

Com. clawback as
% oforig. Total Com. grant Com. (Table 7 payments as%of 1981-82 table 2)

NSW Vic. Qld. SA WA Tas. NT ACT

$m

$m

$m

$m

$m

$m

$m

$m

%

510

561

73

20

35

128

77

484

14

339

373

48

30

20

98

59

314

16

199

219

10

58

39

107

64(48)t 155(181)t 29 (22)t

133

146

16

25

4

45

27

119

18

158

174

12

13

13

38

23

151

13

46

51

3

14

3

20

12

39

23

25

28

1

7

3

11

7

21

25

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

-n.a.

n.a.

n,a.

n.a.

-t

Could be more if the fees raised (Table 6) are greater than estimates. Effect of Queensland adjustment 12 May 1981.

Mr MacKellar-What is 155 plus 16?
Dr BLEWETT-I will explain each detail in a moment. We then can have a debate about the accuracy of this table and about the statements which are being made by various State Ministers. The Health Ministers have stated:
We believe the Commonwealth financial decisions are arbitrary and dangerously unfair to the people of Australia.
Mr Borthwick, the Liberal Minister for Health in Victoria, says that the figures are demonstrably wrong. If one looks at them what the Commonwealth has tried to do is to impose a financial sanction in order to make the States charge full public hospital charges on all people except the very narrowly defined poor. The Commonwealth clawback from each of the States would be: For New South Wales $77m; Victoria $59m; Queensland $64m, until yesterday; South Australia $27m; Western Australia $23m; Tasmania $12m; and the Northern Territory $7m. Let me show how significant that sanction is. It represents a percentage cut. In each case this is quite high in order to persuade the States to do what the Commonwealth Government wants them to do. For New South Wales that cut is about 14 per cent of what the State would otherwise have got; for Victoria it is a cut of 16 per cent; for Queensland, until yesterday, it was a cut of 29 per cent, but because of the special back door arrangement that appears to have been reduced to 22 per cent; for South Australia it is 18 per cent;

for Western Australia 13 per cent; for Tasmania 23 per cent-almost a quarter-and for the Northern Territory 25 per cent. If we take just the States and leave out the Northern Territory, it appears to me that Tasmania, since the back door deal with the Premier of Queensland, is the most seriously disadvantaged State. Of course, the Queensland decision means that if those figures had any logic at all, they have now been undermined. We want to know on what basis those calculations were made. We want to know what is the logic behind them. We want to ask the Minister whether there is any logic across the board now that one State has received this special grant.
Finally, let me say that last week the Minister pilloried the position of the Labor Party in crude and dishonest terms. We accept the need to cover the costs in this country, but we say that the costs should be covered by an income related payment so that every Australian contributes to health care according to his means and takes from health care according to his needs.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (3.39)-The Government rejects the Opposition's politically motivated claims that the new funding arrangements for State health services will adversely affect State and personal

2306 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Hospital Funding

finances or will lead to a decline in hospital stanto have escaped the attention of the honourable

dards. I believe, the Government believes, that gentleman opposite. I was pleased to see that even

the Government's position on future funding the Queensland Minister for Health agreed with

levels is a fair and reasonable one. It could, in this position. He said recently:

fact-the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) wlW led for the Opposition has not acknowledged this-lead to the States having ad-

It is recognised that some people abuse the present free public hospital system. Therefore, the individual who uses the free outpatients or the free hospital system, who can afford to

ditional resources available to them next year bepay, needs to examine his own conscience on this matter.

cause of the cushioning factor which has been built into the arrangements over this transitional period. The Government's position will, we believe, lead also to increased efficiency in costly institutions, such as public hospitals.

The Queensland Minister for Health, who has very recently made something of a feature of the Queensland free hospital system, in line with his Premier, has publicly stated that a person who can afford to pay and does not pay, in his words,

I notice that the honourable gentleman did not 'needs to examine his own conscience on this mat-

spend any time at all on the efficiency of public ter'. The Government also firmly believes that

hospitals-the most expensive component of the there should be a number of inbuilt checks and

health care delivery system. He did not attach any balances in the health care delivery system to

weight to the question of increasing the efficiency minimise unnecessary use and abuse of the sys-

of the administration of public hospitals. I am sure tem. This is because over-use and abuse of the

that this is something quite foreign to persons of a health care delivery system unnecessarily increase

big spending nature, such as those exemplified by the cost of financing that system for the com-

members of the Opposition. It is typical of the apmunity. These beliefs are fundamental to the

proach taken by a socialist Labor government. It Government's health policy. Socialised systems

is typical that the questions of cost, administrative for the provision of health care have been allowed

leanness and administrative efficiency are comto continue without those necessary checks and

pletely left aside. Without in any way jeopardising balances. They have resulted in a continuing in-

the level of care now available in public hospitals, crease in the utilisation of services and the drain

the arrangements we will put in place will be an on taxpayers' funds.

advantage to all taxpayers because they take into account the necessity for administrative efficiency. The Opposition's track record demonstrates beyond any doubt whatsoever that it is not concerned about efficiency or ensuring that taxpayers are protected by government action and that we receive the greatest value possible for each dollar spent on health care.
As I have said on many occasions in this Hous~

The new funding arrangements for State health services embody the principles that I have outlined. We will continue to ensure that special arrangements operate to protect those in genuine need. The honourable member for Bonython said that the Commonwealth has abdicated its responsibilities in the public health area, particularly in relation to hospitals. That is simply not true. What the Government has done is to ensure that

and outside, the fundamental goal of the Governthose in genuine need are protected by allowing

ment in the health area is that all Australians them free access to public hospitals. We require

should have proper access to high quality health the States to provide free access for eligible pen-

care at a cost that the individual and the comsioners and their dependents plus those who are

munity can afford. I remind the House that health defined by the Commonwealth as disadvantaged.

care delivery is a very expensive proposition. All The honourable member for Bonython said that

developed nations are finding the containment of disadvantaged people are narrowly defined. The

health costs one of the most difficult aspects of arrangements will protect about three million

their general administration. As part of the conpeople in this country. Over 20 per cent of the

tainment of costs the Government believes that population will be protected. How that category

welfare assistance in the form of so-called free can be put forward as being narrowly defined I

public hospitals should be made available only to cannot conceive. We believe that all other people

those in genuine need, those people whom the should be required to contribute towards the high

honourable member for Bonython has said are cost of public hospital accommodation and treat-

defined narrowly by the Commonwealth Government. In calculating the level of funds that should

ment. I will say more about that in a moment. The be provided to the States next financial year for

Government believes equally that those who cantheir health services, we have subtracted from the

not be viewed as needy should contribute towards funds they would otherwise have received a

the cost of the health services available to them. reasonable share of the additional revenue they

That aspect of the Government's attitude seems could be expected to receive if those people not in

Hospital Funding

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2307

genuine need were required to contribute towards the cost of their accommodation and treatment and if more realistic bed day charges were introduced.
In view of the misinformation that has been put about in relation to the Commonwealth estimates of the revenue raising capacity of the States in the public hospitals area, I will spell out this afternoon the manner in which the level of funds for State health services in 1981-82 was calculated. As I advised the House last month, in calculating these grants the base figure adopted was the amount to be provided to the States and the Northern Territory for public hospitals, the general community health program and the school dental scheme, plus an amount to maintain the real worth of the year's figure. I emphasise that the base figure for each State is the same real level of funds it is to receive this financial year for the three health programs to which I have just referred. From this base figure we have subtracted only 60 per cent of each State's assessed capacity to increase its revenue through the public hospital system if, amongst other things, the existing bed day charges of $50 and $75 for shared ward and private room accommodation respectively were increased to $80 and $110 and an out-patient charge of $15 per service was applied. The remaining 40 per cent is free to the States. It is additional revenue which will be available to the States to spend in whatever area they wish.
In calculating the potential revenues for each State's public hospital system, the Commonwealth has assumed that only half of public hospital patients will be paying patients. That is a reasonable assumption given that the other measures announced to the House last month will see a much larger percentage of the population taking out health insurance. Obviously, in those States in which close to 50 per cent of patients pay for their beds at the present time, more than half will pay when the new arrangements come into effect. We have also assumed that charges will be made for only one-third of existing out-patient services. Again, this is a very reasonable, if not a conservative, assumption. We have assumed that people covered by third party and workers compensation will be charged at the full average cost which, again, is fair.
I repeat that the Government believes that the assumed level of charges and the other assumptions involved in calculating each State's revenue raising capacity are fair and reasonable. Hospital bed day charges at $80 a day are especially reasonable when we remember that the figure is equal to the amount one would have to pay in a good hotel these days. Of course the hotel charge would not

include three meals and expensive attendant care which is provided in a hospital. An out-patient charge of $15 per service is also fair and reasonable when we remember that the charge for a standard consultation with a general practitioner is $11.80 in New South Wales and that outpatients receive pharmaceutical items free of charge whereas a person who receives a prescription from a private doctor has to pay at least an additional $2.75.
As a number of honourable members will know, the States have questioned the Commonwealth's assumptions stating that they are unrealistic. The honourable member for Bonython has drawn attention to this in his statement to the House today. Only experience will prove whether the claims of the States or the Commonwealth are correct. The Government has now decided that an assessment should be made towards the end of the next financial year of each State's capacity to increase revenue with adjustments being made to the level of funds provided if that is considered appropriate. Again, I believe that this is a fair and reasonable approach to a problem caused by the States' saying on the one hand that they do not believe that the assumptions the Commonwealth has made are correct and on the other hand the Commonwealth's saying that it believes that they are correct provided they are based on the figures provided by the States. There they are based on the figures provided by the States. There is only one way in which the matter can be realistically sorted out and that is to look at the actual results of the implementation of the policy. If the estimates are grossly wrong and adjustments are necessary, the Commonwealth stands ready to make those adjustments.
Concern has also been expressed by Queensland about the loss of funds it would have sustained in 1981-82 under the Commonwealth's original proposition. rt was argued that Queensland is a special case as it is the only State with a free public hospital system. In considering the Queensland Government's arguments the Commonwealth was particularly mindful of the view presented by the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals that any changes to the public hospital system should be gradual and that sudden changes could be disruptive. The Jamison report stated:
. . . sharp, sweeping changes can be disruptive and impractical . . . much can be gained from continued small measures, rather than from sweeping structural change.
The Government also took into account the fact that only about 40 per cent of the Queensland population has hospital insurance, while the

2308 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Hospital Funding

national figure is about 55 per cent. It also took into account the fact that a much smaller percentage of patients in Queensland's public hospitals are paying patients, whereas in States, such as Victoria and New South Wales, well over 40 per cent of patients are already paying patients. Therefore, in the case of Queensland I think it is questionable whether our assumption that 50 per cent of public hospitals patients would be paying patients, is reasonable. In other words, we have looked at the situation in Queensland and we have made an adjustment for it. These were the arguments that were put to the Commonwealth and I believe it is only proper that the Government should review its position in the light of them.
I must say that I find it difficult to understand a situation in which if one does not react to any proposition, one is regarded as stubborn, but if one does react, one is regarded as weak. It seems that a Minister or a government with the capacity to review realistically propositions put by States or individuals and make judgments is in a no win situation either from the point of view of the Opposition or the media. But the Government is prepared and has been prepared, and I as a Minister have been prepared, to look at the situations which have been put to 1I).e by State Ministers. As has already been announced, the Government has made its statement clear in relation to the individual circumstances. As honourable members will be aware, the Commonwealth has agreed to introduce, for one year only, a cushioning factor in the level of funds to be provided to Queensland in 1981-82 by providing an aditional $16m to that State.
I remind the House that the Government has decided that the Grants Commission should, as a matter of urgency, be asked to look at relativities among States in order to remove inequities and to provide incentives for States to correct inefficiencies. The Government, therefore, recognises that there could be inequities in relation to the allocation of funds between States in the health area and that action may be needed to correct this. If necessary, that action will be taken, and I have asked the State Health Ministers to make submissions on possible terms of reference to the Grants Commission as soon as possible. Again, I think that this demonstrates a reasonable approach to a difficult problem.
We have heard much today and over the past few days of the need to provide additional funds to the states for their public hospitals. Regrettably we have heard very little about the need to operate efficient public hospital systems and the considerable waste and inefficiency in those systems highlighted by the Jamison inquiry. For too long

States have been more concerned about having the Commonwealth underwrite their inefficient public hospital systems instead of taking appropriate action to ensure that their public hospitals operate efficiently. The new funding arrangements under the Government's new health policy are designed to promote efficiency by requiring the States to take up their full constitutional responsibility for the provision of health services. This will ensure that taxpayers get the greatest value possible for each health care dollar spent in maintaining the high quality health care system we all enjoy, and it is a high quality health care system. I am sure that all taxpayers will welcome this and will expect the States to take up this challenge.
We have also heard much today about how the Government's new health policy will adversely affect the community. Let me remind the House that under our policy about three million people-those in genuine need~wi11 be entitled to free public hospital and medical services. Much has been made of the fact that all other people will be required to pay for the health services they receive or take out health insurance. Let me again say that exponents of this view fail to acknowledge that those who are not in genuine need will be required only to contribute towards the health services they receive. They will not be required to meet the full cost of those services, a cost that in .many cases is well in excess of the charge actually levied. The actual cost of a public hospital bed, for example, is now close to $200 a day because considerable subsidisation is provided by the Government to bring the cost of health services within the reach of the community and to ensure that all people have access to health insurance at that reasonable cost.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (3.54)-A number of cold, hard facts have been covered up by a lot of the hot air that is being generated in statements from the Government side of the House regarding the most recent health mess. The statements just made by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) have done nothing to alleviate this mess. The ill logic in the statement that the States have not been running their hospital schemes efficiently and therefore the Federal Government will withdraw entirely not only from funding but also from any position in which it could inject some efficiency into the hospitals, is unbelievable. We now see that the Government believes that by standing back the hospitals will magically become efficient. The Minister has also indulged in very selective quoting. He quoted from the report of the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals to

Hospital Funding

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2309

back his very spurious arguments. But, in fact, the enterprise philosophy, has worked consistently to

Jamison report stated that the Queensland hospiput health insurance out of the reach of middle

tal scheme is the most efficient scheme and has the and lower income earners. It has succeeded.

most efficient administration in Australia. Yet it is There are hundreds and thousands of people who

this very scheme which the Government is moving now cannot afford medical care or medical health

to dismantle.

insurance. People in Queensland have been forced

The Minister also quoted the Queensland State Health Minister, Mr Brian Austin, again very selectively. The Minister quoted Mr Austin as saying, in the Telegraph of Wednesday, 22 April:
. . . the individual who uses the free out-patients or the free hospital system, who can afford to pay, needs to examine his own conscience on this matter.

into out-patient departments or they have had to stay home and go without the treatment they need. In recent months the out-patient departments in hospitals have been overflowing. With this scenario as a background, this Government now moves to withdraw funding not only from Queensland but also [rom all the States, as posi-

He completely neglected to quote further. Mr Austin went on to say:

tive proof of its lack of interest in any health insurance scheme.

It has been stated by the Commonwealth that the states will

It is particularly ironic that the Government's

be forced to means test at public hospitals. This statement two week-old health policy, suffering symptoms

would indicate that the Commonwealth has absolutely no idea of what's involved in the running and operation of a public hospital system.
I find it entirely objectionable that different little facts are taken out of context to try to pull the wool over the eyes of the Australian public. Many facts have been hidden. I would like to speak on behalf of ordinary Australians who have been affected by this Government's complete neglect of a decent health insurance system. The Australian Labor Party is the only party which is concerned with health costs and which supports a health insurance scheme which meets the needs of ordinary Australians. The Labor members of this House are the only members who support the retention of Queensland's free hospital scheme, which the Jamison report-the report on which this Government is basing its action-describes as the most efficient system in Australia.

of terminal prevarication, should come unstuck at the very time that the Government has never been more unhealthy. This indecisive, disintegrating Government, showing symptoms of its last dying days in office, is thrashing about looking desperately for some direction for its policies. The fact that Cabinet fidgeted and fussed over hospital funding arrangements for four months indicates its divisiveness and the lack of leadership at the helm. These indications that Government policy was drifting aimlessly were confirmed by the extraordinary events of the past two weeks and particularly the events of yesterday. It is typical of the inefficiency continually displayed in the Government's administration of health services. As my colleague the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) pointed out, the philosophy linking the Government's health policy and its hospital arrangements is that the sick pay. The

I would like to point out these further facts: user pays principle does not apply; the sick pay.

Prior to the introduction of Medibank, We all know which economic group in society is

Queensland's free hospital system was on its last the most prone to sickness and hospitalisation: it is

legs; it was on the point of collapse and ?ould not those who are too poor to afford stable and

have gone on. I speak from close expenence, my nourishing diets and those who cannot afford reg-

father having been the shadow Minister for ular medical check-ups which enable diagnosis

Health in the Queensland Parliament at the time. and treatment of illness in its early stages.

When Medibank was introduced the Government injected the necessary funds into the scheme and it, as honourable members have heard, has become the most efficient in Australia. In its original form Medibank was also very acceptable to the electorate. In my electorate of Lilley doctors were afraid before the introduction of Medibank that everything would fall into shambles. After its introduction, those doctors actually supported Medibank because it was much more efficient and it gave proper health treatment to everyone without the doctors having long lists of bad debts.

The Queensland Minister for Health said recently that, if the Federal Government had its way, Albert Schweitzer's inscription outside his African jungle hospital would have read: 'Here, in whatever hour you come, you will find the light and help of human kindness, if you have got enough to pay'. The words of the Federal Minister for Health two weeks ago were: 'If you are willing to pay for yourselves'. This is the Government's motto and its approach to the provision of health services to the public. It is the old survival of the fittest and wealthiest principle, a social Darwinist

This Government, instead of being honest and approach to health. The poor pay through the

dropping the scheme, as contrary to its private teeth.

2310 REPRESENTATrVES 13 May 1981

Hospital Funding

Yesterday marked the anniversary of Florence Nightingale's birthday. I am sure she must be turning in her grave. In the health field this Government has replaced the sorts of principles that Florence Nightingale represented with the cold hard doctrines of Ayn Rand. This Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), who beats the drum of co-operative federalism and who, until a couple of weeks ago, boasted that Federal-State relations had never been better, did not even have the nerve to consult the States on the new Commonwealth provisions for health services. Right up until the Minister's statement was made in this House, State Health Ministers were guessing about the form in which the Federal Government's assistance would be provided, whether it would be by absorption in general revenue grants or by block grants as recommended in the Jamison report.
The Prime Minister and his Cabinet cronies ride roughshod over the States in the same fashion as they steamroll Ministers who do not completely toe the Fraser line, in the same way that they contemptuously ignore the view of their own increasingly restless and rebellious Government backbench and in the very same way that they handle the business of disseminating information about the process of Government policy-making by selective leaking to the media. We are told that the devolution of responsibility and blame for the country's system of health will supposedly grant greater freedom to the States because hospital assistance will now be absorbed in the category of general revenue grants and the States will have greater flexibility and discretion in the distribution of federal money. What they do not say is that there will be substantially less federal money to go around. Besides that, anything that offers the Government of Mr Bjelke-Pctersen greater dictatorial power, greater manoeuvrability and greater leverage, must raise fears even in the stoutest hearts. I have little sympathy for the predicament of the Queensland Government in this matter. After all, it continually supports the Prime Minister's now very publicised manic obsession to withdraw government services, devolve powers to the States and to leave people generally to fend for themselves. Now that the Federal Government extends that principle to the Queensland Government so that it must fend for itself, it is screaming blue murder. For many years, Queensland had to pay a financial penalty to a Federal Liberal Party Government for providing this service. Two weeks ago, the Minister, while calling for deinstitutionalisation with one
breath, introduced, with the next breath, measures designed to kill individual associations

and to fortify institutionalisation. I refer to the lumping together of a number of services such as the school dental scheme.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER CMr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HODGES (Petrie) (4.6)-This is the second week in a row that the Opposition's spokesman on health (Dr Blewett) has raised a matter of public importance which relates to health. This, coupled with questions that have been asked, has, quite frankly, allowed for an almost ad nauseam debate. One wonders just what impression he is making. It is my view he is making no impression at all. As a matter of fact, it is my view that the present Opposition is sick and needs medical attention and, indeed, hospitalisation. It is the Australian Press at the moment which plays the role of the opposition to this Government. It is about time that this Opposition got off its backside and started to do something about providing a reasonable Opposition to this Government. It is the Press, not the Opposition, that is the real opposition to this Government.
The honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) spoke about the ordinary people of this nation. I remind her that I also represent ordinary people in my electorate, as, indeed, do all honourable members of this House. She talks in terms of providing everything free. I emphasise that 'free' is in inverted commas. Nothing is free in this nation; everything has to be paid for. She has spoken about the poor people, the pensioners and the disadvantaged. I would like her to come with me on some occasions to let her see how those people attend bingo games, use the Totalisator Agency Board and go to hotels.
Mr John Brown-Turn it up; you don't believe
that.
MI' HODGES-The honourable member for Parramatta can come with me to my electorate and I will go with him to his. It amazes me that honourable members on the other side of the House claim that these people do not have any money to provide the priority items in life such as clothing, food and health but they do have enough money for other matters. It is true. There are many such people in my electorate. All honourable members have them in their electorates. I am concerned about those people. But I am also concerned to see that there is some self-help involved in their Jives.
The honourable member for Bonython mentioned the Government's non-negotiable position at the Commonwealth-State Health Ministers conference which was held last Friday. He

Hospital Funding

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2311

indicated that proposals discussed at that conference were changed this week. This is utter nonsense. The Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) has not, in any way, departed from the basic policy that was announced by the Government in this House two weeks ago. Of course the States are unhappy. I have never known the States, since Federation, to be happy with any decision made by a government in relation to funding. Let us consider the $16m .that has been given to Queensland. Queensland does have a special position. At the present time, in Queensland, 20 per cent of the total number of beds in hospitals arepaid beds. Under the formula of the present health arrangements, that figure would be increased to 50 per cent. If this occurred in the first year of the new funding arrangements, it would create certain difficulties for that State. That is an unrealistic position that had to be rectified; hence, of course, the extra assistance that has been given to Queensland.

member for Bonython when he talked about the detrimental impact on personal finances. Indeed, the situation is to the contrary. In actual fact the Government's policy is beneficial to the individual.
The Labor Party supports open-ended arrangements. We saw so many of them in the three years of the Whitlam Government. We have seen repeated statements from the honourable member for Bonython and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden)-they are well documented-that they want to see a return to Medibank. The honourable member for Bonython nods approval. That sort of statement should be promulgated as widely and as strongly as possible throughout the nation because the people have not forgotten the three years between 1972 and 1975 when this policy was in operation. That policy was disastrous then and it will be disastrous if Labor ever comes to power and institutes it.

Let us have a look at the wording of the matter of public importance which we are now debating. It states:
The detrimental impact on State and personal finances--
The Government, this financial year, will collect about $34.5 billion. Whether this is collected by way of personal income tax, or by way of indirect taxes such as excise, sales or company tax, it is the duty of this Government to ensure that those collected dollars are spent efficiently. It is not the Government's money; it is the people's money. The money does not belong to Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser. The money does not belong to Mr Howard. The money belongs to the people. (Quorum formed). It is obvious that the Opposition does not like what it hears and therefore it is taking up some of my time. The States, under Fraser federalism, have the capacity to raise their own funds. They can impose their own taxes and their own charges if they want to. We have seen over the years a certain erosion of that capacity to raise funds. It is my view that if they want more money for hospitals they have the capacity to raise that money and spend it on those hospitals or set their own priorities.
The Labor Opposition stands for bigger government and bigger taxation. In actual fact it is saying that it wants this Government to increase taxes so that there will be more money in the tax pool to payout to the States for whatever purpose. It is my view and the view of this Government that, as far as possible, the earnings of individuals should be left to those individuals to spend and that, as far as possible, governments should keep their hands out of the pockets of individuals. This is contrary to the statement made by the honourable

The cost incurred by governments on behalf of the people in the health field and in other fields must be identifiable. People must be responsible for their own affairs. All accounts, whether they be hospital accounts, accounts for diagnostic services or whatever, should show clearly what costs are involved. Indeed, even if the accounts are not actually paid by the individual because that individual falls into the disadvantaged category-he may be a pensioner or whatever-the costs ought to be set out clearly so that the individual has some idea of what those costs are. Indeed, those persons within our institutions who order these services also ought to be aware of the nature of the costs.
We have seen the general thrust of the health policies that the Commonwealth introduced a few weeks ago supported by most of the States. Queensland, Victoria, Western Australia and South Australia support the general thrust of the policy. They are unhappy with the quantity of money they have received but they support the actual policy involved. The assessment of the hospital payments that has been the subject of some debate over the last three or four days has been made on the data supplied by the States themselves. It has not been based on Commonwealth figures; it has been based on information that has been provided by the States. Of course, as the Minister for Health has stated in the House on more than one occasion, the Commonwealth Grants Commission will look at the situation in relation to the relativities between States and assess whether any State ought to be better treated in the future.

2312 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Suspension ofStanding Orders

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek your indulgence to accept a correction made by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) to a minor arithmetical error in column 8 of the table incorporated in Hansard. The Queensland number should read 171, not 181. The changes are so constant that it is difficult to keep up with them.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The discussion is concluded.
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS MrMORRIS (Shortland) (4.15)-1 move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent:
1. The Minister for Transport making a full statement to the Parliament on the Government's decision to convert Trans-Australia Airlines into a public company detailing: (a) what precise disadvantages and/or advantages, if any, will accrue to air travellers; (b) what costs will be incurred in converting TAA into a public company and who will bear the costs; (c) why the Minister has abandoned the Australian National Airlines Commission Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980 which he stated on 18 September 1980 would ensure 'that TAA operates on a similar basis to a privately owned airline '; (d) why an unnamed private firm of consultants is to examine the. practicalities of selling shares in TAA in preference to a public committee of inquiry, such as the Holcroft committee;
Mr Charles Jones-Or a parliamentary committee.
Mr MORRIS-Or a parliamentary committee. The motion continues:
(e) the principal features of the memorandum of association and the articles of association of the proposed company;
(f) whether the Government now proposes to require Ansett Airlines to be formed into a public company separate and distinct from Ansett Transport Industries Ltd, and
(g) why the Government has repudiated its firm election promises in several statements that TAA would never be sold; and
2. The honourable member for Shortland being granted equal time to respond.
This is a matter and an issue of major national significance.
Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
That the honourable member be not further heard.

Mr Morris-The Government's decision to sell Trans-Australia Airlines amounts to a theft of public assets.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Shortland will resume his seat.

Mr Morris-It is a sell-out of public assets for which the Government has no mandate.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Shortland will resume his seat.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

64

Noes

45

Majority

19

AYES
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W.P. Connolly, D. M. Cowao,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD.
Hicks,N. J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F.
Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A.
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M.
McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Peacock, A. S.
Porter,J. R. Robinson, Ian
Rocher,A. C. Ruddock,P.M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street,A.A.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.I. White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert
Campbell,G. Cass, M.H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T.
Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M. l.
Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V.

NOES

Innes, U.E. Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D.

9,lIspension ofStanding Orders

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2313

NOES

Fry,K,L Hawke, R, J, L
Holding, A. e Howe, B. L Humphreys, B. e Hurford, e J.

(Teller)

Scott, J. L
Uren, T. West,S,].
Willis,R. Young, M. J.

PAIRS

Anthony, J. D. Drummond, P. H.

Wallis,LG. Cross, M. D.

Question so Tesolved in the affirmative.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! Is there a seconder to the motion?

Mr CHARLES JONES (Newcastle) (4.25)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I second the motion as moved by the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris). The answer of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) in reply to a Dorothy Dix question---

Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

Mr Charles Jones-Is a clear indication of how this Government--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!

Mr Charles Jones-Is selling out the assets of this country to their powerful, rich--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!

Mr Charles Jones-The affairs of the Liberal Country Party--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Newcastle will resume his seat. The House will come to order. The question is that the honourable member for Newcastle be
not further heard.

Question put.

The House divided,

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

63

Noes

45

Majority

18

Baume,M.E. Birney t R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown, N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A.
Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen
Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P.
Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B.

AYES

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R, MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E, Porter, J. R. Robinson. Ian

AYES
Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.e Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris,G.McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Rocher, A, C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. l. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C \V. Viner, R. J. White, P. N. D. WiL<;.on. I. R. C

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cunningham, B. T, Darling, E. E. Dawkins, j. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Innes, lJ. E.
Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Lcs (Teller) Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J. C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F.
Morrison, W. I" Mountford, 1. O.
Scholes, G. O. D. Scott, l. L. Urcn, T. West,S.l. Willis,R. Young, M. J.

PAIRS

Anthony, J. D. Drummond, P. H.

WaH is, L.G. Cross, M. D.

Question so resolved in the affirmative,

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-The question now is that so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Minister for Transport making a full statement to the Parliament on a number of matters enumerated by the honourable member for Shortland in his motion at length, I call the honourable member for Corio,

Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (4.32) - The sellout of an instrumentality in this way is a disgrace to the Parliament.

Motion (by Mr Fife) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided,

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr p, C. Millar)

Ayes

61

Noes

45

Majority

16

2314 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Suspension ofStanding Orders

AYES
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. B01irchier, 1. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A,"
Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. JuU,D.F.
Katter, R. C. L1oyd,B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M J. R. MacKenzie,A.J. McLean, R. M. McVeigb,D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E.
Porter, J. R.
Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury1M. E. Shack, P.D. Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair, L McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, O. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (TeUer} Hurford, C. J.

Innes,U.B. Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, I.es (TeUer} Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kent,L
Kerin,J.e,
Klugman, R. E.
McMahon, Les
Mildrcn, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F, Morrison, W. L Mountford, J. O. Scholes, O. O. D. Scott,I. L. Uren,T. West,S.J. WilIis,R.
Young, M. J.

PAIRS

Anthony, J. D. Drummond, P. H. Giles, G. O'H.

Wallis,L.G. Cross, M. D. McLeay, I.eo

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The question now is that the motion to suspend Standing Orders be agreed to.

Question resolved in the negative.

Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. To save the time of the House we have not forced the vote to a division. We have indicated our support for the motion. But the situation is that the Minister for Transport could not

explain to his own back benchers last night the reasons for the Government's action.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Shortland--
Mr Morris-He could not even explain it to them. He had to have officers do that; so the odds are that he could not explain it to the Parliament anyway.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Shortland will resume his seat.
COMPANIES BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 12 May, on motion by MrMoore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Upon which Mr John Brown had moved by way of amendment:
That all words after "That" be omitted with a view to substituting the following words: "whilst not opposing the Bill, the House:
(I) expresses its concern-
(a) at the Government's abdication of its responsibility to make national laws for companies and securities pursuant to the Commonwealth's own constitutional powers, and in accordance with the recommendations of the Senate Select Committee on Securities and Exchange in 1974 (the Rae Report);
(b) at the lack of effective accountability of the National Companies and Securities Commission to either the Government or Parliament of the Commonwealth, or to any other single elected Government or Parliament, and
(c) that despite the inordinate delay in introducing the legislation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth has not been given an opportunity elIectively to scrutinise this bill and associated bills and will not be able effectively to determine company law in the future under the Co-operative Companies and Securities Scheme;
(2) calls upon the Government in the event of the breakdown for any reason of the scheme, of which the Bill is a part, immediately to proceed to the introduction of Commonwealth legislation for the national regulation of companies;
(3) notes that this Bill places uniformity before reform in deference to powerful vested interest groups and represents a retreat to the lowest common denominator standard of company law;
(4) calls upon the Government to expedite the establishment of an Accounting Standards Review Board, and
(5) calls upon the Government immediately to pursue a fundamental reform of company law, including:
(a) the abolition of the category of "exempt proprietary company" and the privileges associated with it;
(b) the provision of statutory directions and powers to the National Companies and Securities Commission and the courts to look behind the corporate entity in appropriate circumstances, to ascertain those who control it or hold shares in it, and, having regard to the purpose of the creation of the corporate entity and the

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2315

manner of its control, to affix personal liability and adjudicate personal rights where it is just and equitable to do so;
(c) the extension of the powers of inspection of the National Companies and Securities Commission to ensure the fullest reasonable access of the Commission to books;
(d) the amendment of any provision which enables questionable practices to be hidden by means of legal professional privilege;
(e) the requirement for all companies to raise and maintain a prescribed minimum nominal and paid up capital;
(f) rationalisation of the cumbersome provisions in respect of company names on the basis of single nationwide registration;
(g) a requirement that companies disclose all donations for political purposes;
(h) a requirement that dividends be paid only from the genuine profits of a company;
(i) full review of the provisions relating to fund raising and prospectuses to ensure maximum disclosure and to require independent valuation of assets exchanged for issued shares;
Ul reform of the provisions relating to companies financ-
ing dealings in their own shares, including the removal of the exemption given to financial assistance to salaried directors;
(k) provision for a higher required standard of competence, care and diligence for directors and officers of companies;
(1) a requirement that more frequent accounts be lodged by companies listed on the Stock Exchanges;
(m) in order to protect creditors and to assist the prevention of tax avoidance, the imposition of stringent disclosure requirements upon companies acting as trustees of trading trusts, in relation to their capacity as trustees and the accounts of the relevant. trusts, and the imposition of heavy penalties for non-compliance;
(n) full disclosure to the public of the beneficial ownership of all shares in companies;
(0) published accounts to include full details of each director's and officer's remuneration and right of inspection for employees and shareholders of director's service contracts;
(p) adequate remedies for oppressive conduct, including extension of the concept of oppression to single and anticipated acts unfairly prejudicial to a shareholder; and provision of further means such as a 'Shareholders' Tribunal' to protect the interests of minority shareholders, and
(q) complete reform of the winding up provisions, including greater protection for unsecured creditors, following a reference on insolvency to the Australian Law Reform Commission".
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Before the debate is resumed on this legislation, I remind the House that it has been agreed that a general debate be allowed covering the Companies Bill, the Companies (Fees) Bill, the Companies (Transitional Provisions) Bill, the Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill, the Crown Debts (Priority) Bill, the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Bill (No.2), the Companies (Acquisition of Shares--Fees) Amendment Bill, the Securities Industry Amendment Bill (No.2), the Securities Industry (Fees)

Amendment Bill, and the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Bill (No.2).

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.37) - I conclude briefly the comments which I began last night before the debate was adjourned. I was making observations on the speech by the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly). In the interests of time. I say briefly that it was more theoretical than practical, and maybe in the course of the Committee stage we will refer to the more practical aspects of the matter.

Question put;

That the words proposed to be omitted (Mf John Brown's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

61

Noes

46

Majority
AYES
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. llradfield. J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N.A. Bungey. M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowao,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D.M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fisher. P. S. Good luck. B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N. J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman. W. M. Howard, J. \V, Hunt, R. J. D.

15
Hyde,J.M. Jarmanl A. W. Jull.D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar,M.J.R. MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller) McLean, R. M. McVeigh,D. T. Macphee. I. M. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe. F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey. C. W. Viner,R,1. White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Armitage, J. L.
Beazley. K. C. Blewett, N, Bowen) Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G.
Cass.M.H. Charles. D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B.
Cunningham, B. T.

NOES

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H, A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J.
Kent, L. Kerin,J.C.
Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.

2316 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

NOES
Darling, E. E. Dawkins. J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Howe,B. L Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D.
Scott. J. L. Theophanous. A. C. Uren, T.
West,S. J,
WiIlis.R. Young. M. 1.

PAIRS

Anthony. J. D. Drummond, P. H.
Giles,G.'O-H.

Wallis,L.G. Cross,M.D.
McLeay,Leo

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

In Committee
Clauses J to 4-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 5 (Interpretation).
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (4.45)-- Clause 5 specifically refers to the interpretation of the Companies Bill. I wish to speak generally about interpretations and. specifically about one of those interpretations. In a Bill where complexity and detail have already passed well beyond any desirable limit, it should be recorded that there are at least six confusingly similar but technically distinct modes of referring to the corporate entities to which the Bill is in various ways applicable. The terms used are as follows: Company, body ~orporate, corporation, foreign company, recogmsed company and recognised foreign company. In addition, in certain parts of the Bill reference is made to companies which are intended versions of all of those six foregoing terms. It appears to me that the Government's ~uch. vaunted ~nifor~ity has done nothing to slmphfy compames legislation which is what it has allegedly intended to do.
Turning to one specific interpretation contained in the Bill, that is, the interpretation of an exempt proprietary company, I wish to make a few observations. We of the Opposition believe that exem~t propr~etary companies and the privileges associated with them should be abolished. My reason for saying that is that there is at present an elaborately defined category called 'exempt proprietary company'. Some of the peculiarities which these companies are allowed to use in the performance of their duties are firstly, that they need not appoint an auditor, and secondly, that they need not file a copy of their accounts along with their annual returns so long

as they either operate as an unlimited company or have the accounts audited. The underlying policy seems to be that companies which are genuinely private, being not directly or indirectly owned or controlled by a public company, should have to appoint an auditor, file accounts or risk unlimited liability but should not be afflicted with more than one of these alternatives. We think that this is muddled thinking. Why should a limited private company, which has gone to the trouble and expense to have an audit, be allowed to keep its accounts in secret to the detriment of creditors and credit rating agencies which perhaps could make good use of those accounts if they were listed? Conversely, why should unaudited accounts which may bc inadequate and misleading be the ones which have to be made public?
In England since 1967 and in other countries a simple formula has applied. The price of limited liability is financial disclosure. We find that this is one of the paramount weaknesses of the Companies Bill as introduced in this chamber. Credit rating agencies have derived significant benefit and private companies have been better induced to look after their finances when they have to disclose their accounts. I note that the report of the United Kingdom's committee of inquiry into small firms, the Bolton Committee, moved exactly as I suggested to eliminate limited private companies. There may be a case for exempting small private companies from disclosing certain individual items. For example, their turnover might be non-disclosable in order to protect them from takeover. The general notion that such private companies should have financial privacy based perhaps on the idea that individual proprietors do not want their employees, or dare I say the tax man, let alone anyone else, to know how rich they are is outmoded and unjustified in a society where pay scales in virtually all salaried employment are easily ascertainable.
In the interests of simpler company law, better creditor protection and better financial control in small companies, the status of exempt proprietary companies should be abolished and all limited companies compelled to prepare and file audited reports. I leave it at that. I hope that our views are clearly known to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) in this regard. I think that my colleague the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) may have some further pointed observations to make on the same clause.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (4.50)-1 wish to deal with the matter of exempt proprietary companies which was dealt with by the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown). In my view they ought to be abolished. I suppose one could

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2317

argue that there are some reasons for retaining the purposes set out in clauses 250 and 278 of the Bill, but sub-clauses (5) and (6) of clause 5 ought to be deleted. In May of last year I sent a telegram to the predecessor of the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs in the following terms:
Further to your answer to question number 5760 and in view of the overriding competence of the EEC in the company law area why have your department and the States failed to closely consider the Bill submitted to the UK. Parliament. Will you urgently raise this matter at the next Ministerial Council meeting so that adequate consideration may be given to the inclusion of appropriate amendments in the forthcoming Australian legislation.
I received a letter dated 1 July from the former Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs in the following terms:
I mentioned in my reply that the UK. Companies Act 1980 will be examined in the context of the draft Commonwealth Companies Bill and also for the purpose of any longer-term reform of the Australian companies legislation. You have now asked why the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs and the States have failed to closely consider the Bill submitted to the UK. Parliament and you have asked that I urgently raise this mattcr at the next Ministerial Council meeting.
There are a number of reasons why Tconsider such a course of action is unnecessary.
Firstly, officers of the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs have in fact been keeping a watching-brief--
I interpolate that it must have been done with blinkers on-
on the passage of this legislation through the UK. Parliament ever since the proposals were fIrst mooted .
Notwithstanding this time differential, the Companies Bill 1980 in fact contains a number of new provisions which are similar to corresponding reforms in the latest UK. reforms and I am advised that officers of thc Department of Business and Consumer Affairs will be giving close consideration to some of the provisions in the UK. Companies Act 1980 in the light of public submissions that have been received on the Companies Bill.
I would be delighted if the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) could explain to me where, in this package of Bills, there are provisions incorporating the United Kingdom legislation. He did not have to wait until 1980 to do so. In the Jenkins committee report of 1962 are recommendations dealing with exempt proprietary companies which were subsequently embodied in legislation. Paragraph 61 of that report states:
We appreciate the argument that the fIling of accounts may cause embarrassment or inconvenience to some exempt private companies though the fears which have been expressed to us on this score are, we believe, exaggerated (like the fears expressed to previous Company Law Committees about the effect of the publication of full accounts by public and, later, by non-exempt private companies). We think that in general such disadvantage as there may be should be accepted because disclosure is right in principal and necessary to protect those

who trade with and extend credit to limited companies. But some of the information now required by the Act (or to be required if our recommendations on accounts are accepted) is of much greater interest to shareholders and prospective shareholders than to creditors, and its omission from the copy of the accounts of small unquoted companies, required to be fIled with the Registrar and therefore open to public inspection, might perhaps avoid some of the embarrassment without seriously reducing the value to creditors of the filed accounts. Accordingly we would require all companies which are incorporated with the privilege of limited liability to fIle their accounts with the Registrar of Companies for the benefit of those who may have dealings with them. But we recommend in paragraph 352 below that directors' emoluments, and company turnover and rents should not be required to be disclosed in the fIled accounts of companies whose securities have been neither quoted nor offered to the public (this information should however be given in the accounts of such companies circulated to members and debenture holders).
Paragraph 62 states:
We would, on the other hand, exempt all unlimited companies from the requirement to fIle accounts: we can see no good reason why they should be treated differently, in this respect, from partnerships and individual traders who trade with unlimited liability.
Paragraph 63 states:
We recommend that:
(a) the distinction between the exempt and non-exempt private company should be ended and the present special privileges of the exempt private company, including the exemption from filing accounts with the Registrar of Companies, should be abolished . . .
(b) unlimited companies should be exempt from the reo quirement to file accounts.
There is no excuse whatsoever for the Ministerial Council not looking at this provision in the intervening period. In my view it is a sorry day when one witnesses in companies law legislation the perpetuation of something that has been abolished in the United Kingdom in the interests of both shareholders and creditors.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.55) -The amendments are not accepted for three reasons. Firstly, the Companies Act as a whole is agreed to unanimously by the Ministerial Council and has to be implemented in that sense. I said last night in reply to honourable members that there is no way that amendments to these Bills can be accepted because agreement was reached with all the States on the basis of co-operative federalism.
Mr John Brown-That doesn't make it right.
Mr MOORE-It does not make it right in terms of techniques, but it makes it right in terms of the agreement with the States, and that is what it is all about. We have learnt this in other areas. The honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) placed much credit on a statement which was made in, I think, 1963. The honourable member probably should be reminded that this provision is to be found in the Labor Government's

2318 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

companies Bill of 1974. If he did not learn then, how can he expect us to learn now? He mentioned also the question of exempt proprietary companies. I see no reasQn for subjecting proprietary companies that are owned by individuals and that are strictly within the personal domain of individuals to public scrutiny if matters are audited. The non-filing provision is strictly in accordance with the privacy of individuals. I cannot accept the proposition of the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) that turnover would protect people from a takeover. In a proprietary company a takeover is related purely to one or two shareholders.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (4.57)-1 wish to refer also to the matter of exempt proprietary companies which is dealt with in clause 5 of the Companies Bill. Page 5 of the Bill states:
'exempt proprietary company' means a proprietary company-
(a) no share in which is, by virtue of sub-sections (5) and (6) of this section, deemed to be owned by a public company; and
(b) no member of which is a public company;
In other words, all proprietary companies would be exempt if they were not wholly or partially owned by a public company. We need to turn to clauses 278 and 279 to see what advantages an exempt proprietary company has. I think the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) has already outlined those advantages. In other words, they need not appoint an auditor and need not file a copy of their accounts along with their annual returns as long as they either operate as an unlimited company or have their accounts audited. I believe that there should not be any provision for exempt proprietary companies. From the point of view of trading creditors, exempt proprietary companies are bad. Trading creditors, particularly those small firms which deal with companies, have no guarantee that the company is in a sound financial situation if they cannot see its accounts or if those accounts are not audited. In addition, I believe that employees of private companies should be able to view the finances of those companies in an audited return. I support the view that has been put forward by the Opposition that the exempt proprietary company area of clause 5 should be struck out of the Bill.
Clause agreed to. Clause 6 agreed to. Clause 7 (Subsidiaries, holding companies and related corporations). Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5.0)-In our overriding amendment we have a clause

which refers to clause 7 in the Companies Bill. That amendment states that we call upon the Government immediately to pursue a fundamental reform of the company law, including the provision of statutory powers to the courts to enable the lifting of the corporate veil in appropriate circumstances, including that whereby a holding and subsidiary company effectively operates as a unit and where a private company acts as a trustee for a trading trust. In backing up that amendment which we have moved I would like to make a few remarks about trading trusts. As I said, we believe that trading trusts, having small private companies as trustees, should be abolished, not left substantially unregulated with only a vague promise of future regulation, as has happened in the second draft of the Companies Bill. Trading trusts provide a classic instance of a tail, that is, tax avoidance by a private business, wagging a dog, that is, carrying on business activity with a proper legal structure.
Over the last 100 years or more-not that any of us would remember that; not even you, Mr Deputy Chairman-the Companies Act and the accompanying case laws have built up an elaborate set of rules to which business enterprises must adhere if they are to have such privileges as limited liability. Accounting rules, standards of skill, care and honesty for directors, personal liability of officers when a business is carried on fraudulently-these, along with many other legal protections for existing and potential shareholders, creditors and other interested parties are all based on the premise that the company in question owns and runs the business in its own right. If, instead, a small, grossly under-capitalised company is permitted to hold the business on trust, the value of these protections is, at best, doubtful and, at worst, negligible. In a manner which is wholly confusing to outsiders, the normal roles associated with the company's form are changed around. As an example, the recipients of surplus profits become trust beneficiaries instead of shareholders, although the trustee company itself is a shareholder. Management of the business is formally vested not in the directors but in the company itself in its capacity as trustee and so on. This is merely because tax planners saw that the company-trust combination might produce tax advantages for their clients.
There is no reason why Parliament should give in and allow many years of work in developing a sophisticated system of company law to be undermined. To allow only private individuals or properly established large-scale trust corporations to manage businesses on trust, as is the case in various parts of Canada, would both preserve the

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2319

effectiveness of company law and reduce the relation to this clause and that is that we would

range of tax fiddles available to private business. like the provision of statutory powers given to the

We are unsophisticated enough in the Opposition courts to enable the lifting of the corporate veil in

to believe that companies should be set up to enappropriate circumstances so that companies can

able business to be conducted properly, to enable be made accountable both to their creditors, their

the shareholders to be properly protected, to enshareholders and their employees.

able creditors who are dealing with a company to be properly protected also and not merely to have an opportunity to deceive people by having what is known as the corporate veil pulled across the eyes of those people who seek to do business with

Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (5.6)~1 take it that the procedure at this point is that we are dealing with trading trusts rather than going on to clause 267?

that company.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. Charles

The Opposition's proposal that the National J ones)~We are dealing with clause 7.

Companies and Securities Commission and the Mr JACOBI~Recent1y, if Press reports are an

courts be directed and empowered to look behind indication, there has been a considerable interest

the corporate entity, to ascertain those who conin the trust device to carryon conventional busi-

trol it or who hold shares in it, relates to the proness practices. By using this device the provisions

cess known in common law as lifting the corporof the Companies Act may be avoided, no matter

ate veil. Some people euphemistically refer to the how many beneficiaries of the trust there are.

corporate veil as the purdah used by capitalist There is no doubt as to why that device was

Muslims, but in this case we refer to it as that veil deliberately deleted from the legislation. We all

of secrecy which is placed across companies to know that. There has been a contentious decision

prevent proper scrutiny of that company and all of the English Court of Appeal that unit holders,

that it stands for.

as a unit trust, do not associate together for the

Mr Dobie~Is that your business theology now?

purpose of gain. That has been the generally accepted position. The Court of Appeal in reaching that decision reversed the decision of Jessell at

Mr JOHN BROWN~Yes. We believe that first instance. The trust device in question was a

this process of lifting the corporate veil is renmere subterfuge for the evasion of companies

dered necessary by the long established principle legislation; it still is. The trustees in reality were

that the company, as a legal entity separate from directors and the unit holders were really

its shareholders and director, is an artificial legal members or shareholders. The modern unit trust

personality capable of perpetual succession and vests the trust property in trustees but the prop-

capable of sueing and being sued. The liability of erty is managed by an independent management

the company to pay its debts extends to the assets company and not by the trustees. I think we ought

of the company, but the individual shareholder is to understand that. The management company,

not liable beyond the amount unpaid on his therefore, fulfils the role normally played by di-

shares. The misuse of the corporate personality in rectors. Surely the Minister for Business and Con-

the shape of $2 companies is very well known. In sumer Affairs (Mr Moore) does not dispute that

fact, the offices of the Corporate Affairs Comconcept.

mission are littered with the number of $2 companies that have crashed, to the detriment of employees, creditors and shareholders. The immunity of shareholders and, in the absence of fraud, directors from liability for contractual or tortious wrongs upon the part of a company is in striking contrast to the joint and several liabilities of the partners in the partnership. The courts will not, except in certain limited circumstances, lift the corporate veil unless there is a specific legislative direction to do so.

Since the Smith v. Anderson case, trusts involving more than 20 unit holders or beneficiaries have frequently been used to operate investment schemes in companies securities and land. Such fixed or flexible tusts are regulated, or were, by Part IV, Division 5, of the old Companies Act, if units of interests are offered to the public. Until recently, there has been no indication that trusts with more than 20 beneficiaries would be used to carryon conventional business activities. I would like that explained. Such trusts should be subject

The Opposition requests that these powers be to the same regulations as companies. Why not? I

granted and, indeed, that the NCSC and the would like an answer from the Minister as to why

courts be directed to look to those who should they should not be. This is necessary if we are

properly be liable in cases where the corporate vegoing to protect beneficiaries and creditors of

hicle is simply used as a shield against liability. I trusts. I hope that the honourable member for

reiterate what I started to say in the first place in North Sydney (Mr Spender) perhaps will get up

2320 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

and we can have a little bit of a debate on the matincluded, and I will put one of those to the Com-

ter. It is recommended that beneficiaries under a mittee. We can have a trust company whose task

trust should be deemed to be associated together it is simply to administer trusts. That is a perfectly

for the purposes of the provisions of the legitimate exercise. Let us assume in favour of the

Companies Act. This would mean that trusts with trust company I am talking about that there is no

20 or more beneficiaries, established for the purtax avoidance, no tax evasion, and that it is a per-

poses of gain, would have to be registered as corfectly straightforward exercise. One of the prob-

porations. The Minister ought think about that. lems it then faces when it deals in the open mar-

The Ministerial Council ought to think about it. ket, for example when buying shares on behalf of

Dealing with clause 267 (1) (a), I should like some observations from my kind friend the honourable member for North Sydney. Creditors who deal with management companies may be misled into believing that the property used by a management company belongs to the management company. I will repeat that so that we can

a number of different trusts, is the complexity of saying on each occasion: 'We will buy 200 shares for Trust Y, 200 shares for Trust Z, 200 shares for the next trust', and so on. The imposition of the disclosure requirements could be highly technical and not easy to comply with, and I speak of the requirements as they appeared in the April

debate it. Creditors who deal with management exposure~

companies may be misled into believing that the Honourable members have referred to the use

property used by a management company belongs of trusts for tax avoidance purposes. Certainly

to the management company and so will be availthat takes place, there is no doubt about that, and

able to creditors in satisfaction of their claims. We there is no doubt that companies acting as trustees

agree on that. That is the position. The reality is are sometimes used for the purposes of tax avoid-

simply that the property belongs to beneficiaries ance. But that does not say that we should intro-

of the trust and is not available to creditors. duce legislation which may pose many more prob-

Hence it is important for the legislation to require lems than it cures. I put it to the honourable

all companies whose business is to manage propmember for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) that, after all,

erty not belonging to them to disclose to creditors he is not looking at a novel situation. Trusts have

that the property apparently in their control and been around for a long time, and if we move

ownership in fact is held in trust. Is anybody precompanies to one side, as it were, and provide that

pared to dispute that? I would not think so. Disthere shall be, as he has said, the lifting of the cor-

closure should be made, firstly, in all business porate veil in all cases, then the true tax avoiders

correspondence with creditors and, secondly, in will simply find another means of going about it,

the company's audited annual accounts filed with which I assume would be to have an ordinary trust

the Corporate Affairs Commission. At present without a company holding the position of

most companies acting as trading trustees fall trustee. I certainly agree that it is a matter that is

within the classification of exempt proprietary worthwhile looking at, and it should be looked at

companies. As a consequence, those companies do further, but I have reservations about the pro-

not have to file audited annual accounts. So we visions as they originally existed in the April

have to contend with both-exempt proprietary exposure draft.

companies and trading trusts.

Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (5.15)-The Op-

I make two simple observations: Not only does position does not believe that the clause dealing

this structure-corporate structure, if you likewith subsidiaries, holding companies and related

avoid being bound by the provisions of the corporations affords sufficient protection to the

Companies Act but also, I think it is true to say public in the way it is presently drafted. The

equally that it is a scheme for tax avoidance. It is definition of subsidiaries and holding companies is

an indictment of the Ministerial Council that crucial to other clauses of the Bill. The Bill does

there is not adequate provision to cover trading not seem to recognise that in a great many cases

trusts, and I support my friend the honourable holding and subsidiary companies act as a unit

member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown).

and not as separate entities. Creditors can there-

Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (5.13)-Let me say, since I have been invited to do so, that from this side of the Committee I do not think we would say that one forecloses the question of the

fore be disadvantaged since a holding company need take no steps to bailout the creditors of its insolvent subsidiary. The subsidiary's employees, of course could be similarly affected.

introduction of provisions concerning trading Insofar as trusts are concerned, and I believe

trusts. As I understand the position, the matter is they are covered by clauses 164 to 167, might I say

under examination. Some very complex questions that over the last 100 years or more the companies

are raised by the disclosure provisions originally Acts and accompanying case law have built up an

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2321

elaborate set of rules to which business enterprises instance the case of Massey Ferguson, a company

must adhere if they are to have such privileges as which crashed in Australia a few years ago, which

limited liability. Accounting rules, standards of was a subsidiary of a Canadian holding company.

skill, care and honesty of directors, personalliabThe Canadian company made no effort at all to

ility of officers when a business is carried on bailout the Australian subsidiary and left credi-

fraudulently, along with many other legal protectors, employees, et cetera, lamenting. So we

tions for existing and potential shareholders, would strongly urge the Minister to see that some

creditors and other interested parties, are all reforms can be made in this area in future through

based on the premise that the company in questhe Ministerial Council so that this whole subject

tion owns and runs its business in its own right. If, of subsidies, holding companies, trust companies,

instead, a small, grossly undercapitalised et cetera, is ironed out and made much more

company is permitted to hold the business on specific.

trust, the value of these protections is at best doubtful, at worst negligible. In a manner which is wholly confusing to outsiders, the normal roles associated with the company formed are changed around. For example, the recipients of surplus profits become trust beneficiaries instead of shareholders, although the company itself has shareholders, management of the business is formally vested not in the directors but in the company
itself in its capacity as trustee, and so on, merely because tax planners saw that the company-trust combination might produce tax advantages for their clients.

Mr MOORE (Ryan~Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (5.20)~The amendments are not acceptable to the Government. I do not accept the proposition that subsidiary companies are necessarily set up to defraud creditors. I spoke last night on the question of creditors and I mentioned then that I do not understand how people can be left holding the bag, as it were, in the case of a subsidiary company if they have made due inquiry. If someone trades in a risk position, having failed to make due inquiry, I do not know how that person can complain about the Companies Act.

I worked in private enterprise for many years prior to coming into this House and I know that

Clause agreed to.

many holding companies have subsidiary

Clauses 8 to 11~by leave~taken together, and

companies for the purpose of manipulating those agreed to.

subsidiary companies, particularly in high risk areas. They will form subsidiary companies in high risk areas so that, if those companies go bad,

Clause 12 (Power of Commission to require production of books).

there is no loss to the shareholders. There is cerMr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5.22) -

tainly a loss to creditors and there is certainly a Clause 12 relates to the power of the National

loss to employees. I have seen this happen. Companies and Securities Commission to require

Nothing whatsoever happens to the shareholders the production of books of companies. We have

in the holding company. They get off scot free, but some reservations about this clause. We feel that

the creditors and employees are left holding the the Commisson is prevented from getting books in

bag. For that reason, I do not think that this certain circumstances under the provisions of this

clause has been correctly drafted and J believe Bill. For example, we think that the Commission

that the area covering trusts should be completely should be able to obtain access to books to enable

struck out.

it to formulate recommendations for law reform.

Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5. I 9)-- To wind up the Opposition's objections to this

Clause 12 (1) (a) contains a rather pleasant phrase. It states:

clause, we believe that the defmition of subsidiary and holding companies is crucial to many other clauses of the Bill. For example, in regard to

Other than the power of the Commission under sub-section 6 (3) of the National Companies and Securities Commission Act.

accounts, group accounts must be prepared for The Commission is prevented from obtaining

subsidiaries, and that is a reference to clauses 269 access to books by that sub-clause. We have no

to 272. However, the Bill goes only part of the doubt that this clause was inserted after the 1980

way towards dealing with the reality that holding exposure draft at the behest of business interests
and subsidiary companies act as a unit and are not wanting to maximise privacy. I guess that in prac-

separate entities. Creditors can be disadvantaged tice the provision is not likely to have any great

since a holding company need take no steps to bail effect but it raises the point as to how much priv-

out the creditors of its insolvent subsidiary-that acy public companies are entitled to. That runs

is a vital attribute as far as we are concerned--and counter to the Labor Party's argument that re-

employees can also suffer for the same reason. I quires maximum public accountability.

2322 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

Clauses 12 (2) (a) and 12 (3) (a) require that the reason for the examination of the books be specified. The intention is obviously to prevent fishing by the Commission. But we feel that this is not justified in the light of public accountability. In our view it is necessary to distinguish between civil liberties like privacy and the liberties of those engaged in business. I take issue with the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) on this matter-I say in passing that on this side of the House we have considerable respect for his integrity-and disagree violently with his view as to how business should be done. We do not think that doing business with a company under the many guises that companies have and under the many corporate forms that companies may take should be like being involved in a lottery. Certainly there is a risk involved in doing business with some types of companies. The old caveat emptor rule remains paramount. But if a propel; national companies law existed, a lot of the risk that is taken both by creditors and shareholders would be eliminated. That is all we are asking for in a national companies law, that proper accountability be made paramount so that companies can not only be seen to be doing business respectably and be doing it respectably but also that they pay their fair share of the tax burden.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (5.24)-1 agree with my colleague the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) that there should be greater access by the Commission to companies' books so that more public accountability exists. I also mention at this stage that I did not say in my earlier remarks that all subsidiary companies set out to take the public in or, indeed, to take creditors in. I said that some of them are set up for that purpose, particularly in high risk areas. I believe that if the Commission is given the proper power it deserves under this clause, it would do away with a lot of those cases involving failed companies. If the Commission was of the opinion that a company was going bad, or likely to go bad, it could pull the books in, make the company more accountable to the public and at least stop some businesses folding up. I believe that particularly in the New South Wales Companies Act there are proper provisions for this. Certainly there is more power in that Act than there is in this legislation. As my colleague the honourable member for Parramatta mentioned earlier, this Bill has been brought together by taking the very least from all of the State Acts; so there is a lowest common denominator. I believe that the Commonwealth should have used its powers more and introduced a national Companies Act rather than this emasculated

legislation which we now have. As far as clause 12 is concerned, I believe that insufficient powers have been given to the Commission and I believe that they should so be given.
Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (S.2S)-ln answer to what has been said by honourable members, I say that the provision contained in clause 12 gives very wide powers for the inspection of books where a contravention or a failurc to comply with a provision of a relevant Act is thought to have taken place. Other circumstances are set out in clause 12 which are, if my recollection is correct, wider than those in existing laws. For my part, I think that businessmen are just as entitled to privacy as ordinary citizens. There should be no greater right of inspection than what is presently conferred by clause 12. Under that clause and in conjunction with the provisions concerning special investigations if it is in the public interest to investigate the affairs of the company, the widest of investigations can be carried out. Witnesses can be examined and books can be inspected and impounded. Taking those provisions together, there are perfectly adequate mechanisms in this Act for the inspection of books. I simply cannot understand how it can be said that to widen the inspection powers in clause 12 would in some way assist law reform. Law reform stems from the examination of a whole series of events. It does not flow from fishing around in the affairs of private businessmen.
Clause agreed to.
Clauses 13 to IS-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 16 (Privilege).
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5.29)- We are still dealing with inspections. The part of the second reading amendment which we moved called upon the Government to reform this area. We were talking of:
the amendment of any provision which enables questionable practices to be hidden by means of legal professional privilege.
I have no doubt that the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) will take umbrage at what accusations we mayor may not level against the legal profession. But it seems to us that this is the first of a number of protections given to legal professional privilege. We feel that the clout of the legal profession has led to the insertion of these protections. We also feel that it is an invitation for evasion of the legislations because under this provision questionable transactions need simply be channelled through an unethical lawyer. I must say that the Commission can require the name and address of the person to whom

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2323

or by whom a supposedly privileged communiMr Moore-I did not say a word.

cation is made. But we still feel that it is an invitation to evade the provisions of this part of the legislation which calls for proper accountability.

Mr JACOBI-J am pleased that we have unanimity about something.

Under those circumstances we question it quite Mr Moore-I only looked.

severely. We call on the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs to remove that clause and to revert to the exposure draft in 1980 which did not include it.

Mr JACOBI-I am sorry. Creditors are supposed to be able to rely on a company having a particular issued or paid up share capital and that that capital will remain undiminished by any

Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (5.31)-First expenditure other than that on legitimate busi-

of all, lawyers are always a convenient target for ness. Unfortunately for creditors and for, per-

attack. But let us put that to one side. Secondly, it haps, shareholders, the provisions in this Bill will

is very important that we should remember that be singularly ineffective in making the share capi-

the rights which are being protected are the rights tal concept an effective barrier against losses.

of a person to obtain advice. When one looks at There is nothing in this Bill to strengthen that.

clause 16 one sees that there is protection against privileged communications. These are communications which fall within a very narrow compass such as communications made for the purposes of obtaining legal advice to assist, for example, in a case which is coming up or which has been brought against one. Because of the narrowness of the protection, it has to be bona fide legal advice which has been sought, a privileged communication, within the narrow compass that the law has laid down, but an exceedingly necessary compass because we should all be entitled to obtain legal advice; and that includes companies and even company directors.

The English position and that applying in this country stands in marked contrast to that applying to countries throughout the European Economic Community. 1 regret to say that the rot set in at a very early stage. The National Limited Liability Act was enacted about 1855. It provided for three basic issues: Minimum share capital of 250 had to be paid in excess of 20 per cent; three-quarters of the company's nominal capital had to be prescribed; and the company had to be wound up if three-quarters of its capital had been lost. The situation has deteriorated a lot since then. Each one of those safeguards has disappeared. They disappeared as early as 1862. They

Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (5.34)-1 oppose have not been replaced. There is nothing in this

this clause also. I do not see that there is any need Bill to replace them. Other restrictions to protect

for legal people to be given any special attention. I creditors-that is, the rules that reductions of

note that bankers are not given the same proteccapital must be approved by the court and divi-

tion; nor are accountants. I think accountants and dends must not be paid out of capital-have

members of the legal profession in the past and proved, regrettably, weak in practice. It is an un-

also at present are making a mockery out of cerfortunate fact that, in the United Kingdom and

tain provisions that this Government has Australia, creditors cannot afford to rely ,on a

introduced, particularly those provisions that company's capital. I do not think that anybody in

apply to tax evasion. 1 cannot see why there this chamber would disagree with that statement.

should be any privilege whatsoever applying to It is a regrettable fact of the corporate structure in

any person, whether he be a legal person, a banker Australia. Few companies that are wound up are

or, indeed, an accountant. From memory, I think able to meet their debts, let alone return any capi-

that no such privilege is granted under the New tal to their members.

South Wales Companies Act. 1 do not think any should be granted under this Bill.

The English Act of 1855 required all companies with limited liability status to have at least  250

Clause agreed to.

in minimum share capital. That provision disap-

Clauses 17 to 32-by leave--taken together, and agreed to.
Clauses 33 to 37-by leave-taken together.

peared in 1962. Ever since then it has become possible, as I said the other night, to form a limited liability company with a share capital of seven shares for a par value of about one farthing. We

Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (5.36)-1 want to deal have not changed from that. We have allowed

with the question of minimum paid up capital, that provision, in Australia, to reach 2c and for

which 1 raised last night. As I understand it, the public companies 5c. That is a scandal. At least,

courts have always taken the view that a the 1862 Jenkins Act reported that in principle it

company's share capital should apply only for the would favour a statutory minimum paid up share

purposes of business. You do not think that is capital. It further noted that under capitalisation

right, Mr Minister?

was a major cause of business failure. Nobody

2324 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

denies that. Experience in this country certainly Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5.40)-1

supports that concept. But it declined to recthink that the honourable member for Hawker

ommend the introduction of a minimum paid up (Mr Jacobi) has fully summed up our reservations

capital requirement because it would be relatively about this area. In fact, I think that we probably

easy to evade. I suppose that is true. In particular, have stronger reservations about this part of the

it would be difficult to prevent a company from Bill than we have about any other part of it. That

returning its minimum capital to its promoters in is why our second reading amendment referred to

exchange for assets by way of loan or by some modifying or altering the law so that the raising

other way. It is interesting to note that the supand the maintenance of a prescribed minimum

posed difficulties with minimum capital requirenominal and paid up capital for all companies be-

ments have not prevented some European councame mandatory. 1 noticed with some interest

tries from enforcing it. Austria has a minimum that the honourable member for Hawker

paid up capital requirement--

suggested what might be the minimum amounts

Mr Spender-How much?

required for Australian companies, and 1 would not argue with that. His suggestion is certainly a

Mr JACOBI-It is $US5,500. Does the long way in advance of 2c and 5c, which I am sure

honourable member want more figures?

even the Minister for Business and Consumer

Mr Spender-Yes.

Affairs finds quite ludicrous.

Mr JACOBI-France has a minimum paid up capital requiremen,t of $3,650; the Federal Republic of Germany has a requirement for $7,700; Italy has a requirement for $50. That is marvellous, is it not? Australia is not even on a par with that. Australia's requirement is for a minimum paid up capital of 5c. Sweden has a requirement for $10,500; in Switzerland, it is $7,200. It is interesting that the Netherlands has no prescribed minimum capital; but, if Australia did not have that requirement, perhaps it could apply the provisions that apply in the Netherlands. The Netherlands does have the provision that authorised capital must not be more than five times the issued capital. Furthermore, the Ministry of Justice will not authorise the formation of a company unless it believes that the company's issued capital

Mr Jacobi-He agrees with it; I am sure he does.
Mr JOHN BROWN-Yes, I am sure he does. 1 think the examples which the honourable member for Hawker gave of the minimum paid up capital in other nations should be quite enlightening for us when we look at the sort of companies law under which we battle in Australia. Unfortunately Australian company law has never required a minimum nominal or issued company capital. Of course, that has been used historically to the detriment of creditors and shareholders. One solution, I would suggest, is to require the amount of capital to be included in the name of a company if it is less than a certain amount-for example, Bloggs $100 Pty Ltd-and require so much to be paid up.

is appropriate in view of the company's objects In European Economic Community countries,

and other financial sources. I would settle for that particularly the United Kingdom, it is now

provision. That is far better than the inadequate necessary for public companies to issue shares to a

provisions applying in this legislation. If we look nominal value of not less than the authorised

at that panorama, I suppose it can be seen that the minimum-in the United Kingdom that amount

minimum capital requirements are the order of is $50,000-and to receive payment of not less

the day. In Australia,a minimum paid up capital than one-quarter of the nominal value of each

of perhaps $10,000 would be appropriate for proissued share. We do not argue that that exact

prietary companies, while $50,000 would be example should be introduced in Australia, but

appropriate for public companies. We ought to we think that anything that gets us away from the

think about it. These amounts should be reviewed $2 companies would have to be an advancement.

regularly to take account of inflation. I think that We find that to be one of the prime failings 'of this

existing companies should be required to conform Bill. 1am sure the Minister agrees with me ano'the

with the requirements within 12 months of the Opposition generally in this respect. 1 am sure

commencement of the legislation. When we conthat we have sufficient faith in the Minister to be

sider the high level of liquidations in this country confident that he will press this matter at the next

and the devastating effect liquidation has on Ministerial Council meeting notwithstanding all

shareholders and creditors we can see that this is the difficulties of having to obtain agreement from

an appalling piece of legislation. I suggest to the a majority of seven State governments. This

Minister that this is one of the matters that ought would be one area in which he should have a

to rate highly at the next meeting of the Minisspecific look at taking Australia out of the ridicu-

terial Council.

lous situation it is in at the moment where a

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2325

company can be formed with 2c or 5c capital. This is an abolutely ridiculous situation in 1981.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (5.43)-The Government cannot accept the proposal at the moment. I think that the points made by the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) and the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) certainly carry some weight. I am not convinced by the argument that the capitalisations of $5,000, $7,000 and $10,000 held in the countries the honourable member for Hawker mentioned are in themselves guarantees against bankruptcy or that sort of activity. It is really just a matter of form. Other factors go well beyond this. Nevertheless, I think that the comments made by the honourable members are worth noting.
Clauses agreed to.
Clauses 38 and 39-by leave---taken together, and agreed to.
Clauses 40 to 64-by leave--taken together.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5.45)- We are now dealing with one of the cumbersome parts of the Bill. We are calling on the Government to rationalise the cumbersome provisions in respect of company names. It seems to us to be quite ludicrous that we need 24 or 25 clauses in this Bill to cater for the names that companies may give themselves. I point out that the Labor Government's Bill which was rejected in 1974 would have eliminated a great deal of this verbiage and perhaps only four or five clauses would have covered the same area. The procedure for reserving and registering company names, already complicated and expensive, especially when multi-State trading is involved, becomes in fact a legal nightmare under this Bill. A quick glance at the index to the Companies Bill and the section headings in Division 2 of Part III will indicate the enormous number of different procedures for reservation and registration, depending on the precise nature, location and trading intentions of the company in question.
Perhaps the most striking example is clause 57, which refers to 'Registration of name of foreign company that has become a recognised company after transfer of incorporation to participating State or Territory'. Surely even my learned legal friend the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) could find a simpler way than that mouthful of rationalising that name. A good deal of the complexity is attributable to the numerous related but technically distinct names applicable to the corporate entity. I refer to clause 5 (I), which covers about five or six pages of the Bill and deals with the various types of companies that can

be established. More importantly, the opportunity has been lost in this Bill to simplify the company names procedure by enabling companies to make an available search on a national basis and permitting only those names to be registered which are nationally available because such a system would obviate the need to specify the particular States in which registration is desired and would more particularly, if computerised, greatly reduce administrative cost. J would refer that suggestion to the Minister. It just seems to us to be flamboyantly excessive to have 24 or 25 clauses to list the number and types of names that companies might have. Perhaps this is another area in which the Minister might suggest to the Ministerial Council some quick reform.
Clauses agreed to.
Clauses 65 and 66-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 67 (Powers).
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5.48)- Clause 67 deals with the powers of companies. We would like something to be done about this area. We ask the Committee to agree to our proposals, which would give the Government power to require the disclosure of donations paid for political purposes. Need I say any more? There is a requirement for companies to list donations to charitable causes. Whilst I could never in any of my wildest dreams consider the Liberal Party to be a charitable cause, I would like to think that that power should be extended to make sure that any donation to a political party should be made public, as is the case under United Kingdom law. I would like to be able to pick up the Ansett accounts every year and find there is a donation of $50,000 to the Liberal Party. At least the public would know who supports political parties. If our suggestion were implemented the same thing would apply perhaps to other organisations that contribute to the Australian Labor Party. We have nothing to hide or to fear. If this were done, I think the whole area of companies law would be considered to be more decent. Certainly, it would have a great deal more prestige if these sorts of donations from companies, public or otherwise, were made public. I would hope, perhaps futilely, that the Minister also might suggest this to the Ministerial Council.
Clause agreed to.
Clauses 68 to 93-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clauses 94 to I09-by leave-taken together.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5.50)- We are now discussing Part IV of the Bill,

2326 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

prospectuses, securities and charges. The Opof share for asset exchange and the type of share

position moved an amendment which called for: options offered to various people from time to

. . . full review of the provisions relating to fund-raising time such as employees or particular directors but and prospectuses to ensure maximum disclosure and to realso in terms of unsecured notes, notes and de-

quire independent valuation of assets exchanged for issued bentures and the type of debentures offered. Far

shares.

too often in the past the type of prospectus

In supporting the amendment I mention that in offered to the public, whilst meeting the technical

October 1970 the Company Law Advisory Comrequirements, certainly did not give the necessary

mittee, better known as the Eggleston Committee, information as to what the issue was for and the

reported to the Standing Committee of the real purpose behind it. With valuation, particu-

Attorneys-General on control of 'Fund Raising, larly in the area of the acquisition of assets for

Share Capital and Debentures'. The detailed reshares, there is a need for, I think, more certifica-

port of the Committee contained sections on the tion of value assets and where they really come

protection of investors in relation to fund raising from.

operations, statutory provisions relating to prospectuses and the content of prospectuses. Some of the Committee's recommendations over the years have been implemented but the present

Clauses agreed to. Clauses 110 to 112-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.

Bill involves no significant changes in the prospectus provisions. Once again the opportunity to utilise the deliberations of the only expert committee to look at company law in Australia in the last 20 years has been missed. We feel that this is a deplorable state of affairs.

Clause 113 (Return as to allotments): Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (5.55)-1 wish to discuss two points. The first concerns the closing 'off of the offsetting cash transaction loophole in the provision relating to non-cash consideration of share issue. I think that was recommended by the

The Opposition is particularly concerned to Eggleston Company Law Advisory Committee ensure maximum disclosure to prospective purbut there is no embodiment of that recommen-

chasers of shares or debentures and to ensure that dation in this legislation.

the interests of existing shareholders are not prejudiced by the issue of shares for nonpecuniary consideration, for example, in the form

Mr Moore-That is contained in the general review to which I referred before.

of assets. The latter requires a statutory obligation Mr JACOBI-That is being generally

to obtain an independent evaluation. I think that reviewed, is it? I wish to make a passing reference

probably there have been bad manifestations of to the United Kingdom Companies Act 1980

that weakness in the law in the not too distant which contains a requirement for non-cash con-

past. I will not mention all such instances, but the siderations for shares to be subject to expert

Negri River Corporation share trading was probindependent valuation. That is the part of which

ably a fairly good example of that. I will not say there is an appalling gap in the report of the issu-

any more on that matter except that the Oppoing by company shareholders to the Corporate

sition is not at all happy with the provision regardAffairs Commission. I will not canvass the whole

ing prospectuses and the lack of information conissue to the report which was very competently

tained in them. The Opposition requires urgent made to the South Australian Government in

reform in that area to make sure that investors 1977. Actually, to be blunt, there was no excuse

buying shares in a company are fully protected for the members of the Ministerial Council not to

and fully warned in advance of what they can have applied their minds to the issue. The matter

expect by proper reference to a properly detailed was looked at in depth in 1977. I wonder what re-

prospectus.

search has been done in the departments in the re-

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business spective States, including our own area.

and Consumer Affairs) (5.54)-This is one part In the few. minutes remaining before we

of the Bill which needs some attention. I am sure suspend the sitting for dinner I will make some

that the Ministerial Council will address itself to reference to the United Kingdom Act. I suggest to

this matter in the fairly near future. It is a very imthe Minister that this is one area that ought to be

portant part of the capital market. In my view it looked at closely by the Ministerial Council. I will

constitutes the crunch of the matter because the read some brief extracts from sections 24 to 27 of

invitation to the public to subscribe is the starting the United Kingdom Companies Act 1980. Sub-

point for investment. Because of that we need to section (1) of section 24 reads:

look at the areas not only in terms of shares, . . . a public company shall not allot shares as fully or prospectuses, the memorandum of offer, the type partly paid up . . . otherwise than in cash unless--.

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2327

This is then set out in paragraph (b) which states:

A report with respect to its value has been made to the company by a person appointed by the company--

Paragraph (c) states:

A copy of the report has been sent to the proposed allottee of the shares.

Sub-section (4) states:

The valuation and report required by sub-section (1) above shall be made by an independent person . . . who-
(a) appears to him to have the requisite knowledge and experience to value the consideration or that part of the consideration; and
(b) is not an officer or servant of the company or any other body corporate which is that company's subsidiary or holding company or a subsidiary of that company's holding company or a partner or employer of such an officer or servant;

Sub-section (5) states:

The independent person's report

shall state-

(a) the nominal value of the shares

(b) the amount of any premium payable on those shares;

(c) the description of the consideration-

(d) the extent to which the nominal value of the shares

and any premium are to be treated as paid up-

(i) by the consideration;

(ii) in cash.

I will not read any further. The point I am trying
to make simply is that there is more than ample coverage in a provision if it were inserted in the Bill to cover this situation as has been done in the United Kingdom Act. As T said earlier I see no reason at all why in fact the Ministerial Councilor its advisers could not have examined this provision in the period they have had. It is not an un-
usual provision to be in the United r:ingdom Act. It is also far more competently set out, if I might say so, in the Swedish Act. In looking at the pos-
ition generally it is an indictment again of the
Ministerial Council and its advisers.

Clause agreed to.

Clauses 114 and llS-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.

Sittings suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.

Clause 116 agreed to.

Clause 117 (Power to make certain payments).

Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (d.l)-Before the
suspension of the sitting, the Committee was dealing with non-cash considerations. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard sections 23 to 27 of the United Kingdom Companies Act of 1980.

Leave granted.

The document read as follows-

23.-(1) A public company shall not allot shares as fully or partly paid up (as to their nominal value or any premium payable on them) otherwise than in cash if the consideration for the allotment is or includes an undertaking which is to be or may be performed more than five years after the day of the allotment.

(2) Where a public company allots shares in contravention of subsection (I) above, the allottee of the shares shall be liable to pay the company an amount equal to their nominal value, together with the whole of any premium, or, if the case so requires, such proportion of that amount as is treated as paid up by the undertaking and shall be liable to pay interest at the appropriate rate on the amount payable under the foregoing provision.
(3) Where a contract for the allotment of shares does not contravene subsection (1) above, any variation of the contract which has the effect that the contract would have contravened that SUbsection if the terms of the contract as varied had been its original terms shall be void.
(4) Subsection (3) above shall apply to the variation by a public company of the terms of a contract entered into before the company was re-registered as a public company.
(5) Where a public company allots shares for a consideration which consists of or includes (in accordance with subsection (l) above) an undertaking which is to be performed within five years of the allotment but that undertaking is not performed within the period allowed by the contract for the allotment of the shares, the allottee of the shares in question shall be liable to pay the company at the end of that period an amount equal to the nominal value of the shares, together with the whole of any premium, or, if the case so requires, such proportion of that amount as is treated as paid up by the undertaking, together with interest at the appropriate rate on the amount payable under the foregoing provision.
(6) Subsection (4) of section 20 above shall apply in relation to a contravention of this section and to a failure to carry out a term of a contract as mentioned in subsection (5) above as it applies in relation to a contravention of that section.
(?) Any reference in this section to a contract for the allotment of shares includes a reference to an ancillary contract relating to payment in rcspect of those shares.
24.-(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, a public company shall not allot shares as fully or partly paid up (as to their nominal value or any premium payable on them) otherwise than in cash unless-
(a) the consideration for the allotment has been valued in accordance with the following provisions of this section;
(b) a report with respect to its value has been made to the company by a person appointed by the company in accordance with those provisions during the six months immediately preceding the allotment of the shares; and
(c) a copy of the report has been sent to the proposed allottee of the shares.
(2) Subsection (1) above shall not apply to the allotment of shares by a company in connection with-
(a) an offer made by the company to all the holders of the shares in another company to acquire all or some of those shares or to all holders of a particular class of those shares to acquire all or some of the shares of that class; or
(b) a proposed merger of that company with another company.
(3) In determining for the purposes of subsection (2) above whether an offer is so made by a company (in this subsection referred to as the "offeror company"), shares held by or by a nominee of the offeror company in the other company or held in the other company by or by a nominee of a company which is the offeror company's holding company or its subsidiary or a company which is a subsidiary of its holding company shall be disregarded; and for those purposes there is a proposed merger of two companies when one of them proposes to acquire all the assets and liabilities of the other in exchange for

2328 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

the issue of shares in that one to shareholders of the other, with or without any cash payment to those shareholders.
(4) The valuation and report required by subsection (1) above shall be made by an independent person, that is to say, a person qualified at the time of the report to be appointed or continue to be auditor of the company, except that where it appears to him to be reasonable for the valuation of the consideration, or a valuation of part of the consideration, to be made, or to accept such a valuation made, by any person who-
(a) appears to him to have the requisite knowledge and experience to value the consideration or that part of the consideration; and
(b) is not an officer or servant of the company or any other body corporate which is that company's subsidiary or holding company or a subsidiary of that company's holding company or a partner or employee of such an officer or servant;
he may arrange for or accept such a valuation, together with a report which will enable him to make his own report under that subsection and provide a note in accordance with subsection (7) below.
(5) The independent person's report under subsection (1) above shall slale ~
(a) the nominal value of the shares to be wholly or partly paid for by the consideration in question;
(b) the amount of any premium payable on those shares; (c) the description of the consideration and, as respects so
much of the consideration as he himself has valued, a description of that part of the consideration, the method used to value it and the date of the valuation; (d) the extent to which the nominal value of the shares and any premium are to be treated as paid up-
(i) by the consideration; (ii) in cash.
(6) Where any consideration is valued under this section by a person other than the independent person, the latter's report under subsection (1) shall state that fact and shall also-
(a) state the former's name and what knowledge and experience he has to carry out the valuation; and
(b) describe so much of the consideration as was valued by that other person, the method used to value it, and state the date of valuation.
(7) The report of the independent person made under subsection (1) above shall contain or be accompanied by a note by him-
(a) in the case of a valuation made by another person, that it appeared to the independent person reasonable to arrange for it to be so made or to accept a valuation so made;
(b) whoever made the valuation, that the method ofvaluation was reasonable in all the circumstances;
(c) that it appears to the independent person that there has been no material change in the value of the consideration in question since the valuation; and
(d) that on the basis of the valuation the value of the consideration, together with any cash by which the nominal value of the shares or any premium payable on them is to be paid up, is not less than so much of the aggregate of the nominal value and the whole of any such premium as is treated as paid up by the consideration and any such cash.
(8) Subsection (9) below applies where a public company allots any share in contravention of subsection (1) above and either-
(a) the allottee has not received a report under this section; or

(b) there has been some other contravention of this section and the allottee knew or ought to have known that it amounted to a contravention.
(9) Where this subsection applies, the allottee shall be liable to pay the company an amount equal to the nominal value of the shares, together with the whole of any premium or, if the case so requires, such proportion of that amount as is treated as paid up by the consideration, and shall be liable to pay interest at the appropriate rate on the amount payable under the foregoing provision.
(10) Subsection (4) of section 20 above shall apply for the purposes of this section as it applies for the purposes of that.
(11) Where the consideration is accepted partly in payment up of the nominal value of the shares and any premium and partly for some other consideration given by the company, the foregoing provisions of this section shall apply as if references to the consideration accepted by the company included references to the proportion of that consideration which is properly attributable to the payment up of that value and any premium;and
(a) the independent person shall carry out or arrange for such other valuations as will enable him to determine that proportion; and
(b) his report under subsection (1) above shall state what valuations have been made by virtue of this subsection and also the reason for and method and date of any such valuation and any other matters which may be relevant to that determination.
(12) In this section-
(a) any reference to a company, except where it is or is to be construed as a reference to a public company, includes a reference to any body corporate and any body to which letters patent have been issued under the Chartered Companies Acl 1837; and
(b) any reference to an officer or servant shall not include a reference to an auditor.
25.-(1) Any person carrying out a valuation or making a report under section 24 above with respect to any consideration proposed to be accepted or given by a company shall be entitled to require from the officers of the company such information and explanation as he thinks necessary to enable him to carry out the valuation or to make the report and provide a note under that section.
(2) A company to which such a report is made as to the value of any consideration for which, or partly for which, it proposes to allot shares shall deliver a copy of the report to the registrar of companies for registration at the same time that it files the return of the allotments of those shares under section 52 of the 1948 Act, and subsection (3) of that section (default) shall apply to a default in complying with this subsection as it applies to a default in complying with that section.
(3) Any person who knowingly or recklessly makes a statementwhich-
(a) is misleading, false or deceptive in a material particular,and
(b) is a statement to which this subsection applies,
shall be guilty of an offence.
(4) Subsection (3) above applies to any statement made (whether orally or in writing) to any person carrying out a valuation or making a report under section 24 above, being a statement which conveys or purports to convey any information or explanation which that person requires, or is entitled to require, under subsection (I) above.
(5) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be liable-
(a) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine, or both;

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2329

(b) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, or both.
26.-(1) A public company, other than a company re-registered under section 8 above, shall not, unless the conditions mentioned in subsection (3) below have been complied with, enter into an agreement with a relevant person for the transfer by him during the initial period of one or more non-cash assets to the company or another for a consideration to be given by the company equal in value at the time of the agreement to at least one-tenth of the nominal value of the company's share capital issued at that time.
(2) In this section(a) in relation to a company formed as a public company,
"relevant person" means any subscriber to the memorandum of the company and "initial period" means the period of two years beginning with the date on which the company is issued with a certificate under section 4 above that it is entitled to do business; (b) in relation to a company re-registered, or registered in accordance with section 13 above, as a public company, "relevant person" means any person who was a member of the company on the date of the reregistration or registration and "initial period" means the period of two years beginning with that date;
and in this subsection the reference to a company re-registered as a public company includes a reference to a private company so re-registered which was a public company before it was a private company.
(3) The conditions referred to in subsection (1) above are that-
(a) the consideration to be received by the company (that is to say, the asset to be transferred to the company or the advantage to the company of its transfer to another person) and any consideration other than cash to be given by the company have been valued under the following provisions of this section (without prejudice to any requirement to value any consideration under section 24 above);
(b) a report with respect to the consideration to be so received and given has been made to the company in accordance with those provisions during the six months immediately preceding the date of the agreement;
(c) the terms of the agreement have been approved by an ordinary resolution of the company; and
(d) not later than the giving of the notice of the meeting at which the resolution is proposed, copies of the resolution and report have been circulated to the members of the company entitled to receive that notice and, if the relevant person is not then such a member, to that person.
(4) Subsection (1) above shall not apply to the following agreements for the transfer of an asset for a consideration to be given by the company, that is to say-
(a) where it is part of the ordinary business of the company to acquire or arrange for other persons to acquire assets of a particular description, an agreement entered into by the company in the ordinary course of its business for the transfer of an asset of that description to it or such a person, as the case may be; or
(b) an agreement entered into by the company under the supervision of the court, or an officer authorised by the court for the purpose, for the transfer of an asset to the company or to another.
(5) Section 24 (4) and (6) above shall apply to a valuation and report of any consideration under this section as those subsections apply to a valuation of and report on any consideration under subsection (1) of that section.

(6) The report of the independent person under this section shall-
(a) state the consideration to be received by the company, describing the asset in question, specifying the amount to be received in cash, and the consideration to be given by the company, specifying the amount to be given in cash;
(b) state the method and date of valuation; (c) contain or be accompanied by a note as to the matters
mentioned in section 24 (7) (a) to (c) above; and (d) contain or be accompanied by a note that on the basis
of the valuation the value of the consideration to be received by the company is not less than the value of the consideration to be given by it.
(7) If a public company enters into an agreement with any relevant person in contravention of subsection (I) above and either he has not received a report under this section or there has been some other contravention of this section or section 24 (4) or (6) above which he knew or ought to have known amounted to a contravention, then, subject to subsection (8) below-
(a) the company shall be entitled to recover from the relevant person any consideration given by the company under the agreement or an amount equivalent to its value at the time of the agreement; and
(b) the agreement, so far as not carried out, shall be void.
(8) Where a company enters into an agreement in contravention of subsection (1) above and that agreement is or includes an agreement for the allotment of shares in that company, then, whether or not the agreement also contravenes section 24 above-
(a) subsection (7) above shall not apply to the agreement in so far as it is an agreement for the allotment of shares; and
(b) subsection (4) of section 20 and subsection (9) of section 24 above shall apply in relation to the shares as if they had been allotted in contravention of section 24.
27.-(1) Any person carrying out a valuation or making a report under section 26 above shall be entitled to require from the officers of the company such information and explanation as he thinks necessary to enable him to carry out the valuation or make the report and provide the note required by that section; and subsections (3) and (5) of section 25 above shall apply in relation to any such valuation and report as they apply in relation to a valuation and report under section 24 (1) above with the substitution of a reference to this subsection for the reference in section 25 (4) to section 25 (I).
(2) A company which has passed a resolution under section 26 above with respect to the transfer of an asset shall, within 15 days of the passing of the resolution, deliver to the registrar of companies a copy of the resolution together with the report required by that section and, if it fails to do so, the company and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding one-fifth of the statutory maximum or, on conviction after continued contravention, a default fine not exceeding one-fiftieth of the statutory maximum for every day until the resolution is so delivered.
(3) Any reference in section 26 above or this section to consideration given for the transfer of an asset includes a reference to consideration given partly for its transfer; but-
(a) the value of any consideration partly so given shall be taken to be the proportion of that consideration properly attributable to its transfer;
(b) the independent person shall carry out or arrange for such valuations of anything else as will enable him to determine that proportion; and
(c) his report under that section shall state what valuation has been made by virtue of this paragraph and also the reason for and method and date of any such valuation

2330 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

and any other matters which may be relevant to that determination.
Mr JACOBI-Clauses 116 and 117, when read together, clearly seek to limit a limited liability company to issuing shares at a discount of up to 10 per cent provided that the companies memoranda or articles do not prohibit the practice. That is referred to in clause 117 (1) (a). It parrots paragraph 302 of the explanatory memorandum with which the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) has kindly furnished the Parliament. That paragraph indicates that clause 117 applies to all payments, not just to commissions and brokerage which the explanatory memorandum states, in effect, that the provision deals with. Sub-clause 117 (2) states:
. . . the allowance of a discount by a company shall be taken to be the making of a payment by the company.
Consequently, the provisions of the following clause, clause 118, which are aimed at ensuring the creditors and shareholders are not prejudiced by the discount share issues, have no application to discounts of up to 10 per cent. Clause 117 ought to be amended so that it covers only commissions paid to underwriters and a brokerage paid to registered sharebrokers in connection with an issue of company shares. I would like some response from the ministerial advisers on that matter.
I think the part of the Bill dealing with commissions was intended to make it clear that companies could legitimately pay underwriting and brokerage commissions incurred in issuing shares without infringing the prohibition of issuing shares at a discount. It is worded very broadly, and it is arguable that a company could legitimately issue shares to anyone under this clause at a discount of up to 10 per cent. I suggest it ought to be amended so that it authorises only underwriting commissions, salesmen's commissions and brokerage commissions incurred in the issue of company shares. I believe that clause is defective to that extent, and again I ask the Minister to raise the matter in the Ministerial Council.
Clause agreed to. Clauses 118 to 124-by leave-taken together, and agreed to. Clause 125 (Rights of holders of classes of shares). Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (8.5)-This clause relates to re-operation. The National Companies Bill, a private member's Bill introduced by the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen) in 1976, abolished the articles of memorandum distinction and simply adopted the

concept of company rules. Clause 73(1) provides that the memorandum of a company may be altered to the extent and in a manner provided by the Act, but not otherwise. Clause 73 (2) provides:
Subject to this section, sub-section 78 (3) and section 320, if a provision of the memorandum of a company could lawfully have been contained in the articles of the company, the company may, unless the memorandum prohibits the alterations of that provision, alter that provision by special resolution.
Clause 73 (5) states:
Nothing in sub-section (2) permits the alteration of a provision of the memorandum of a company that relates to rights to which only members included in a particular class of members are entitled.
In other words, class rights clauses cannot be altered under this provision. The question I raise with the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) is whether clause 125 (2) permits the alteration of a class rights clause which is contained in the company's memorandum of association, where there is no existing variation procedure, prohibition or variation. Clause 125 (2) (a) applies where rights are attached to shares included in a class of shares. But nowhere in clause 125 is there any express reference to the rights clause itself, as distinct from the variation of the rights clause-that is important-being in the memorandum of association. Clause 125 (2) expressly allows the memorandum to be altered so as to include a variation of the rights clause. I can see the ministerial advisers are certainly following the problem.
Clause 125 (2) does not expressly or by necessary implication state that class rights provisions in the memorandum of association may be altered by adhering to the stated procedure. It must therefore be considered doubtful that such a provision could be altered under clause 125 when clauses 72 and 73 are borne in mind. I suggest that that is where the conflict exists. Perhaps this doubt could be resolved. I ask the Minister to reconsider this and perhaps the Ministerial Council and the advisers could look at it and amend clause 125 (2) to read: 'Rights are attached to shares included in a class of shares whether in the memorandum of articles of association of the company or otherwise'. It seems clear from clause 125 (3) that rights clauses in the memorandum are included and intended to be altered. The consequential amendment to clause 126 is obvious. It would have to read: 'Rights are attached to shares in a company whether in a memorandum of articles of association or the company, or otherwise'. There would also have to be a consequential amendment to clause 127. I ask the Minister to look at that. I believe there are some anomalies

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2331

and that at least that part of the legislation should be straightened up.
MI' MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (8.9)--1 will look at the points the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) has raised. My interpretation of the situation is somewhat different. My advisers will look at the suggestions to ascertain what they mean.
Clause agreed to.
Clauses 126 to 128-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clauses 129 to 136-by leave-taken together.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (8.10)- Part of the Opposition's amendment to the motion for the second reading of the Bill related to clauses 129 to 136. We asked for the reform of the provisions relating to companies financing dealings in their own shares, including the deletion of salaried directors from the definition of employees. Of course, the Labor Party approves of any scheme to assist employees to buy shares in the company they work for. However, we feel that often these schemes are really only perks for directors. The privileges do not usually get down to those on the shop fioor. In fact, in the United Kingdom the Labor Government's companies Bill of 1978 recognised the possibility of abuse and excluded salaried directors from the definition of employees. We certainly agree with that. We believe that the provision in clause 129 (I) (a) and (b) which exempts financial assistance in respect of any director holding salaried employment or an officer of the company from the provision of these clauses is unwarranted and should be removed. Clause 129 (4) states:
. . . a company shall be taken to have given financial assistance in connection with an acquisition or proposed acquisition referred to in paragraph (1) (a) if, when the financial assistance was given to a person, the company was aware that the financial assistance would financially assist--
I pose a question to the Minister in relation to clause 129 (4). How can a company be aware that financial assistance would t1nancially assist? It seems to be a pejorative question to begin with but in the absence of any deeming provision it must be wondered which of the company's officers or employees must be aware of the relevant facts for the company to be held to be aware of the same facts. It need only be said that in the state of the common law at present the criteria governing those persons who can bring this primary liability on a company are very ill-defined. We are asking for some assistance in that area. I hope that the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) will heed those remarks and refine the language of clause 129. More particularly, we are

concerned at the possibility of employees not getting the advantage that is obviously intended because, as I have pointed out, when these things are promulgated they normally do not go to those most in need.
We also have some grave reservations about clause 130, which relates to the consequences of a company financing dealings in its own shares. We feel that some sad consequences could follow from that sort of practice. Notwithstanding commercial opinion to the contrary, some provisions are necessary to catch certain abusers. I give a couple of examples. For instance, person A may borrow money to take over company B and then strip the assets of company B to finance the loan he used to purchase the company in the first place. That is a perfectly good example of the consequences of companies financing dealings in their own shares. Another example is when the controllers of a company strip the assets of that company to feather their own shareholdings. We are very worried about that. The wording of clause 129 (4) (b) may not extend to the first mentioned abuse, that is, person A borrowing from company B to finance the purchase of the same company, because of the phrase 'of the subscription' which is included in the text. The Minister should look into these clauses and bring some of the difficulties before the Ministerial Council. If he does so there may be some improvements in the drafting of those clauses to eliminate possible abuses.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (8.15)-1 take notice of what has been said. This is a very technical area. Whilst the Government did not accept the Opposition's amendment to the motion for the second reading of the Bill, I will look into the matters raised in it. I think the proposition of employee shares is a vital one in the administration of any company and every encouragement ought to be given to their issue. The difficulty lies not so much with the companies and the issue of the shares but with the taxation implications. Under the present Income Tax Assessment Act those shares afford a disadvantage to employees rather than a straight out advantage. The problem lies not so much within the Companies Act as within the Income Tax Assessment Act. As a general rule, whilst the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) seemed to suggest that only directors or senior executives were the participants--
Mr John Brown-No, not necessarily. The danger is there that they might well be.
Mr MOORE-- I take the point. The most important thing to me is that the advantages ought

2332 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

to be open to all employees. Naturally, they will depend on the scale of responsibility. In my view, companies would be well advised to look at the issue of employees' shares in their own interests and in the interests of the shareholders. Secondly, I think that the redemption of shares is a very technical area. I noticed recently an article by the Australian Merchant Bankers Association which supported the proposition. In principle, I think there is a lot to recommend it. It is a practice used in the United States of America in redemption of certain shares under financial conditions of a company. There are circumstances in which it would be of advantage to a corporation. Whilst I do not think that is the general application, it may well be that the Ministerial Council should give consideration to its application with certain qualifications.
Clauses agreed to.
Clauses 137 to 228-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 229 (Duty and liability of officers) .
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (8.18)-1 want some clarification of clause 229. I have discussed it with the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) who had the courtesy to allow me to discuss it with his ministerial advisers. We disagreed, but I would like to put the matter on the record for future reference. I raised the position of receivers appointed out of court under clauses 229 (5) and 535 (4) as distinct from receiver managers. Subject to clause 229 they cannot seek relief from the court under clause 535. I can anticipate the answer from the Minister that the word 'officer' in the definition clause as well as in clause 535 (4) has a broader meaning than the definition under clause 5 (1). I do not accept that. However, I suggest to the Minister that he return to the drawing board and introduce an appropriate amendment which I will indicate later.
Under clause 535, the court has the power to grant relief to certain persons in connection with civil proceedings brought against them for negligence, default, breach of trust or a breach of duty. Breaches of clause 229 would be within clause 535 to the extent that a company has a civil right to claim loss or damage sustained as a result of a breach of clause 229 (6). The persons who can seek relief under clause 535 are set out in clause 535 (4). They are (a) an officer of a corporation; (b) an auditor of a corporation; (c) an expert; or (d) a receiver, receiver and manager, liquidator or other person appointed or directed by the court to carry out any duty under this Act in relation to a corporation. The question which I pose is: Are

previously appointed receivers entitled to seek relief under clause 535? Rather anomalously the answer would appear, in my view, to be no.

The reference to 'officer' in clause 535 (4) (a) seems to be a reference to 'officer' as defined in clause 5 (1 )-that is, the definition clauserather than 'officer' as defined in clause 229. That this seems so is clear by the reference in clause 535 (4) (d) to court appointed receivers and receivers and managers. This provision would be unnecessary if 'officer' was intended to be covered by the definition in clause 229 because that definition clearly embraces court appointed receivers and receivers and managers, whereas the clause 5 (I) definition expressly excludes them. Clause 535 (4) should be amended so that it covers all persons, and in particular privately appointed receivers, who come within the clause 229 definition of 'officer'. I suggest to the Minister that we ought to amend that clause as follows:

Clause property

o53r5~nbyy

apdadritngoftothseu.bp-crloa~uesrety(e.o) f'athreececiov!e'proorafttiohne

appointed under a power contained In an Instrument.

That would overcome what is in fact, in my view, a clear oversight.

I will now deal with the question of clause 237. I believe the clause should be amended. Again, the word 'officer' as defined in clause 237 (1) would apply only to those persons within the clause 5 (1) definition of 'officer'. Consequently, clause 237 (1) would not catch exemption or indemnification provisions relating to privately appointed receivers and court appointed receivers, receivers and managers an~ liquidators. All of these classes of persons are subject to clause 229 which refers to duties in favour of the company. It follows that 'officer' in clause 227 should have the same meaning as it has in clause 229. The same amendment should be inserted as in clause 229. I also suggest to the Minister that he take back to the Ministerial Council the suggestion that we add a new sub-clause to clause 229 which deals with the protection of shareholders. Such a provision is contained in the Swedish Act and it highlights in effect the total inadequacy of the current provision. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard an extract of the Swedish Companies Act. I refer to chapter 9, section 3 of the 1975 Act.

Leave granted.

The section read asjollows-

Nobody may vote for more than one fifth of the total number of votes attributable to the shares represented at the meeting, unless otherwise provided in the articles of association.
A shareholder may not take part in a vote personally or by proxy. with respect to

1. any legal action against himself,

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2333

2. his release from liability for damages or other obligations towards the company, or
3. any legal action against others or their release from liability if, in respect to such matters, he has a material interest which may be contrary to that of the company.
Paragraphs one and two shall be correspondingly applicable to a shareholder's representative.
Mr JACOBI-I thank the Committee. I hope that the Minister will take this provision on board.
Mr Moore-I have so much now that I am almost going under.
Mr JACOBI-Well, I think it might be helpful if we refer the matter to some of our good friends in the States. Section 3 of the Swedish Act, which has been incorporated in Hansard, states:
Nobody may vote for more than one fifth of the total number of votes attributable to the shares represented at the meeting, unless otherwise provided in the articles of association.
A shareholder may not take part in a vote personally or by proxy, with respect to
I. any legal action against himself, 2. his release from liability for damages or other obli-
gations towards the company, or 3. any legal action against others or their release from liab-
ility if, in respect to such matters, he has a material interest which may be contrary to that of the company.
Paragraphs one and two shall be correspondingly applicable to a shareholder's representative.
Section 7 of the Act states:
A shareholder is entitled to have a matter dealt with at a general meeting of shareholders provided that the board of directors has received a request there for early enough to include the matter in the notice conveningthe meeting.
No such provision is contained in the Companies Bill. There is a total absence of any such clause. It is a very vital provision and I would suggest that it is a matter that ought to be referred to the Ministerial Council for consideration.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (8.25)-1 wish to make a few short remarks on clause 229 of the Companies Bill. We are asking for the provision of a higher required standard of competence, care and diligence for directors and officers of companies. I doubt that anybody would disagree with that as a sentiment. We feel that the provisions of the Bill set a fairly low standard in this area. The previous draft exposure had much more stringent requirements for diligence and care by directors. In fact, it imposed a stricter test and involved a certain amount of subjectivity. The draft stated that the care, diligence and skill required was to be not less than what a reasonably prudent person would exercise in relation to his own business or affairs in comparable circumstances. Unfortunately, the Confederation of Australian Industry, as well as other heavy lobby groups, has seen to it that the teeth have been

taken out of the legislation which is now before us.
We believe the standard of skill which is appropriate to directors and other officers should be made explicitly objective-that is, assessed according to the standards of a reasonable person, at least in relation to the directors on the board of a quoted company. The subjective criteria established in the present law let incompetent directors ofI far too lightly. T think that is a view that is universally accepted by many people, not only of the Opposition, but in the commercial area. The directors that we are talking about are only assessed according to the degree of confidence which persons of their background, experience and qualifications might be expected to have. Surely that leaves a great deal of value judgment to somebody who is adjudicating in this area. Whilst this approach is probably legitimate for directors of small backyard companies or perhaps the corner service station, it makes no sense to directors of large quoted companies, because these people certainly are quasi professionals, being paid large sums to take care of shareholders' funds and also the money of creditors. To a great extent they are responsible for the tenure of employment of the workers. We feel that like other professionals, such as doctors or lawyers, their performance should be assessed on the objective standards.
The companies Acts in Europe and particularly in the United Kingdom are more stringent in this area than is this Bill. We would hope that the Minister would make a more serious attempt to strengthen the supervision of directors in quoted companies as well as all other companies. Following on from the suggestions made to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) by the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi), perhaps the Minister might look at the provisions contained in the Swedish Bill. Perhaps thosc provisions might be able to be altered for or implemented in the Australian scene. We would hope so anyhow.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (8.28)-1 wish to respond to the two propositions put forward by the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi). Undoubtedly he has done an enormous amount of work in this area and he is probably enjoying tonight's proceedings. It is arguable that the proposition which he put forward in relation to clause 535 of the Companies Bill is in itself any wider than the definition of 'officer' under clause 229.
Mr Jacobi-It does not cover a receiver. That is the problem.

2334 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

Mr MOORE-No, but it is a marginal situation. The honourable member cannot claim the points that he has been claiming on the basis of that argument. I understand what he is talking about. I will agree to look at it. But I do not believe the force of his argument really offsets the two balances.
In relation to the matters put forward by the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown), I can only say that the company directors are the owner's representatives. Those are the facts of life. The board of directors represents the owners. The managing director is the management. I can understand that some sensitivities exist when one looks at the Australian Labor Party in Queensland in relation to its broadcasting station. Some considerable difficulties and problems are being experienced in recognising who represents the owners of the ALP radio station. I can understand the particular interest in the subject. Nevertheless the competence, care and skill of those gentlemen is now being tested in the Supreme Court of Queensland. That will make remarkable reading. I am sure the honourable member had that matter in mind.
The appointment of directors is of considerable significance. The directors represent the proprietors of the corporation. In my view people are sometimes appointed as directors because they are friends within friends rather than people with straight out management competence for appointment to directorships. I understand the points that have been brought forward. The members of boards should recognise that they represent proprietary interests.
Clause agreed to.
Clauses 230 to 246-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 247 (Circulation of members' resolutions, etc.).
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (8.31)-1 raise again the matter of shareholders' rights. Those rights have been neglected by the provisions of the Bill. In relation to members' petitions, I suggest that clause 247 ought to be amended by replacing the words 'and (unless the company otherwise resolves) at the expense of those members' with the words 'at the expense of the company'. Under clause 247 (5) a company has the power to apply to the court to prevent the right specified in clause 247 (1) from being abused. This clause ought to be amended to extend the rights to individual members. They ought to be able to insist on the company forwarding details of any resolution of the members at the same time as the notice of meeting is sent to all members. This is abSent from

the Bill. The expense ought to be borne by the company. It should also be possible for an individual shareholder to cause the company to circulate on his behalf a statement with respect to any business to be dealt with at the meeting. The circulation of these statements should arguably be at the shareholders' expense unless the company otherwise agrees. In any event, the expense could be minimised if the statement accompanied the notice of the meeting. This is yet another clear indication of the fact that little respect is shown to the shareholders in the provisions of the Bill.
I raise one further matter which is not pertinent to the matter I have just mentioned. I have tried for a long time to get a provision in this respect included in the Bill. I refer to proxy shares. It has nothing to do with this section of the Bill, but I ask the Minister to think about this matter. I believe that proxy shares are an important part of shareholders' rights. A shareholder should have the right not only to appoint a proxy but also to instruct a proxy in certain specific and important areas, such as the appointment or dismissal of a director or an auditor. The shareholder is neglected in this respect in the provisions of this Bill.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (8.33)-A substantial number of corporations provide for proxies in the detached part of their annual reports and those proxies are not only about whom one wants to appoint but also about whether one wants to vote for or against a resolution or a person. I have seen this method adopted by a number of public corporations.
Clause agreed to.
Clauses 248 to 260-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 261 (Power of company to obtain information as to beneficial ownership of its shares).
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (8.35)-1 have a certain amount of feeling about clause 261. The clause deals with the absence of nominee shares. Under sub-clause (5) a company has the right to disclose on request the beneficial owners of its shares. It is not obliged to do so. Sub-clause (4) states that once this ownership is disclosed by a company it is listed on a separate share register which sets out the beneficial owners. Sub-clause (5) states that separate parts of the register are open for inspection only by a member of the company or persons authorised so to do by the Corporate Affairs Commission. Sub-clause (9) gives the Corporate Affairs Commission power to

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2335

exempt disclosure. I trust that I am reading accurately the provisions of the Bill on those four points.
Mr John Brown-You are.
Mr JACOBI-I am grateful to the honourable member. A very interesting letter by Bertram Cox in the Adelaide Advertiser of August of last year puts this matter far more succinctly than I can. It states:
The law imposes restrictions on who may hold shares in an Australian company and also prescribes the maximum percentage they may acquire in any particular enterprise.
Foreign investment in Australian companies is controlled, particularly in extractive industries takeover procedures are invoked when more than a certain percentage is held, mUltiple ownership of television stations is prevented and 'insider' trading by directors and others can be traced. All sound and acceptable policies.
Yet these controls can be vitiated at will by the use of nominee companies, a trend that is growing in this country. Any person or company can buy as many shares as they desire, record them in XYZ Nominees Ltd and their ownership will remain as secret as a Swiss bank account.
How wrong this is. It completely vitiates the intention of the legislation. The share registers of companies are open to inspection by the public, yet major shareholdings through this 'cloak and dagger' method remain concealed from view.
If nominee companies are permitted to continue-and I remain unconvinced of their necessity or desirability-- legislation should be introduced to require nominee companies-usually banks-to supply to companies a monthly list of the owners of shares held by them as nominees in those companies. This information would then become available, and rightly so, to the general public on a search of the companies' registers.
Where is the justification for secrecy in what should be and otherwise is, a matter open to the public?
Insofar as overseas companies Acts are concerned, whether they be in the European Economic Community, encompassing France, West Germany and the United Kingdom or in Canada and the United States, perhaps they are equally as defective as these Bills in relation to nominee shareholdings. I think this is regrettable and scandalous. I put a series of questions on the Notice Paper which highlight the utter deficiency of this piece of legislation. I asked the Treasurer (Mr Howard) the following question:
I. Can he say what proportion of shares in each of the following companies:
(i) BHP (ii) Peko-Wallsend (iii) Western Mining Corporation (iv) North Broken Hill (v) Pancontinental Mining (vi) CSR (vii) MIM Holdings
is held by bank or other nominee companies.
2. Further, can he say what proportion of the nominee shareholding in each of these companies is in turn foreign owned, and if not, why not.

3. Is it a fact that nominee shareholding of major Australian mining companies has increased steadily over the past few years.
4. If so, is the Treasurer and the FIRB concerned by this development.
5. Is it also a fact that the Treasurer has powers under Sectin 36 (I) of the Foreign Takeovers Act to require disclosure of the persons or corporations on whose behalf the interest is held by nominee companies.
. 6. If so, h~s he used his powers to discover what foreign mterests are mvolved in nominee companies which have significant shares in the mining companies above.
The answer is obviously no.
7. If he has not used these powers, why not, and will he do so with urgency.
8. Will the Government allow Australian equity in the above companies to continue to decline, or does it propose any action to limit foreign ownership through nominee companies.
. 9. What proportion of shares in each of the following banks IS held by that bank's own nominee companies:
(a) ANZ (b) Bank of NSW (c) National (d) CBC
10. What is the rank, in terms of the number of shares held, that each nominee has in its parent bank.
II. Is it a fact that where a hank nominee company holds shares 111 its holding company, even if this is on behalf of a third party, that the hank is enabled to act in the same fashion as if it were dealing in its own shares, by virtue of the power granted by the beneficial owner.
12. II' so, will he discuss with the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs-
I hope he has done so already-
the need to include appropriate provisions in the proposed
Ir National Companies Securities legislation to rectify this gap,
and not, why not.
Let me just pass one simple observation. The provisions in the Bill are not sufficient. They are not good enough. They are defective. They are ineffective. The only way to protect Australian equity and the resources that this country wants to develop is to force disclosure of nominee shareholdings. I will be delighted to get answers to those extensive questions. I doubt whether I will get them within the next month. I sincerely ask the Minister to note that this is one area which, in this country's interests, ought to be re-raised with the Ministerial Council to ensure that there are adequate provisions in this legislation providing for the forced disclosure of nominee shareholdings.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (8.42)-1 will take only a minute to reinforce the very strongly stated views of the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi). I think that anybody who was listening to him could only be impressed with his sincerity on this subject and his innate knowledge of the problems of this sort of shareholding. I repeat that we demand that the

2336 REPRESEN TATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

Companies Bill be amended to allow full disclosure to the public of the beneficial ownership of all shares in companies. Public accountability and the philosophy of disclosure demand that the information be open not only to the company but also to the public. Clause 261 (9) referring to the discretion of the National Companies and Securities Commission to exempt a person from the provision of the Bill is something which rather terrifies and horrifies us. I repeat our strong desire that the Bill be amended in this area and that the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities will see that full disclosure is available to everybody, so that anybody trading with a company will know with whom he is trading.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (8.43)-~I also wish to compliment the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) on his certain depth of knowledge of these matters. Clause 261 enables the company concerned to inquire of shareholders as to who the beneficial holders are. Having acquired that information it will then be registered in a special register which will be available to the National Companies and Securities Commission and to members of the company.
I just give a brief outline as to why we have a nominee company. It is one of those things which mystique has also built up as a bogy. It is used for very valid commercial reasons, besides the matter of privacy. The commercial reasons are that, in a sense as a broker, one almost invariably runs one's own nominee company, because there are an enormous number of occasions when one has to accumulate shares or register shares to protect oneself against dividends or rights in an issue and that could not be done in one's name. Under the requirements of the Stock Exchange this has to be done through a nominee company. Exactly the same provision applies. therefore, to the banking nominee companies. These companies are very heavily used in certain personal cases and certainly in the cases of overseas investments in Australia. This is done through banking corporations, through nominee companies for the very precise reasons that one has to clear one's currency. Therefore, one is apt to use and register shares that are bought in London or New York and nominate those through a nominee company while one is clearing currency. The banks will not release the script until a person pays, or in the reverse, where a' person happens to be selling he registers it with the bank nominee company and declares those shares to the purchasers in New York, London or wherever on receipt of money. It is very obvious that nominee companies are heavily used in those situations for registration of

overseas payments. Those are two valid reasons that brokers use them.
Under the takeover code it is necessary, once a level of 20 per cent is reached under the new threshold agreement which will be applicable as a legislative base, I hope from 1 July, to declare one's hand. That in itself is a threshold means. I am aware, as well as anybody, that nominee companies have been used for a number of warehousing and other techniques. I am well aware of that. I do not wish to let the other side of the coin be shown. These companies are a very useful commercial device. 1 would support their use.
Clause agreed to.
Clause 262 agreed to.
Clause 263 agreed to.
Clauses 264 to 266-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clauses 267 to 276-by leave-taken together.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (8.47)- We are now dealing with Division 2, accounts. I thought that the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) was going to rise to speak to a previous clause which we did not debate. One point that Twould like to make, Mr Deputy Chairman, if I have your indulgence-l think the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs would probably agree with me~is that we are insisting that companies should have more frequent accounts, at least for quoted companies. The reason that we particularly want to question the Companies Bill in that area is that there is a perfectly good example in the Associated Securities Ltd collapse a couple of years ago where people were still devoting their savings to a body which was at risk. If accounts had been published more frequently then perhaps these people may not have done just that because the previous years' accounts were no guide to the investors in that area. I am glad that I have had your indulgence, Mr Deputy Chairman, to make that remark.
I get back to the area of accounts we are debating. In the exposure draft of the Companies Bill certain provisions were inserted as Part 6aa in relation to companies acting as trustees of trading trusts. In essence these provisions required the company to indicate on all its business documents that it was carrying on business as a trustee and to name the trust. They required the directors in their report, forming part of the annual accounts, to specify the business or businesses that were carried on by the company as trustees of a trading trust and to state whether the assets of the trust were sufficient to discharge the liabilities of the

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2337

company as trustee. The Opposition welcomed those proposed provisions as being, firstly, an important protection to persons dealing with companies acting as trustees of trading trusts, alerting them that the company was not trading in its own right, and secondly, we found that it was a disincentive to the use of trading trusts as a vehicle for tax avoidance by requiring the trustee capacity of the company to be publicly disclosed. Perhaps-I might say this cynically-predictably these proposals brought a storm of protest from the corporate sector. Regrettably the Government succumbed and removed these provisions from the Bill in its second draft. We find that rather regrettable.
We urge that legislation be prepared forthwith incorporating as a minimum the provisions of the original Part 6aa of the exposure draft. We bring this to the Minister's attention most forcefully. We find one of the real weaknesses of this Bill to be that those provisions that were so much of a reform nature in the exposure draft have been deleted from the Bill that we are now debating. I hope that will be another area in which the Minister might be able to use his good offices and no doubt his forceful arguments to prevail upon the Ministers of the Ministerial Council to see that that original draft be incorporated as an amendment in this legislation.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (8.51)-1 reinforce the comments made by the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) in regard to this clause which deals with accounts and auditing. The Opposition has moved that the Bill be amended. I know that it cannot be amended at this stage because of problems with the States, but I think this is something that should be dealt with fairly quickly once the Act is proclaimed. We feel that the Bill is inadequate. I have three specific points to outline. Firstly, I know that in particular the existing legislation in New South Wales requires the principal accounting officers of the companies to state whether, to the best of their knowledge and belief, the accounts give a true and fair view of matters. That requirement does not appear anywhere in this Bill.
Mr John Brown-It has been deleted.

does not require such reports to state the emoluments of directors to be included in the aggregate amount of emoluments shown in the accounts or the fixed salary of a director who is a full time employee. The latter is covered by an exemption which also is not contained in the existing legislation. I feel that it is a matter that should be covered and I think the Minister should take that on board.
1 would just like to mention the matLer which the honourable member for ParramatLa raised regarding more frequent accounts being submitted rather than yearly accounts. I have mentioned that nobody takes responsibility for submitting more frequent accounts. Even if somebody took responsibility for the matter, we consider that the accounts should be submitted more frequently than once a year so that a trend is available not only to creditors but also to those peoplc who are prepared to invest in such companies. As I mentioned earlier in the debate, this should apply particularly to companies of a high risk character. I think that the amendments outlined by the Opposition are sane amendments and that they should be proceeded with by the Government.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (8.54)-1 cannot accept the Opposition's amendments, for a couple of
reasons which r shall outline. The honourable
member for Banks (Mr Mountford) should know that accounts of all public companies are submitted half-yearly. That is a requirement of listing on the stock exchange and it has been so for some considerable time. If one is in a risk area-the term the honourable member used, and I presume that relates to mining accounts are required to be produced on a quarterly basis. The companies come forward with quarterly production figures. On top of that, accounts are put out and signed by the executives of the company and also by one of the directors. The auditor is required to certify as to the accuracy of those accounts; so there is no point in saying that the accounts go out without verification or without the responsibility of the company. That is just not true.
Mr Jacohi-You have to take into account the standard of the information, too.

Mr MOUNTFORD-It has been deleted. The requirements in the Bill for the keeping of
accounts and the submitting of those accounts to a corporation or the Corporate Affairs Commission is pointless really if somebody does not take responsibility for them. This does not happen in this
legislation. I feel that that is a major omission. Clause 270 (7) which deals with directors' reports

Mr MOORE-As the honourable member for Hawker said, and as I said last night, the standard of information in accounts varies enormously. By chance, the accounts I had last night showed an enormous amount of information. Generally
speaking, those accounts which show too much in-
formation are not appreciated and are not read. The accounts that show too little would cause one

2338 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

to glance at them briefly because of their inadequacy. Directors' pay and emoluments are shown in the accounts; they are not shown as gross amounts. The accounts will signify the amount paid to executive and non-executive directors. The accounts do not itemise them; so one has to do a calculation to find out roughly what the directors would have got. But the figures are there if anyone wishes to look for them.
Clauses agreed to. Clauses 277 and 278-by leave-taken together, and agreed to. Clause 279 (Exempt proprietary company need not appoint auditor in certain circumstances) . Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (8.56)-This clause deals with the exempt liability of proprietary companies dealing with auditors. My view is that this clause should be deleted from the Bill. I also believe that clause 277 (2) and (6) should be amended by inserting the word 'unlimited' between 'and' and 'exempt proprietary company'. Regarding clause 370, the remedy in cases of oppression or injustice should be to replace the provision modelled on section 75 of the United Kingdom Companies Act 1980. That section covers the following areas: Isolated acts of oppression; proposed or anticipated oppression; and single acts-past, actual or anticipated-acts of oppression. To some extent the Minister has covered multiple acts, but the question of anticipated acts has not been covered. Mr Moore-What clause are you on? Mr JACOBI-Clause 320. Mr John Brown-We are only on clause 279. Mr JACOBI-This clause deals with the same problem. I want to canvas the two issues now so I do not need to come back to the matter. I ask leave of the Minister to incorporate in Hansard section 75 of the United Kingdom Act which refers to proposed new sections 320 and 279. Leave granted. The document read as follows-
75.(1) Any member of a company may apply to the court by petition for an order under this section on the ground that the affairs of the company are being or have been conducted in a manner which is unfairly prejudicial to the interests of some part of the members (including at least himself) or that any actual or proposed act or omission of the company (including an act or omission on its behalf) is or would be so prejudicial.
(2) If in the case of any company-

(a) the Secretary of State has received a report under section 168 of the 1948 Act (inspectors' reports) or exercised his powers under Part III of the 1967 Act or section 36 (2) to (6) of the Insurance Companies Act 1974 (inspection of company's books and papers); and
(b) it appears to him that the affairs of the company are being or have been conducted in a manner which is unfairly prejudicial to the interests of some part of the members or that any actual or proposed act or omission of the company (including an act or omission on its behalf) is or would be so prejudicial,
he may himself (in addition to or instead of presenting a petition for the winding-up of the company under section 35 (l) of the 1967 Act) apply to the court by petition for an order under his section.
(3) lfthe court is satisfwd that a petition under this section is well founded it may make such order as it thinks fit for givingreliefin respect of the matters complained of.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (3) above, an order under this section may-
(a) regulate the conduct of the company's affairs in the future;
(b) require the company to refrain from doing or continuing an act complained of by the petitioner or to do an act which the petitioner has complained it has omitted to do;
(c) authorise civil proceedings to be brought in the name and on behalf of the company by such person or persons and on such terms as the court may direct;
(d) provide for the purchase of the shares of any members of the company by other members or by the company itself and, in the case of a purchase by the company itself, the reduction of the company's capital accordingly.
(5) Where an order under this section requires the company not to make any, or any specified, alteration in the memorandum or articles then, notwithstanding anything in the Companies Acts, the company shall not have power without the leave of the court to make any such alteration in breach of that requirement.
(6) Any alteration in the memorandum or articles of the company made by virtue of an order under this section shall be of the same effect as if duly made by resolution of the company and the provisions of the Companies Act shall apply to the memorandum or articles as so altered accordingly.
(7) An office copy of any order under this section altering, or giving leave to alter, a company's memorandum or articles shall, within 14 days from the making of the order or such longer period as the court may allow, be delivered by the company to the registrar of companies for registration; and if a company makes default in complying with this subsection, the company and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding one-fifth of the statutory maximum or, on conviction after continued contravention, a default fine not exceeding one-fiftieth of the statutory maximum for every day until that copy is delivered.
(8) In relation to a petition under this section, section 365 of the 1948 Act (general rules for winding up) shall apply as it applies in relation to a winding-up petition.
(9) This section shall apply to a person who is not a member of a company but to whom shares in the company have been transferred or transmitted by operation of law as it applies to a member of the company, and references to a member or members shall be construed accordingly.

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2339

(1) In subsections (2) to (9) above "company" means any body corporate which is liable to be wound up under th\l 1948 Act.
(11) Section 210 of the 1948 Act and section 35(2) of the 1967 Act (which are superseded by this section) shall cease to have effect except in relation to proceedings on a petition pre-

that, when so much attention in the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Bill has been devoted to the protection of shareholders, this urgent reform has been overlooked in the Companies Bill. I recommend that the Minister for Business and Con-

sented before the appointed day.

sumer Affairs (Mr Moore) have a look at that sec-

Clause agreed to. Clauses 280 to 319-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.

tion which the honourable member for Hawker has incorporated in Hansard. I think it is a much more advanced concept with regard to oppression of shareholders than is contained within this Bill. I

Clause 320 (Remedy in cases of oppression or hope that that would be one other area to which

injustice) .

some urgent reform could be made. Perhaps the

Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (8.58)- Minister could start the ball rolling in that area on We are now discussing Part IX of the Bill which the Ministerial Council.

deals with the conduct of affairs of a company in Clause agreed to.

an oppressive or unjust manner. In the best of all worlds, I guest that that type of behaviour might not happen, but humans .being humans and

Clauses 321 to 323-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.

companies being companies, it does happen; so Clause 324 (Liability of receiver).

this is a very important Part. In our amendment we ask:

Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (9.3)-1 will not delay the Committee on this clause. Clause 324, as I

(b) adequate remedies for oppressive conduct, including
extension of the concept of oppression to single and anticipated acts unfairly prejudicial to a shareholder; and provision of further means such as a 'shareholders' Tribunal' to protect the interests of minority shareholders,

understand it, establishes no duty of care for the receiver. I have the New Zealand Companies Amendment Act. I seek leave of the Committee to have part of new section 345B of the Act incor-

Clause 320 constitutes a limited advance on the porated in Hansard.

present section 186 relating to the oppression of Leave granted.

shareholders. Clause 320 (1) (a) and clause 320 (2) are new clauses entitling a member of a company to apply for the winding up of the company if he believes:

The section read as follows-
It provides that a receiver or manager of the property of a company who sells any of that property shall exercise all reasonable care to obtain the best price reasonably obtainable

that directors have acted in their own interests and not in the interests of the members as a whole or in any other manner whatsoever that is unfair or unjust to one or more of the members
We cannot altogether disagree with that. This

as at the time of sale. This duty is expressed to be one that is owed by the receiver to the company; and it is not to be a defence to any action or proceeding brought by the company against the receiver or manager in respect of a breach of that duty that the receiver or manager was acting as the agent of the company, or under a power of attorney given by the

innovation, however, merely restates in a different company. Neither is the receiver or manager entitled to be

part of the Bill the right of a member which is already contained in clause 364 (1) (f).

indemnified or compensated by the company for any liability he may incur as a result of the breach of his duty.

The remedy of oppression has been seriously restricted in its application by the courts. The Opposition believes that the concept of oppression should be replaced by the concept of unfair prejudice which is referred to in the section of the

Mr JACOBI-I suggest to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mf Moore) that that section be included in the Bill which we are presently debating. I request that this suggestion go to the Ministerial Council for consideration.

English Bill to which the honourable member for Clause agreed to.

Hawker (Mr Jacobi) referred. That section was recommended by the Jenkins Committee in the United Kingdom in 1962. Only by lowering the threshold will this become a meaningful remedy

Clauses 325 to 357-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clauses 358 to 474-by leave-taken together.

for oppressed minorities. In addition the tendency Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (9.5)-

of the courts to require a course of conduct before These clauses of the Bill are headed 'Part XU-

finding oppression should be replaced by a proWinding Up'. I guess that is relevant as we are get-

vision that single acts of prejudice are sufficient to ting to the winding up stage of this epic saga with

attract the remedy. The Opposition believes the Companies Bill. Our complaint about Part

further that the concept of a shareholders' triXII, to a great extent, relates to its huge extent be-

bunal warrants closer scrutiny as a further means cause the provisions relating to winding up cover

to shareholder protection. It is to be lamented some 117 clauses of the Bill. Part XII extends

2340 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

from clause 358 to clause 474. A quick perusal of I point out that just as the investor invests

the structure of the clauses in the index to the Bill money and so has security, so does the worker in-

shows the complex nature of the provisions relatvest his labour and should be considered high in

ing to the different forms of winding up.

priority above all other debtors including the

Unfortunately, in Australia, there has never been a full examination of the procedures and requirements relating to corporate insolvency, although the legislative provisions relating to individual bankruptcies receive close scrutiny. I suggest that, in view of the enormous number of bankruptcies that are occurring around Australia and that have occurred since this Government came to office, it is high time that a first class look was given to the whole area of insolvency. The Australian Law Reform Commission has requested a reference from the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) on the whole question of insolvency. To date, the Government has indicated that it does not intend giving such a reference to

Commonwealth. We are aware that the States have not agreed to waive their claim. But I am sure that, if the Minister were to get together with the States, he could work something out that would give security to the worker who has invested his or her lahour.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (9.9)-Clause 360 deals with the liabilities of contributors of present or past members. In dealing with corporate malfeasance I am reminded of that old dictum myoid father used to tell me. He said: 'As you go through life, lad, you will find plenty Sheriffs of Nottingham and very few Robin Hoods. To the former they give knighthoods and the latter they hang'. I note that the Minister agrees with that.

the Commission.

Section 391 of the South Australian Companies Act provides that any transfer of shares made

We feel that the Law Reform Commission has within a period of two years before the comdone excellent work in such areas and that, since mencement of the winding up of the company to

it has requested such a brief from the Governany person known by the transferor to be unable

ment, it is almost sinful that the Government has to pay the liability on those shares shall not relieve not made an attempt to give it that brief. the transferor of that liability. It was considered Simplification of the winding up provisions and that section 391 was sound in principle and should

the consideration of the vastly divergent interests of secured and unsecured creditors are two important reasons to justify such a reference. We feel very strongly on this point that the part of the Bill that requires 117 clauses to examine the whole subject of winding up of companies is mute testimony to the fact that the whole process is far too involved. We ask that the Minister urgently heed the request by the Law Reform Commission and give it a brief to look at this whole area of winding up.

be retained in future legislation. That provision was subsequently incorporated in the South Australian Act.
The Minister may recall the headline 'Garretty group creditors meet again today'. This head line referred to one of the most disgraceful episodes in Australian corporate history, and there have been enough of them. This episode concerned the Garretty group of companies and in particular the mutual trust Dividend Fund Inc. In this case not only did a group of mainly small investors lose the

Mrs CHILD (Henty) (9.7)-1 draw the attenvalue of their shares but also they were personally

tion of the Minister for Business and Consumer liable for a $125,000 deficiency in the company.

Affairs (Mr Moore) to clause 441 which relates to priority payments. I understand that these pay-

Mr Barry Jones-Unlike the Garrettys.

ments are also mentioned in the Crown Debts Mr JACOBI-Unlike the Garrettys. Much of

(Priority) Bill. Sub-clause (e) states that the fifth the fund's money was lent to other companies in

payment in priority to all other unsecured debts is the group of Garretty companies. In most West-

the wages in respect of services rendered to the ern countries this would not have been allowed. It

company by employees before the relevant date, could not happen under the South Australian

but not exceeding $2,000 in respect of anyone of Act. However, Dividend Fund was inhibited only

the employees. We were disappointed to find that by its articles of association, which were no inhi-

the Government did not accept the recbition whatsoever. It is essential that a provision

ommendation of the Senate Select Committee such as section 391 of the South Australian

that the Crown priority would be abrogated and Companies Act dealing with transfers to avoid

that the secured debts would come first and then liability be inserted into the national Act. There

the employees would come after. My colleague, ought to be proper regulation of mutual funds. It

the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John is an indictment of the Government that there is

Brown) will move an amendment to the Crown an absence of such a provision in this legislation.

Debts (Priority) Bill.

There is no excuse for this. To add insult to injury,

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2341

the Victorian Government was obliged to bailout does not always keep the payment of wages to em-

a number of elderly people each to the tune of ployees up to date. It puts off the payment of

$4,500. These pensioners had put their life savings wages because it thinks that they are probably one

into this shonky group. I regret to say it, but it is of the last things that need to be paid. In many in-

true, that under this Government equality before stances it is a subsidiary company which is being

the law means the right to rich men to sleep under wound up and the holding company will escape

bridges.

scot free. It wants to maintain some credibility

I sincerely ask the Minister to take section 391 of the South Australian Act to the Ministerial Council as a means of ensuring that no more shonky deals like the Garretty situation are allowed to take place. Unless this provision is put in the federal legislation this situation will occur again. I will read to the Committee section 391 of the South Australian Act, which is concerned with transfer to avoid liability. Sub-section (1) is

with its largest creditors who are trading with the holding company. Of course, the people it can get rid of are the employees and the small creditors. Therefore I hope the Minister will be able to convince his colleagues in the other States that all of the wages and emoluments of employees should rank above even secured creditors in clause 440 and should not be relegated to the fifth, sixth and seventh positions in clause 441.

not pertinent to this legislation, but I will read it nonetheless. It states:
Any transfer of a share in any company to an infant for the purpose of avoiding or evading liability with regard to such share, shall not relieve the transferor of any such liability.

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (9.18)-Clauses 358 to 474 are significant clauses, relating to the provisions for winding up. I think everybody has seen instances of this in recent times. Some companies

I will now read sub-section (2), which is relevant to the legislation before the Committee. Subsection (2) states:

have been wound up in a very spectacular fashion but most do not attract such attention. I think it is probably worthwhile at this point to make some reference to the winding up of a significant

No transfer of a share in any company made for the purpose of avoiding or evading liability with regard to such share shall relieve the transferor of any such liability, if the transfer is made to any person for a nominal consideration, or for no

company. Opposition members seem to think that there is some conspiratorial atmosphere surrounding subsidiary companies. They are not de-

consideration, or for valuable consideration expressed, but not paid to the transferor, or for a consideration paid to the transferee, or with a trust or reservation expressed, or implied, for the benefit of the transferor, or to a person know to the transferor to be unable to pay the liability on such share, unless

signed by most corporations to be anything but an ordinary trading corporation entity. They generally have a position in corporate strategy and part of that strategy is not to defraud.

such transfer has been made and registered two years before the company is wound up.

Mr Barry Jones-Remember what Adam Smith said.

It is appalling that there is a complete absence of such a provision from this Bill. This is an indictment of the Federal Government's advisers. Unless that loophole is plugged the same position will be exploited ad infinitum. I ask the Minister to insert in the national Companies Bill the provision in the South Australian Companies Act.

Mr MOORE-I am aware of that. I am also aware of what some other people say about the priorities and credibility of people in corporate life. They are not necessarily correct, just as Adam Smith's observations on economics were not necessarily correct. Therefore, I will get back to the question of liquidation of receiverships be-

Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (9.15)-1 would cause they are important. Rather than start from

like to refer briefly to clauses 440 and 441. Clause the position that the honourable member for

440 provides that all debts will rank equally unless Henty (Mrs Child) did, I would point to some of

otherwise provided in the legislation. This obvithe facts which I think are relevant. It concerns

ously refers to debenture holders and other me that these days, when a receivership gets under

secured creditors, who would obviously rank way and moves along to the inevitable liquidation,

above the creditors mentioned in clause 441. So in the initial stages an evaluation of assets is made.

far as paragraphs (e), (f) and (g) of clause 441 On the basis of this valuation the receivers

are concerned, I think that wages, compensation accounts are paid-they are substantial-so that

for injuries to employees, long service leave and so at the end of the road the return to shareholders,

forth should rank above even secured creditors. In secured creditors and other receivers under the

the normal course of events, if a company is going plan sometimes are a good deal more than they

along quite satisfactorily the wages, salaries, long were in the first case. This brings about the pos-

service leave entitlements and so forth are payition where debentures or unsecured notes are

able when they fall due, either weekly or when a sold on the market at substantial discounts to

person takes leave. A company which is going bad their real worth because the assessment in the first

2342 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

place is made, in no small way, by the receiver or the liquidator on a valuation which he puts in the newspapers and which everyone takes for granted. When the receiver gets to a position that is sometimes considerably more than was first set out. The Patrick Partners corporation liquidation is one such example. Every honourable member seems to remember that case. Because of that I think we all ought to look at provisions to ensure, in the first place, that the write-down on assets is not as significant or as excessive as it would be under real market forces which makes the receiver look a particularly smart performer, and also that people do not act because they are not fully informed.
I think the honourable member for Henty used the words 'investors are secured'. Shareholders are not secured, but rank at the bottom of the list. They come after unsecured creditors who are right down at the bottom. The only secure investors are those who have a registered mortgage against assets. Those distinctions should be known. The other point is that mutual funds have had a fairly disastrous history. I put that down in no small way to the thing called the management company which is implanted into a lot of the mutual funds developed in Australia in the 1960s and the 19708. In future those funds will have to be looked at in terms of what is allowable for the management company within the structure. I have a particular desire to see Australians invest, in a direct sense, in Australia. That would require that these funds are not put in the position of having management companies built into their super structures which is enormously expensive and therefore impedes their performance rather than helps it. Those are matters which will have to be looked at.
Clauses agreed to.
Clauses 475 to 564-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 565 (Dividends payable from profits only).
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (9.23)- We are now dealing with clause 565, dividends payable from profits only. This clause causes the Opposition some worry. In fact, the Opposition included this clause in our second reading amendment. The clause now only provides that no dividends shall be payable to the shareholder of any company except out of profits. Whilst the clause gives an inclusive definition of dividends it does not give any definition of profit. Sub-clause (2) assumes that the concept of profit is clearly defined and understood for this sub-clause makes it an offence for a director or executive officer of a

company wilfully to pay dividends out of what he knows is not profits. For that reason alone a definition of profits is totally desirable. In the view of the Opposition, more importantly, in failing to define profits the Bill leaves the way open for a liberal interpretation of the concept and for the strictures of this clause to be avoided.
In the exposure draft of the Companies Bill clause 376 defined profits, for the purpose of payment of dividends, as being the sum of:
(a) The aggregate of its revenue profits so far as not previously applied (whether by distribution, capitalisation or otherwise); and
(b) Tbe amount, if any, by which the aggregate of its realised capital profits so far as not so previously applied exceeds the aggregate of revenue losses and realised capital losses so far as not previously written off.
The proposed clause contained further strictures relating to the inclusion of capital profits in the profits against which dividends could be debited. There was some criticism of these provisions from an accounting point of view. Probably some of the criticisms were justified. However, it is a great pity that the Government got cold feet in this area.
Mr J acohi-They watered it down.
Mr JOHN BROWN-That is why they got cold feet, because they used cold water to water it down. What was a most important step towards reform has been abandoned and the interpretation of the concept of profit left entirely to the directors of the company. While we may share some of the views of the Minister that not all directors are thieves, cheats or brigands, I think the Minister would also agree that there are quite a number of directors, in and out of gaol, who perhaps would not qualify for that description. The Opposition is quite concerned that the definition of profits is almost left to the value judgment of a director. The Opposition regrets that instead of persisting with a worthwhile reform and endeavouring to get it right the Government has succumbed to unreasonable pressure from accountants and other lobbyists and that good reform in thc exposure draft, like a lot of other good reforms, has disappeared from the Companies Bill. We regret that that is what has happened. This is another one of the many amendments which we think need to be made to the Companies Bill to make it the Bill that we all want, given the fact that it is a co-operative scheme rather than a uniform scheme. Even with that fact in mind if this amendment were cleared up perhaps there might be more protection.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (9.26)-1 will not delay the House but I wish to say something on

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2343

the matter of no dividends except out of profits. I declared year. That can be an adjustment of the

suggest that we replace this provision with secstock figure in the normal trading company or it

tions 39 and 40 of the United Kingdom can relate to assets which have been disposed of or

Companies Act. I will read from these sections so which have become redundant for which the loss

that they will be recorded in Hansard. The prehas not been taken into account.

ceding Australian Companies Acts as well as this Bill, regrettably, do not define the word profits. That is precisely the argument and is the sort of argument which the Minister used when talking on the last provision of the Bill. It is ironic, as I said last night, that the United Kingdom has adopted a more stringent definition than we have done. I will briefly read from the two United Kingdom sections. Section 39 states:

In terms of determining profit one should look also at the taxation aspects. A corporation or a proprietary company can apply to pay a dividend which represents more than gross earnings for the year. That meets the requirements of the 60 per cent payout and gives substantial tax credits into the future. Once again profits, under those circumstances, are in a different situation. When we talk of profit, we really have a moving feast and

(l) A company shall not make a distribution . . . except out of profits availablefor the purpose . . .
(2) For the purpose of this part . . . a company's profit available for distribution, are its accumulated realised profits, so far as not previously utilised by distribution or capitalisation, less its accumulative or realised losses, so far as not

one has to understand the criteria on which we should rely. I can appreciate the honourable member's need for definition of profit; all I am saying is that in arriving at that position first of all we must determine our accounting standard. 1 am

previously written off in a reduction or re-organisation of referring to historical, current cost accounting.

capital duly made.

Having accepted the basis of that, one has to

Section 40 states:

move from that position to the valuation of stock

A public company may only make a distribution at any on hand and, after having made that assessment,

time:

one must then look at the taxation implications.

(a) if at that time the amount of its net assets is not less Having made those three judgments, one might

than the aggregate of the companies called up share get three totally different views of what profit is.

capital and its undistributable reserves; and

(b) if, and to the extent that, the distribution does not re-

Clause agreed to.

duce the amount of those assets to less than that aggregate.
I suggest that until we include those sorts of provisions in the Bill we will not get the coverage that

Clauses 566 to 576--by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 577 agreed to.

we want.

Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business whole.

and Consumer Affairs) (9.29)-The concept of Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (9.33)-1 want to raise

profit is a very interesting one and one which I with the Minister the question of Schedule 9

think we should all look at. Firstly, it is not only a which now, in effect, goes into the legislation by

question of, for example, a revenue profit or a way of regulation to complete the Bill. The Minis-

capital profit which brings certain applications to ter and I have had a lengthy exchange on the need

accounting as we know them today but also confor an accounting standards review board. In his

cerns the problems relating to current cost acrecent answer to my question on notice No. 418,

counting which has a very dramatic effect on the he stated:

profitability of corporations. Very few companies . . . decided to refer to the National Companies and Sethese days, if they apply current cost accounting curities Commission for consideration and report:

directly to their operations, would come out with a profit because of the inflationary effect and be-

(a) the question of the establishment of the Companies and Securities Law Review Committee; and

cause of the provision which comes out of that. In certain areas they would but without any doubt that would not be the case in the general manufacturing area. On top of that, as an accounting principle one has to have some realisation of what

(b) the question of the cstablishment of the Accounting Standards Review Board and the South Australian 'Report on the Committee of Inquiry into the Registration and Conduct of Accountants'.
The Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities has received and is still considering a preliminary paper that was

profit is when there are substantial unrealised prepared for it by the National Companies and Securities losses in the accounts. This applies particularly in Commission of the Accounting Standards Review Board.

certain companies which are carrying forward I agree with the Minister's precedingremarks; it is

depreciated assets when those companies decide crucial, for a variety of reasons, to get an account-

for one reason or another not to take their loss in ing standards review committee. As the Minister

that particular year but to carry it forward. That knows, the current Schedule 9, which is going into

has a significant impact on profit within the the legislation by way of regulations-with which

2344 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Bill

we on this side of the House certainly agree- -is much less effective than the charter set down by the respective accounting bodies. We both agree on that.
I want to raise two issues relating to Schedule 9, particularly in regard to clause 2L. I suggest that the Schedule is inadequate in a number of important aspects. I trust that my repeated requests for an accounting standards review board finally will be heeded by the Ministerial Council. Perhaps the Minister might give me some indication at this stage of just how far the Ministerial Council has got in regard to that. In my view, two sub-clauses should be added to clause 2L of Schedule 9. There are a couple of reasons for that. Firstly, turnover sales ought to be disclosed. They are not at the moment. Secondly, total wage and salary costs ought to be disclosed. There is no provision in Schedule 9 for that at the moment. Why is that? One cannot possibly calculate the efficiency of a firm without sales figures. The legislation is defective in that regard. It does not give shareholders the right to make a balanced evaluation for analysis of a company's liquidity. A second point on the matter of wages is that disclosure involves a socially significant payment to the community, to both shareholders and to the public. Obviously it is important for a number of other reasons. It is quite unfortunate that this provision has never appeared in Schedule 9. The other important factor is that employers can gauge distribution to employees, governments and shareholders. This provision is equally important-I can understand the corporate sector not wanting this-in order to determine the wages component in the price structure. I hope the Ministerial Council, whatever it does and whatever guidelines and criteria it fixes, ranks those two matters as important.
It is appalling that such information is not disclosed-not made public-to enable proper evaluation. I go back to what the Minister said before. I have a different point of view. The situation to which I refer occurs in insurance companies in particular. Britain has found it to be much needed and long overdue to have more adequate information in balance sheets, whether they are quarterly, half-yearly or annual balance sheets. We tend to overlook the fact that 15 per cent of company shareholders cannot understand a balance sheet. Of those remaining-the real watchdogs-only 4 per cent or 5 per cent, excluding directors, can understand balance sheets. The failure to provide for appropriate disclosures on balance sheets is one of the real difficulties in effecting the early detection ofliquidity problems. In regard to proper accountancy procedures, I want to raise with the Minister a matter that I

consider to be critically important. It is one that I hope he takes to the Ministerial Council. In my view it should rank extremely highly amongst the criteria fixed ultimately by the review board. It is an issue that ought to be given priority. I ask the Minister to take a brief and refer it to the National Companies and Securities Commission for urgent consideration. Perhaps the Minister will understand and grasp that concept more than most others. I am dealing now with winding up, liquidation, and things such as that. The brief is this: The Companies Act must give some guidance in determining the criteria which should be used for changing from going concern values to liquidation values.
Mr Moore-Yes, I was talking about that.
Mr JACOBI-Exactly. I think it is an appalling defect. I will undertake to put an appropriate question on the Notice Paper, perhaps tomorrow. If we consider the number of companies that have gone into liquidation, this sort of information, this sort of criteria, is critically important.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (9.41)- The latter point raised by the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) was the point to which I was referring when I responded previously. I have very grave reservations about the practice of making valuations, announcing valuations, on which people hold securities. They can then sell them and come out subsequently, some years later, with a far better result. Certainly the amounts returned by the receiver are substantial.
On the question of accounting procedures and accounting reviews, there is no doubt at all that standards vary enormously. However, I do not accept that the way to do something in this life is to adopt the view: When in doubt, regulate. There is a great old bureaucratic practice which says: 'We do not know anything about it. We will regulate it'. I have seen governments in Queensland and in other places do this. The most appropriate course would be for the National Securities Commission to determine the minimum acceptable to it--not the maximum but the minimum. From that base, discussions could be held with the Institute of Chartered Accountants or the Society of Accountants in which they could recognise what should become the minimum acceptable. By doing that we could save ourselves yet another government body, board or regulatory authority. At the same time, it is hoped that we would see accountants reach those standards. If they do not reach

Companies Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2345

those standards, we will have to consider the opposite situation. I hope that common sense, commercial practice and a sense of professionalism will be such as to carry through these things.
Remainder of Bill agreed to. Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Moore)-by leaveread a third time.
COMPANIES (FEES) BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 30 April, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second.time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
COMPANIES (TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS) BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 30 April, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
COMPANIES (MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS) BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 30 April, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading iiave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
CROWN DEBTS (PRIORITY) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 30 April, on motion by MrMoore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (9.46)-1 move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing the Bill, the House: (1) expresses its concern that Crown Priorities in relation to tax instalment deductions and witholding tax on dividends and interest remitted overseas, and the priority of the Crown in right of the States, have been preserved, and (2) calls upon the Government to(a) abolish all remaining Crown Priorities in right of the Commonwealth and to seek the abolition of all remaining Crown Priorities in the State sphere, and (b) ensure that all wages and compensation payments to employees are given priority over all creditors'.
In June 1978 the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs tabled in the Senate its report entitled 'Priority of Crown Debts'. The report was in response to a reference to the Standing Committee from the Senate on 21 April 1977 to review the right of priority of the Crown over other creditors in matters of bankruptcy, corporate liquidations, and other cases of impecunious persons or corporations. In that report the Senate Standing Committee recommended the complete abrogation of all Crown priorities in insolvency administration. The Federal Government-this Government-went some way along the line. The then Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, the present Minister for Education (Mr Fife), in a statement to the House of Representatives on 13 September 1979 said that the Government had examined the report and, whilst it was fully in agreement with the main thrust of the Committee's argument, it was not willing to abrogate its total rights to Crown priority.
The Government therefore went to the States with the view that the Crown should retain priority in the areas of tax instalment deductions, withholding tax on undistributed dividends, and interest remitted overseas. When it came time for the Ministerial Council to look at this proposition, the States were unwilling to forgo their rights. Because the Commonwealth was not prepared to forgo all its rights, the States were likewise inclined. We now have the situation mentioned by the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child)

2346 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Crown Debts (Priority) Bill

and the honourable member for Banks (Mr Mountford) in the debate on clause 441 of the Companies Bill, under which employees' rights come way down the line. The Opposition finds this an unacceptable and most reprehensible state of affairs. Firstly, in the case of a failed company, secured creditors get their slice. They are followed by the Commonwealth, then the State, and finally, way down the line, in paragraphs (e), (f) and (g), the employees have an opportunity to get something from what is left of the wreck. We cannot accept that as being a moral state of affairs.
As the honourable member for Henty pointed out, and it has been pointed out in this debate by other speakers, the people who work for companies in fact are investing their labour in the fortunes of that company with just as much sincerity as a shareholder is investing his money. However, the particular characteristic of an employee's efforts is that in almost every case the only chance an employee of a company has of getting anything back is what he gains in wages from that company. The Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) suggested some while back that shareholders come even further down the line than employees.
Mr Moore-They do.
Mr JOHN BROWN-Perhaps that might be a case of regret also. It may well be that a case is made out for them to have priority over the Crown. I think that the pertinent point to be remembered here is that most people who are investing in companies, particularly large public companies, do not have all their eggs in one basket. It is a very rare investor who puts all his money into one company. So it is possible that, if a company fails and an investor loses his or her investment in that company, he or she does have some other form of living; but with an employee that is not the case. We are not prepared to accept that salary earners, when accepting their share of what is left, are placed right at the bottom of the priority list. I put it very firmly to the Minister that the Crown Debts (Priority) Bill and section 441 of the Companies Bill should be looked at to see that our view, which was the view of the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs, is accepted and that employees rights are put right at the top of the list of priorities.

employees? In fact, due to their downgraded position right at the bottom of the priorities list, the total possible payment to anyone employee under these circumstances is $2,000. Mr Deputy Speaker, I hope that both you and the Minister believe that the Opposition is very sincere in its endeavours in relation to this Bill. We believe we have a right, as I think the government has a right, to protect the workers of Australia. In the case of failed companies, it is usually not the workers fault that the company fails. Other people might put forward a countervailing argument, but in almost every case of company failure in Australia it could never be that the guilt would be sheeted to the employees. Almost always it has been the fault of the management or perhaps the economy generally that a company has failed, but certainly not the fault of the employees. How in heaven's name could anyone suggest that when a company does fail and employees are put out of work they cannot receive wages owing to them unless they are placed right at the bottom of the priorities list? I hope that the Minister would heed those remarks. I hope that, when the Ministerial Council discusses this Bill, the Opposition's amendment will be listened to and invoked.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (9.53)-Yes, I second the amendment. I do so very strongly. I think that the plight of the employee when the firm by which he is employed goes broke is pretty deplorable. Recently several firms in Melbourne, particularly manufacturing firms, have collapsed and a receiver has been appointed. In each case several hundred employees were immediately out of work, and with little warning. I will return to that aspect later. However, their plight is even worse than that of persons who are sacked or rendered redundant because in those cases people at least receive payment for the weeks they have worked, plus a week's notice with pay. Those men and women who have given their services and fulfilled their contracts with the firm concerned not only did not receive the pay that they were waiting for, which was probably needed to pay the rent and buy groceries, but also did not receive a week's notice pay, long service leave pro rata payments and holiday pay. The employees are way down the line as regards the priorities list.

The Commonwealth can hardly say that it has no other way of obtaining revenue. With all the avenues which are open to government, should it think that it is entitled to have a share above the wages which are due to employees in a failed company or of compensation payments due to

What happens when a firm goes broke, firstly, is that the secured creditors receive first call on the available finance followed closely by the Taxation Office, which we all seem to have a bogy about. It collects the accumulated pay-as-you-earn instalments. In the cases which I outlined this

Crown Debts (Priority) Bill

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2347

amounted to thousands of dollars. Another matrecommendations of the Senate Standing Com-

ter that I would like to know is why does the Taxmittee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs in re-

ation Office allow firms that are getting a bit rocky gard to Crown priorities. The Government did

to owe it such tremendous amounts of money? In not go into a huddle with the States to get the

fact, in their final gasp, those firms are trying to States to agree that the Taxation Office should get

float on employees' deductions. Then the out of the way and let the secured creditors and

companies go broke, that money goes too. The the workers take their bites before it received its

Taxation Office takes another bite in claiming tax share. In one of the cases which I referred to,

on the undistributed dividends and then a third something like $170,000 is owing to the Taxation

bite on tax on interest remitted overseas.

Office. 1 think that the Department will have to

Then the unsecured creditors are entitled to receive their share. We still have not reached the employees because nine categories of unsecured creditors come first. The workers run fifth. I find
it quite unacceptable that unsecured creditors are placed ahead of employees on the list because unsecured creditors become involved after the winding up of a company. The employee was owed the money before the receiver came in. These debts were incurred after the winding up and the receiver was brought in, but the unsecured creditors still get paid before the debtors with whom the firm incurred liability before it became insolvent. If it were a horse race the workers certainly would run unplaced.

waive that money because it should never have let the debt get to that extraordinary amount. It is important to realise that the employee has no other recourse for reimbursement. If he cannot get paid out of the funds, that is it. He cannot go to the man to whom he owes the rent or the person to whom he is paying the mortgage on his house and say: '1 worked for a month but 1did not get paid'. Nobody will let him ofr the hook for what he owes. 1 urge the Government to accept this amendment which is on behalf of the workers. The Government and the Opposition in this place represent the people of Australia who are the workers.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (9.59)-Listening to the

The Crown must abrogate all Crown priorities comments which have been made on the Crown

in insolvency cases in line with the amendment Debts (Priority) Bill, one would think that the

which has been moved by the Opposition. As my Commonwealth had done nothing towards it. In

colleague the honourable member for Parramatta fact, that is far from the case. The report of the

(Mr John Brown) has pointed out, the Taxation Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional

Office certainly has plenty of other ways in which and Legal Affairs did not say that secured credi-

it can recoup its money. The employee cannot. I tors should come first on the priority list and then

take the point which was made about the regisemployees. It simply said that by abolishing

tered mortgage being applied against assets, but I Crown priorities the position of employees was

again point out that the worker has invested his or improved because so much more money was left

her labour and I believe that his or her security is in the pool. By making that contribution, com-

of prime importance no matter what is happening pletely without the agreement of the States, we

within the firm. If a person works for money it has have made a contribution towards the general list

become his or her money. Most firms know that of creditors on the scale. I think that this form of

they are going bankrupt while the employees are legislation has made a contribution. In the eyes of

still working for them. It is quite immoral for some, it may not have gone far enough, but cer-

firms to keep employees working when the mantainly it has made a contribution along the right

agement knows that they will not be paid at the path.

end of that month, fortnight, or whenever the final crash comes. The rights of the worker in regard to payment for services given should receive the first protection. All wages and compensation payments to employees must be given priority over all other creditors. Maybe we need to have a reclassification of employees to place them in the
first group, which is the secured creditors. r think
that is where the employees belong.

Earlier I took issue with the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child) in relation to certain creditors. On this occasion I have to take issue with the honourable member on the question of the costs incurred after the appointment. Quite naturally costs will be incurred as part of the ongoing operation after the receiver takes up his position. It is quite natural for those costs to be charged to the operation. The receiver would not

I cannot say too strongly that the Opposition accept the job if he did not receive a salary.

believes that we have a moral and legal right to Turning to the question of taxation collections,

protect the wages of those who work. We were the Income Tax Assessment Act states that the

disappointed that the Government accepted the employer has a responsibility to pay employees as

2348 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Crown Debts (Priority) Bill

soon as the deductions have been made and I know that there are certain penalties for those employers who do not. The responsibility for noncollection and for not following up lies with certain people. I support the priorities set down in this Bill.

Question put:

That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr John Brown's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

63

Noes

43

Majority

20

AYES
Baume,M.E. Bimey,R.J. Bourchier, I. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D.M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman,A. W.
NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M. J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R.V. Fry,K.L. Howe,B.L. Humphreys,B.C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Jacobi,R.

lull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Killen, D. 1. Lloyd,B. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller) McLean, R. M. McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moorc,J.C. Newman,K.E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury,M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. C. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.I. -White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.
Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford,I.G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J.L. Tbeophanous, A. C. Uren,T. West,S. 1. Willis,R. Young,M.l.

PAIRS

Anthony,J.D. Drummond,P.H. Glles,G.O'H.

Wallis,L.G. Cross,M.D. McLeay,Leo

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.

COMPANIES (ACQUISITION OF SHARES) AMENDMENT BILL (No.2)
1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 30 April, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
Clauses 1 to 9-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clauses 10 and II-by leave-taken together.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (10.9)- On behalf of the Opposition, I move:
That Part III, comprising clauses 10 and 11, be omitted.
These clauses remove the prohibitions on crossings by brokers acting for an offeror either on or off market. The Government indicates in its explanatory memorandum on this Bill, although the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) made no mention of the matter in his second reading speech, the following:
Part III of the Bill will not be proclaimed to come into operation until the Ministerial Council agrees unanimously to do so.
Before deciding to proclaim Part III, the Ministerial Council will consider:
(a) reports on whether stock exchange business rules need changes to deal adequately with conflicts of interest during crossings; and
(b) draft changes to the securities industry code relating to the enforcement of the relevant stock exchange business rules and appropriate disciplinary procedures for dealers.
The Opposition objects to these amendments on two grounds. Firstly, as I mentioned in my speech on the motion that the Companies Bill be read a second time, what the Government is asking this Parliament to do is to pass into law provisions that we do not yet know are desirable or

Companies Amendment Bill (No.2)

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2349

feasible. The Government is asking us to abrogate our responsibility and to hand over the decision to a body which is accountable to no one parliament. We consider this to be a breach of parliamentary processes which are all too often treated with contempt by this Government.
Our second objection relates to the fact that we have no confidence that the business rules of the stock exchanges or, indeed, the policing capacity of these exchanges is adequate to deal with conflicts of interest during crossings. For example, we observe that the exchange in Sydney as reported in the Press on 8 May saw fit to fine an unnamed stockbroker $10,000 last week for malfeasance in dealing with a parcel of the dreaded Negri River Corporation Ltd shares. Strangely enough the broker's name has not been revealed.
We figure this to be a weakness in the Companies Bill whereby the stock exchange can take unto itself the regulation of the activities and the behaviour of the brokers within that exchange. A person can be dealing, as this gentleman obviously had, dishonestly with a parcel of shares, can be fined $10,000 by that stock exchange and his name not be revealed to the Press. This gentleman, being a peer of the establishment, a pillar of society or whatever, is nothing more than a common criminal. There is something inherently wrong in this Bill where the stock exchange does not have the capacity, the right or, indeed, the intention of revealing this man's name in public. If he had been a shoplifter pinching a seven and sixpenny toy from Woolworths his name would have been revealed to the Press. But it appears that there is one law for the unwary and one law for the rich.

particularly helpful to the Opposition. The Ministr has fully made them available to us. That fact is appreciated by us. We thank them for their co-operation.
Mr MOORE (Ryan~~ Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (10.16)-1 would also like to thank those who participated in this debate, particularly the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) and the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) who very obviously have made a considerable study of what has been in the Bills and have gone out of their way to inform themselves on a matter which does not really entice a lot of people to take much notice of. I commend them for the effort they have put into it and certainly for the knowledge that they have imparted during the debate tonight. It is a very helpful contribution to what I hope will be a fairly memorable occasion insofar as it is the first time in Australia's history that we have had a national companies Bill passed by the national Parliament.
In relation to crossings, 1 hate to inform the honourable member for Parramatta that the man not named by the Stock Exchange was not involved in a crossings problem. Nevertheless, this case does bear out some of the migivings that people have with the Stock Exchange as a whole. What people really need to do is to brush up on their public relations and to see far more of their public responsibilities. I will say something about crossings because this is one of those areas where very few people have an idea of what it is all about. There is plenty of recrimination and plenty of saying: 'It's all wrong'. But there is no great background of understanding what it is about.

We consider that Part III of this Bill which we would like omitted is a very weak arrangement. 1 know that the Minister has varying views from the Opposition on the subject of crossings. Perhaps he will give us the benefit of his wisdom in a moment or two. He cannot deny the inherent weakness of this Bill, in that the self-regulating policies of the stock exchange are like the self-regulating policies of anything else-nobody is competent to judge himself fairly and objectively. I suggest to the Minister that we hope that Part III of this Bill will be eliminated from the total Bill because we consider that it points up inherent weaknesses in the Bill. We consider that this whole area needs redrafting.
Before 1 conclude, since this is the last time that 1 will be speaking for the Opposition on this total great package of Bills, 1 think it would be reasonable to pay some sort of tribute to the Minister's staff sitting up there in the wings. They have been

The term 'crossing' simply means a sale within a broker's office, that is, broker to broker and from client to client. In those circumstances a relationship develops between a client and a broker in exactly the same way as between a patient and a doctor. The most important thing to anyone, after health, is a person's shares or money. 1 think everyone in this place and some of those who have gone will probably recognise that. Because of that the relationships between a broker and his client are particularly close.
I go on to the next stage because most of the problems appear to be in the area of crossings associated with an offer. An offer is made for a company and is well publicised in the Press. Notice of the offer is posted on the boards of the stock exchange. Those brokers who are dealing in a stock not only are presumed to have read the newspapers but also are presumed to have read the notices on the boards within the stock

2350 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Companies Amendment Bill (No.2)

exchange. So, on two counts they are adjudged to know of the offer. Under those circumstances a client who is a client of the broker acting for the offeror who wishes to sell his shares then approaches his broker with that order to sell. He is offering his shares for sale in the knowledge of the offer because it is advised in the newspapers. The broker knows about it because he has read about it in the newspapers. If he has not, that notice is on the board on the floor of the Stock Exchange where the deal must take place and, as a consequence, he is informed. Therefore, in my view a crossing within the full knowledge of both the buyer and the seller is quite within the bounds of commercial activity and quite within the rules of the stock exchange.
Mr Jacobi---But the rules of the stock exchange are defective in that case.
Mr MOORE-They are not at all. I am surprised that the honourable member for Hawker seems not to understand that these are transactions taking place in a fully informed market.
Mr John Brown--What about before the offer is made public?
Mr MOORE-The honourable member for Parramatta has raised a point. 1 think I told him about this in the corridor. That problem can only really take place where a broker is building up a holding on behalf of an offeror prior to the offer being made. Under the circumstances of the new Bill dealing with the National Companies and Securities Commission that relates to shares prior to the 20 per cent threshold. Under those circumstances a broker acting for an offeror accumulating up to the 20 per cent mark on a rising market will, of course, be buying shares at a varying price. A client of that broker offering to sell on those price patterns needs to know of these activities or have complete trust in that broker. It is only within that context that J see a problem within the prospect of crossings.
I take the view that most brokers are honest. I take the view that most clients trust the activities of their broker. As I have said before, we are dealing with a person's most precious commodity-his money. Therefore, I say that it would be a very silly broker who acted not with the best interests of his client at heart despite the fact that he could be acting for an offeror. I can only say that in a position like that the broker is more likely to say to his client: 'Hold on, there is something coming', and to advise him quietly that there is something better coming and that he ought to hold on on that occasion. J do not hold these enormous fears for crossings. T think there is a lot in the relationship between the individual client and his broker.

Within the game of the financial world there is an enormous amount of personal trust and integrity which undoubtedly prevails in the very marked majority of cases throughout Australia.

Question put:

That Part III of the Bill be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Dr H. A. Jenkins)

Ayes

64

Noes

42

Majority

22

AYES
Baume,M.E, Birney, R. J. Bourchier, 1. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,1. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W.

Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C.
Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch. Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller)
McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T.
Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E.
Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M.
Street, A. A.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.J. White, P. N. D.
Wilson, J. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,I. Cohen,B. Cunningbam, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, 1. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller)

Hurford, C. J. Jacobi, R. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly, R. J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Willis,R. Young, M.J.

Anthony, J. D.

PAIRS

Wallis,L.G.

Companies Amendment Bill (No.2)

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2351

Drummond, P. H. Giles. G. O'H.

PAIRS

Cro~s,M. D. McLeay,Leo

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole, and agreed to.

Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.

Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Moore}-by leaveread a third time.

COMPANIES (ACQUISITION OF SHARES-FEES) AMENDMENT BILL
1981 Second Reading Consideration resumed from 30 April, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
COMPANIES AND SECURITIES (INTERPRETATION AND
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981
Second Reading Consideration resumed from 30 April, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
SECURITIES INDUSTRY AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 30 April, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith, Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
SECURITIES INDUSTRY (FEES) AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 30 April, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time,

ADJOURNMENT Gun Clubs and Firearms Control-Proposed
Sale of Belconnen Mall-Grants to the States-Housing-Computer
Equipment-Women Against Rape-Polish Emigration-Plant Breeders' Rights
Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.30)-1 have referred very briefly in the past to the issue of gun clubs. 1 wish to return to this issue tonight. The gun lobby is made up of many different gun clubs in the country'and the firearms traders. I reiterate that 1am in no way opposed to gun clubs or to the legitimate training and practice in the correct use of firearms. But the problem of noise cause by the gun club activities in residential areas is a serious one in my electorate. I want to refer to the Lysterfield Range which affects my constituents in the Belgrave Heights area. Because of extensive change in land use patterns in this area since 1970 when the lease was signed, the gun club now poses severe nuisance value in the area. The number of houses has increased to such an extent that the gun club is now in a residential area. Noise from this range is so bad, and occurs on both weekdays and for many hours at the weekend, that residents frequently have to leave their homes and go out for the day. Residents have taken local action themselves to try to solve this problem, but have been totally unsuccessful. In fact, with the increasing membership of the club, there is now

2352 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

I
Adjournment i

more noise, from more shoots, and the gun club plans to extend even further.
A local residents action group committed itself to $2,000 worth of sound readings taken by one of Melbourne's most reputable firms. On four occasions in the past few months the readings showed excessive noise at seven different properties throughout the area. Some readings have been taken inside the living rooms of homes and noise levels are such that, under the Australian Standard Specification, there would be immediate community and personal reaction. An expert report to the Shire of Sherbrooke from the Environmental Protection Authority and professional sound consultants last October, stated that: 'from the results of the survey, it is clear that, at present, the Range is imposing an intolerable burden on nearby residents, and we do not believe this should continue.'
There can be no doubt that such noise levels are having a detrimental effect on land values in the area. The local Sherbrooke Shire Council has requested that the gun club take action to lower noise levels, but has found no improvement in noise levels and frequency eminating from the range. It has now resorted to supreme court action on the matter, which involves considerable time, effort and expense from a local council to be involved in. The action has been deemed essential because no relief has been possible through government channels. This is a very real problem to local residents, and is causing severe distress and costing them many thousands of dollars as their home investment is devalued. While I appreciate the need for gun clubs, this particular problem shows that there is a vital need for such organisations to keep in touch with the realities of residential life.
I suggest that an inquiry into the location and nature of gun clubs in the whole of Australia would reveal similar problems in other parts of the country. There is a need to establish a uniform set of standards for the zoning and positioning of these ranges and to remove them from proximity to residential areas. The other aspect of the use of firearms which concerns me is the increased use of such weapons for political and criminal terrorism, as illustrated in the recent assassination of John Lennon in New York and the attempted assassination of President Reagan. Whilst we have not yet reached the stage in this country where our political and other leaders are threatened and killed, and where 200 million guns are in private hands with little or any control over them, as in the United States, the Australian situation is rapidly moving in this direction.

According to Professor Richard Harding, whose book Firearms and Violence in Australian Life has just been published, we are well on the way to reaching the American situation. He describes the domestic gun scene in Australia as 'destructive, volatile, self perpetuating and intractable'. Our political leaders, when asked to comment on events such as the Reagan assassination attempt, claimed smugly that our laws are much tighter here. This may be so. However, the eight Australian police commissioners have pointed out that, through a loophole in regulations, the Israeli Uzi machine pistols and the Russian Kalashnikov assault rifles can be readily imported into this country. This type of weapon is used by terrorists and armed criminals throughout the world. It is favoured by private armies in many countries.
In the context of the increasing dangers to society from all types of firearms, no tightening of regulations would be too severe. The Federal Government must act to ensure that what has happened in the United States of America cannot happen here. Uniform and stringent federal regulations on the use and possession of firearms by individuals and organisations is vitally necessary.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (10.34)-It will be interesting to consider and comment on the speech which has been made in view of the advice that is often given by honourable members on the other side of the House. In the circumstances which have been mentioned it is a wonder that the constituents were not advised to go and stand in front of the guns. However, I rise on a different matter tonight.
In his statement to the House on the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced the intention to sell certain commercially-oriented assets. I applaud this announcement. The Opposition denounces it and, in fact, declares it will repurchase any assets sold. I presume it will arbitrarily resume such property purely on the grounds that it was once the property of the Commonwealth. Let us hope this socialistic principle is not to be applied to all other property owners in the Australian Capital Territory. The Opposition further sees this suggestion as being a move to benefit big business in allowing it the opportunity of financial returns on what were government initiatives. This need not be so.
One of the properties concerned is the Belconnen Mall. If honourable members think it is peculiar for a Western Australian to speak on this issue, I think that the silence from the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) and the

Adjournment

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2353

honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry) warrants some comments in this House. The Belconnen Mall has a total lettable area of 520,000 square feet. The Mall has 172 separate shops. These vary in size from the Myer Canberra store which is 220,000 square feet to a store of 100 square feet. The four major stores-Myer, G. J. Coles and Co. Ltd, K Mart (Australia) Ltd and Woolworths Ltd-collectively occupy 360,000 square feet while a typical small trader occupies 800 square feet. The tenants of these shops pay rent to the Commonwealth based on their turnover. In other words, all charges to their customers must include this figure. There can be no economy of scale reflected in lower prices.
The tenants have their own association. It met last week to discuss a proposal for the strata titling of the mall. Of the 172 tenants, 118 were represented. They voted unanimously to approach the Government to arrange a strata titles deal and to offer the various shops to the tenants in the first instance. I support this concept entirely. If I need support from the Government, might I quote from the Prime Minister's statement. On page one of his statement, he referred to 'increased opportunities for all'. On page 2, he said:
And we must not forget that it is people, their knowledge and their talents, their enterprise and determination, their belief that they can succeed, who have built Australia.
I support the concept of small government. I equally support the concept of small business. I have ample experience to say that it achieves efficiencies far in excess of big business and creates an enthusiasm to succeed impossible in the impartial corridors of big business. The Government now has a tremendous opportunity to demonstrate its principles of support for private enterprise and support for the individual by sale of the Belconnen Mall to its tenants. Some will say the administrative difficulties make it impossible. I remind them that Columbia has orbitted the earth and returned unscathed.
Some will say the large tenants policy is not to purchase freehold and that certain small tenants will be unable to finance purchase of their section. This could certainly occur. However, it is no deterrent to strata titling. Such areas as are not purchased by their occupiers can be made available to other investors small and large. If we consider the range of areas and consequently variation in purchase prices that will be on offer, it is obvious the type of investors interested in lease back will be considerable. What will the new owneroperator and his customers gain? With fixed capital charges, the tenant will naturally address himself to maximising the turnover of his area.

Increased turnover will improve the capital value of his property and reduce the effect of capital charges on his mark-up. The resulting reduced prices will benefit his customers and presumably increase his turnover further. That is Liberal philosophy at work. At the successful completion of this project, a similar approach should be considered at our airport terminals. The 'ownerdriver' whatever his actual business activity-he might be a contract carpenter, a truck driver or a small shop owner-is the backbone of the Australian economy. I request the Government to take up the challenge at Belconnen and to support this principle. When the sales are completed to those sturdy traders, I challenge the Opposition to try to take them back.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (10.39)-A short time ago, I made reference to the decreasing real value of the total grants that have been made available to the States since this Government first came to office in 1975-76. I indicated on that occasion that I would take the opportunity to pursue the matter further and to explain the developments that have taken place, not only in relation to the total grants being made available to the States, but also, more particularly, to the effect that the States have experienced as a result of the policies of this Government in relation to their general purpose capital grants and their specific purpose grants. On that previous occasion I referred to the fact that during the current year in real terms the total States grants are deficient to the extent of $1,418m compared with the amount the States received in total in 1975-76. I also referred to a statement made by the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch), at the Liberal Party's New South Wales council meeting in Maitland in March this year. At that conference the Minister also said:
The States can expect little joy from Commonwealth decisions in the short months ahead.
It is becoming increasingly apparent exactly what that statement means. The most recent spectacle was the States' being denied the $70m that both the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Treasurer (Mr Howard) had been authorised by Cabinet to allow to them. Following that, we saw the public humiliation of the States throughout the whole of the Commonwealth. We saw a very serious reaction from the States when they realised the extent to which they had been conned, the reasons they had been conned and the way in which both the Prime Minister and the Treasurer paraded themselves before the media to show how strong and clever they had been, not only at the expense of the State Premiers and

2354 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Adjournment

State governments, but also at the expense of the residents in the States.
I wish to develop further the points I made previously in relation to grants. First of all, I will deal specifically with the general purpose capital funds allocated to the States. In 1975-76 general purpose capital funds to the States totalled $1,291m. In the current financial year, 1980-81, general purpose capital funds to the States total $1,307m. That represents an increase during those five years of only 1.2 per cent. In order to maintain their real value in terms of what has happened to costs and prices during that period, they should have increased by 63.4 per cent or $818m. The actual increase that has taken place in those capital funds has not been anything like the $818m necessary in order to retain their real value. They have increased by only $16m during those five years. That means that in this year alone general purpose capital funds to the States are deficient in real terms to the extent of $802m.
The situation in relation to specific purpose payments is essentially the same. In 1975-76 the allocations to the States were $4, 152m. In the current year they are $5,227m. In other words, they have increased by 26 per cent. During that period prices have increased by 63.4 per cent. If specific purpose payments to the States had maintained their real value, they would have increased by $2,632m. In fact, the actual increase was $1 ,075m. Therefore, in this year alone, specific purpose payments to the States are deficient in real terms to the extent of $1 ,567m. The substance and the import of the statements made by the Prime Minister, the Treasurer and the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) are becoming increasingly apparent to the States. There has been a very well orchestrated campaign on the part of the Government to squeeze the States and to put them into a position of being seriously disadvantaged.
Mr FISHER (Mallee) (10.44)-1 am quite sure that every honourable member in this House recognises that the provision of adequate and suitable housing is a crucial element in the successful development of our communities. In the electorate of Mallee, over the last three or four years, we have seen very significant growth in both economic activity and the creation of additional population. In the city of Mildura, which without doubt is one of the finest provincial cities in Australia, this has been indicated by a 28 per cent increase in the issue of housing permits for private dwellings over the last two years. I believe this is an indication of the Government's success in stimulating real growth and creating real opportunities for long term employment. Of course, it

has developed a real confidence in the future viability of our rural and provincial cities. However, Tbelieve it is recognised that housing is a limiting factor in the development of population growth.
Without doubt, in every community in my electorate--this would be so in almost every electorate throughout Australia-housing is a limiting factor. Almost every area needs additional skilled tradesmen. Small communitie~ are unable to obtain skilled tradesmen if housing is not avail" able. Seasonal employment opportunities throughout the north-west part of Victoria attract hundreds of people every year to that region. Of course, because of the friendly nature of the people and the opportunities for work, they stay.
Mr Porter-And their member.
Mr FISHER-As the honourable member for Barker correctly stated, they stay also because of the friendly nature of their local member. If we are to house these people successfully and to keep them in our rural communities, large appropriations vf funds to the housing area are needed. I am, therefore, very pleased to hear of the importance this Government attaches-lam sure all Opposition members would agree-to efficiency in our administration. We now live in an age of superior technology. The silicon chip and computers have become a necessary part of any efficient cost effective organisation. The recent findings of the Review of Commonwealth Functions have shown us that departments have to move towards cost efficiency. In his statement to the House, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced that every effort will be made to eliminate nonefficient services, to combine common service areas, to make more efficient use of automatic data processing and to decentralise and deregulate management decisions to individual departments.
The Department of Housing and Construction is moving in this direction by acquiring a computer network to ensure efficient delegation of activities. This network requires a central computer with facilities in each region. It will be a link behyeen the central and regional operations. This is a crucial part in the efficient operation of the network. It was one of the main determinants of the Government's decision to acquire the network from IBM Australia Ltd. Criticism of the Government's decision fails to recognise this crucial element. I believe it demonstrates a complete failure by the Opposition to appreciate the importance of ensuring the best equipment for the job.
Mr FRY (Fraser) (10.49)-1 was interested to hear the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey) who apparently has become an instant

Adjournment

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2355

expert on the Belconnen Mall. I wonder whether that is true or whether he was merely reading a speech prepared for him by the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman). It should be known that the Belconnen shopping mall is an outstanding project. It is unique in that it is the only publicly owned shopping mall. It has been very successful. It was about to divert its profits to provide recreational facilities for the people of Belconnen who have been neglected by the Government. Whilst my favoured proposal is that the mall should remain public property, I would certainly prefer it to be sold under strata title than to one of the friends of the Government. Time will tell.

I wish to speak briefly tonight about the letter which, I think, all honourable members received from the National President of the Returned Services League of Australia in which he made accusations against an organisation called Women Against Rape. The letter stated:

The RSL learned of their plans which were as follows:

1. to bring to Canberra as many members of their group as possible to participate.
2. to march no matter what and carry placards representing the various groups forming part of the women marching, for example, 'Wimmin Against Rape' and 'Women Against Nuclear Energy'.
3. to effectively 'reduce the militarism of the march' by slashing the drums of the bands participating, by damaging their instruments, and by spraying the bandsmen with paint. They planned to make the bands in the march their major target.

4. to obstruct the march by laying down in front of march-

ing veterans so that the veterans would have to walk

over them symbolising 'rape'.

'

5. to deface the Australian War Memorial. It should be

noted that last year the Memorial was defaced by 'per-

sons unknown' but this year the War Memorial in Perth

was desecrated.

These are the hysterical accusations which the RSL and the Minister have made against this women's organisation in Canberra. I just want to read out the response which the organisation has sent to honourable members. It states:

This letter is in response to accusations made against Women Against Rape by the RS.L., the Minister for the Capital Territory, Mr Hodgman, and the Australian Federal Police.

Women Against Rape would like to make it known, yet one more time, that it categorically denies all allegations levelled against it that the group had at any time intended to disrupt the ANZAC Day march last month.

We at no time even discussed the activities suggested (drum slashing, symbolically being walked over by the veterans etc. etc) even in jest, let alone decide to adopt them as tactics on ANZAC Day. From the first five minutes of the first meeting of the organising collective in January, there was a commitment to non-violence.

We went to great lengths to prepare ourselves, to respond non-violently if we were confronted by violence from the police or spectators. All our meetings were open to any

woman who wished to attend; all our decisions were made public through leaflets, letters, media releases and word-ofmouth. Workshops, open to any woman wishing to attend were publicized and run. In these, role playing and discussion were used to help women to prepare themselves to respond non-violently. We are happy to make available to you minutes of all our meetings and all documents relating to our collective.
On ANZAC morning we gathered as planned, marching off silently and in an orderly fashion (after yet again stressing our commitment to non-violence) to join the end of the official march without disruption. The rest of the story is well known. We were stopped and arrests resulted, police using the amended traffic ordinance gazetted for the occasion.
There was no disruption to the official ANZAC parade and it should be noted that the six busloads of interstate women we were supposedly importing for the occasion were nowhere to be seen. Only one-tenth of the sixty one women arrested were from interstate. Neither did any of the women arrested have spray cans of paint, implements with which to slash drums, or anything else, with which to create a disturbance, on their persons.
The RSL, the Minister and the police based their hysterical stand to disallow us marching on what they say was the evidence of an informant. As we know that no such incriminating discussions ever took place we must believe that, either this informant never existed and that the Minister and the RSL are lying, or that if she did exist she lied to them. If the latter is the case, the RSL, the Minister and the police must take responsibility for refusing over three hundred women their rights of free expression on the spurious evidence of one, as yet, unidentified woman.
Of course, it is not mentioned that it may have been a man dressed in drag. The letter continues:
Women Against Rape is at present looking into our legal position in relation to the slanderous and libelous comments made by the Mirtister and the RSL.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (10.54)-1 want to draw the attention of the House to the grievance of an organisation which is based in my electorate but which speaks for the broken families of Poles and in particular of Polish refugees who have settled in Australia. This is the Committee for Family Reunions, whose address is Post Office Box 104, Woollahra. I am sure that the House is aware that in the last year or two some 2,000 to 3,000 Polish refugees have come to Australia, joining the 120,000 or so Poles who settled here in earlier years. At least 400 of these Poles are husbands who are separated from their wives and children and who have sought unsuccessfully over months and years to get permission for their wives and children who are living in Poland to join them in Australia.
They are obviously being punished by the Polish Government for having left Poland because Poland does not recognise the right of emigration. But worse than that, they are being harassed in Australia and their families are being harassed in Poland. It has been reported by this Committee that some of those who are living in Australia are encouraged or asked to become snoopers on other

2356 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Adjournment

Polish refugees and to report their activities to the Polish Consulate. Others are ridiculed on the grounds that their wives do not want to join them, despite all the evidence to the contrary. Mr Boniecki, who is a spokesman for the Australian Committee for Human Rights in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, stated:
We have the case of one man whose wife and three-year-old son were refused permission to leave Poland three times. When this man approached the Polish Consul in Sydney at a public function, the Consul laughed off the man's grievance and publicly declared that everyone knew that his wife did not want to join him.
Consequently, to prove the falsity of the statement, the man has obtained a statutory declaration certified by a Polish court that his wife wants to leave the country.
Of course, there has been no change in the attitude of the Po1ish Consul or of the Warsaw Government. These men are being punished for having left Poland, despite the fact that Poland signed the Helsinki Agreement on Human Rights in 1975, not to mention the Universal Declaration on Human Rights of the United Nations. It has refused to issue passports. It has refused this fundamental right.
Some delay in the processing of these matters is understandable. It would not be surprising if it took some weeks or in certain cases some months, but this has taken many months and is going on into years. Late last year the Australian Committee for Human Rights in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe sent a telegram to the Conference on European Security and Co-operation in Madrid. The telegram stated:
Attention of the Conference is drawn to the specific situation of spouses and children of hundreds of Polish refugees recently settled in Australia. These families still in Poland are repeatedly refused passports so that they can leave Poland and be reunited with their families in Australia. Please press the Polish authorities to respect these basic human rights in the spirit of the Helsinki Agreements and to allow these families to leave immediately.
There has been no response from Poland. There has certainly been a response in Australia. There have been hunger strikes. There is a fear that there will be more serious responses by these people in Australia who have been unable to bring their wives and children-in some cases very young children-from Poland. We know that the Polish Government is divided. We know that there are hard liners who want the Soviet Union to occupy the country in the manner of Czechoslovakia in the 1960s. We also know that there are others who take a more progressive line. There are some in Australia who would say that we should not be embarrassing the Polish Government in the present situation, but it seems to me that it is so simple a matter for the progressive element in the Polish Government to agree to give

passports to those families that we should be pressing them. The Polish Government could do one simple thing to earn the sympathy of Australians and that is allow these families to be reunited. The Polish Government is seeking credit from the Australian Government as it is seeking credit from other governments throughout the world. The least that the Australian Government can do is support these settlers, who will in due course become citizens of this country, and ask the Polish Government to cease punishing them and allow the families to be reunited in Australia.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (10.59)-1 want to draw attention briefly to a petition which 1 presented yesterday on behalf of a co-operative group in the north-west of Tasmania known as TARGA. That group collected 2,500 signatures concerning the issue of plant breeders' rights. The group holds very strong views about the subject. It is concerned about the proposed legislation, which will restrict free growing and the exchange and sale of non-chemically treated seeds, and believes that a decline in the genetic diversity of plants was evidenced in Europe following the implementation of such legislation. The group believes that it is important that this issue be canvassed in full scale public debate. I believe that the group would argue that there are several reasons why the plant breeders' rights legislation ought to be opposed. It would argue, firstly, that seeds are a public resource; secondly, that seed patenting effectively allows large corporations to control seed production and sales; and, thirdly, that germ plasm, the basic seed used in breeding programs, is hoarded by these corporations and exchanges of seed and scientific information slow down. 1 believe that this point of view that this group is seeking to disseminate is important. 1 think it is unfortunate that sometimes all the work that goes into collecting signatures for petitions is given such brief attention in the House. 1just wanted to place on record in the time available the fact that this group had done the work and that there were so many signatures on the petition and to draw attention to the substance of the petition.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 11 p.m., the debate is interrupted.
Mr McVeigh-Mr Deputy Speaker, I require the debate to be extended.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate may continue until 11.1 0 p.m.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (ll.O)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to speak on comments made during the adjoutnment debate by the honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher) who highlighted

Adjournment

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2357

the need for computer technology as a tool for efficient government administration. At the outset I want to say that I wholeheartedly endorse his sentiments. I thank him very much indeed for a thoughtful contribution to the adjournment debate. It is always good when someone raises his thought to matters of national importance rather than parish pump activities. My Department of course has immense communication and administration requirements which have made its computer purchase essential. I agree with the honourable member that criticism of computers fails to appreciate the tremendously important role they play and the importance of the link between the central and regional facilities in any computer
network.
In regard to my own Department the Government decided on the successful tenderer for the supply of its equipment after the Department's own very thorough evaluation process had been reviewed by an expert interdepartmental committee on the technical and procurement aspects of the purchase and later on by an independent assessor, Professor C. H. Brookes. These studies confirmed the original finding that the substantially higher technical risks associated with alternative solutions could not be accepted, The Government is satisfied that the expert reviews carried out have ensured the best possible solution to meet the needs of the Department of Housing and Construction.
Assertions have been made that the Government had changed its tendering criteria and my colleague the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) has previously refuted this allegation and commented on procurement principles. Perhaps the most extensive refutation of these allegations comes from the Australian General Manager of Sperry Univac-an unsuccessful tender. The Melbourne branch manager of that company was quoted as being critical of the tendering process. The Australian General Manager of that company inserted an advertisement at his company's expense the following week completely refuting those claims. The Australian General Manager has said he is the only person who can authorise official media releases for the company. The official media release includes the
statement:
Over the past few months views have been expressed in reports by the media concerning a tender for the data processing requirements for the Department of Housing and Construction, Canberra, culminating in comments and statements made in a report on page 1 of the Pacific Computer Weekly of 23-29 January 1981. All official media releases for my company are authorised from the General Manager's Office at Sperry Univac. As the above mentioned comments that were published were not authorised by me, I must refute the opinons and statements so published on this subject. Sperry

Univac's association with governments, both Federal and State, is conducted on a professional basis, with the supply of equipment and services to them being of the highest possible standard. At all times Sperry Univac has received the respected assistance, courtesy and advice from all government departments. We have always found the actions of various government members to be of the highest professional standard.
As honourable members will be aware, there have been many attempts to criticise my Department's computer purchase. Attempts were made on 8 September 1980 at the House of Representatives Committee on Expenditure; in this chamber on three occasions during September 1980; and in the Pacific Computer Weekly of 23-29 January 1981. I regret to say that in this chamber today yet another attempt was made to criticise that purchase and to criticise and question the integrity of the Public Service and the tendering processes which were followed in the computer procurement. I hope that this restatement of the facts will put these unfounded allegations to rest once and for all. I resent the aspersions cast on the integrity of officers of my Department who are men of outstanding ability, honesty and sincerity of purpose. These aspersions were cast earlier today by the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren).
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate having been concluded, the House stands adjourned until 10.30 a.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 11.5 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Hunt to present a Bill for an Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Mr McVeigh to present a Bill for an Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Mr Sinclair to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act 1980 and the Coral Sea Islands Act 1969.
Mr Viner to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Mr Wilson to present a Bill for an Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.

2358 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Notices

REPLY TO A REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library On 28 April 1981, Mr Mountford asked Mr Speaker-
(l) How many staff were directly responsible for the receipt and recording of serials acquired by the Parliamentary Library in (a) 1969-70 and (b) 1979-80,
(2) How many serial titles were acquired by the Library in each of these years.

(3) How does the Library follow up the non-receipt of single issues of acquired serials, in order to maintain a complete collection, when was the practice adopted and what was the practice prior to that.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) 2, (b) 3,
(2) 1969-70: 4500 (approximately); 1979-80: 9000 (approximately) .
(3) Follow-up is by means of a 'claim' to the supplier to provide the missing issue(s). There has never been any practice other than this.

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2359 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Social Security Appeals
(Question No. 21)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Further to the Attorney-General's answer to Question No. 5318 (Hansard, 22 May 1980, page 3197), and the report on Social Security Appeals made to the Attorney-General by the Administrative Review Council in June 1980, what was the situation as at 25 November 1980;
(2) Will the Administrative Review Council's report on Social Security Appeals be published, as recommended by the Council in paragraph 102 of its Fourth Annual Report.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(l) The Administrative Review Council reported to me on Social Security Appeals in June 1980. The Council's report is under consideration by the Government. In the meantime, the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (Social Services Act) Regulations have been amended to extend the rights of appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in social security matters.
(2) A summary of the Administrative Review Council's report on Social Security Appeals was included in the Council's Fourth Annual Report, which I have tabled. I expect to table the report on Social Security Appeals in the very near future.
Assistance to Inventors Scheme
(Question No. 47)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 26 November 1980;
(I) What commercial results have been reached by individuals assisted under the Assistance to Inventors Scheme since 1975.
(2) What measures does the Government take to assist inventors to obtain commercial results for inventions initially attracting grants under the Scheme.
(3) Is the Government satisfied with the current operation of the Scheme and the commercial results that have flowed therefrom; if not, are measures proposed to improve the scheme; if so, what are they.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Financial assistance was first providcd under the Assistance to Inventors Scheme in 1975-76. To 31 December 1980 a total of 50 inventors grants had been made under the scheme amounting in aggregate to $225,776. A review of the progress of the individual grant-assisted inventions revealed:
(a) Eight of the inventions are currently in production with aggregate sales in 1980-81 estimated to amount to $500,000;
(b) Ten of the inventions have been advanced to the stage where they are considered ready for commercial production and the involvement of appropriate manufacturers is actively being sought;

(c) Twenty-seven of the inventions are still under development with a view to their eventual commercial production; and
(d) Pive of the inventions have been found not to be viable and their further development abandoned.
(2) The Assistance to Inventors Scheme provides for grant assistance to enable the development of worthy patentable inventions to the stage where the technical feasibility can be established and the potential usefulness demonstrated in practice. This primarily involves assistance to finance the construction and testing of a demonstration prototype.
The hasic rationale underlying the Scheme is that at this stage the invcntor should be in a position to both lodge a complete patent speciGcation and to pursue commercialisation of the invention by, say, entering into an arrangement with an appropriate manufacturer. No direct assistance is provided under the Scheme in respect of the subsequent stages involved in obtaining commercial results from grant-assisted inventions.
The Government does however recognise the need for sound and responsible policies to promote the commercialisation of Australian invention. It has implemented a number of pilot innovation programs which, together with the Assistance to Inventors Scheme, will provide a base of practical experience on which to evaluate longer term policy options for the realisation of the full industrial and employment benefits of Australian inventiveness.
Assistance is made available under the pilot innovation programs for the following measures directed at facilitating the realisation of commerical results from developed inventions:
(a) Establishment, in conjunction with State Chambers of Manufactures, of 'Innovation Centres' to promote greater interaction between private inventors and manufacturers;
(b) Organisation, in conjunction with interested Australian companies and academic institutions, of 'Adventure Workshops in Innovation and Entrepreneurship' designed to provide the opportunity for selected Australian graduates to develop the entrepreneurial skills required to progress an invention to the market; and
(c) Investigation, under the 'Pilot Enterprise Development Program', of practical means for providing access by private inventors to the full spectrum of expertise required to develop and implement strategies for the creation of new technology-based firms.
(3) The commercial results arising from grant-assisted inventions, as indicated in (1) above, are considered to demonstrate the cost-effectiveness of funds which have been made available for the Assistance to Inventors Scheme. To this extent the Government is satisfied with the results that have flowed from the Scheme. The Government is however concerned to ensure the improved administrative effectiveness of the Scheme. In this respect, the following measures were set out in the schedule of decisions arising from the Review of Commonwealth Functions tabled by the Prime Minister on 30 April 1981:
(a) Administration of the Scheme to be streamlined;
(b) Abolition of the Australian Inventions Advisory Committee; and

2360 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(c) Review of the Scheme by persons from the private sector.
Welfare Expenditure in Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 56)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) what grants, loans or concessions are made by his Department or others for (a) health, (b) education, (c) welfare, (d) development, (e) disaster relief or (f) other purposes in the Australian Capital Territory on the basis of matching allocations from other Departments such as are matched in the States by State allocations.
(2) what is the (a) maximum and (b) minimum rate per capita of such matching allocations by Australian States and Territories for (i) women's refuges, (ii) youth refuges, (iii) remedial and special education, (iv) self-help activities for the unemployed incorporating economic, educational, cultural and communal activities and (v) other voluntary community organisations.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that-
The Department of the Capital Territory has consulted with officers of the Capital Territory Health Commission and the ACT Schools Authority and advises in respect to question (l) that there are no grants, loans or concessions made on the basis of matching allocations from other Departments by the Department of the Capital Territory, the Commission or the Authority for the purposes listed.
Consequently there can be no answer to question (2).
There are however arrangements in the ACT whereby community organisations seek and obtain assistance along comparable lines to assistance provided to such organisations by governments in the States.
It is generally the practice for community organisations to apply for assistance direct to the Commonwealth Government Department or Authority responsible for that particular matter. There are nine such Departments and Authorities which make grants to ACT community organisations for a wide range of activities.
The grants made by these Departments and Authorities over the last five financial years were provided in answer to question No. 4541 in 1979. Since then and following consultations with other Ministers, the Department of the Capital Territory has established an Interdepartmental Committee to act as a clearing house. This Committee provides the opportunity for the exchange of information and expertise on applications for grants which are being considered by these Departments and Authorities. These arrangements should facilitate co-ordination and rationalisation of grants to ACT organisations.
Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly
(Question No. 171)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory a question, upon notice, on 25 November 1980:
Do: (a) members of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly have protection against litigation in respect of matters raised as part of the proceedings of the Assembly, and

(b) witnesses giving evidence before committees of the Assembly have any legal protection;
if not will he take action to provide reasonable protection?
Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
I am informed by my Department that the honourable member's question calls for an expression of legal opinion and, as the honourable member will be aware, the Standing Orders of the House of Representatives provide that questions shall not ask for a legal opinion. I am, however, able to inform the Honourable Member that the whole question of the Australian law on defamation is under review by the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General and that any reform in the law relating to privilege for the ACT House of Assembly will need to await the outcome of this review. I should perhaps add that I am concerned about the position of the Assembly following the recent Supreme Court case involving a member of the Assembly and I am anxious to resolve the situation as quickly as possible.
Australian Federal Police
(Question No. 202)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(l) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the Canberra Times, 25 April 1980 of a decision of the Policy Committee of the Australian Federal Police that the general orders and instructions of the force should be made publicly available.
(2) Will he table these general orders and instructions in the House as a matter of urgency.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) I have arranged for two copies of the general orders and general instructions to be available in the Parliamentary Library.
National Aviation Museum
(Question No. 240)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
Has the Government taken action to establish an Australian National Aviation Museum; if so, what action; if not, what action does it propose to take.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
An interdepartmental working group chaired by the Secretary of my Department and comprising representatives of the Australian War Memorial and the Departments of Defence, Transport and Housing and Construction has been studying the proposal for a National Aviation Museum to commemorate and preserve Australia's aviation history. The working group has studied aspects such as the development, timing and location of the proposed museum. I have received a preliminary Report and I expect to have the final Report shortly.

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2361

Rosemount Repatriation Hospital
(Question No. 256)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) Has the closure of the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital, Queensland, been discussed with organisations representing (a) employees, (b) patients and/ or (c) relatives.
(2) Will an equal number of beds be available after the anticipated closure as readily and promptly at all times for simiJar purposes as beds are available at Rosemount.
(3) Will staff ceilings be affected by the closure; if so, will individual attention to patients be reduced, including (a) catering for personal dietary preferences, (b) supportive counselling and (c) other person-to-personrapport between staff members and the patients and families they serve.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1 ) Yes. Prior to the decision to close the Rosemoun t Repatriation Hospital being taken and announced, a number of discussions took place between senior officers of my department, ex-service and employee organisations and others. Apart from some concern about a few points, there was general acceptance that transfer of the functions to the Repatriation General Hospital, Greenslopes, would be for the benefit of patients.
Since the closure was announced, discussions have taken place with a wider range of organisations, particularly the ex-service organisations and the Queensland Branch of the Hospital Employees' Federation, as well as patients and their relatives. The proposed closure has been widely publicised and all interested parties have had the opportunity to present their views to my Department or direct to myself.
Many different issues have been raised in the discussions about the closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital and have ranged across such topics as the placement of individual patients and the future use of the property and its facilities. These discussions are continuing and many of the issues will not be decided until the transfer of the functions of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital to the Repatriation General Hospital, Greenslopes, is about to, or has taken place. On present indications this will be in late May 1981.
(2) Currently, the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital has some 60 beds available for use. When this hospital is closed, two wards, each of 32 beds, will be opened at Repatriation General Hospital, Greenslopes. These beds will be available as promptly and in the same way as beds have been available at Rosemount.
(3) The functions and staff ceiling resources of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital will be transferred to the Repatriation General Hospital, Greenslopes. The treatment provided to patients will be improved as a direct result of the clinical supervision and services available at an acute-care general hospital and there will be no diminution of attention to individual patients and their families.
Historic Aircraft
(Question No. 361)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) What measures are taken to determine the historic worth of aircraft.

(2) What are the names and qualifications of any experts who advise the Government on such aircraft.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department:
(I) The following criteria have been established to assist in assessing the national historic significance of aircraft:
A close association of the aircraft with a famous Australian or organisation.
Export of the aircraft would mean the loss of a unique or rare type of aircraft to Australia.
Aircraft manufactured in Australia and an important example of industrial technology of a particular period.
Aircraft which have been used by the Australian Forces.
Aircraft presently in commercial use in Australia or still in use by the Defence Forces.
Aircraft which were operated from Australia by Australia's allies in World War II.
Aircraft operated by enemy forces against Australian forces.
Aircraft which have not been modified to such extent that their integrity as an example of type has been permanently destroyed.
Aircraft of a type not represented in other public collections in Australia, in particular the Service collections or the Australian War Memorial.
(2) Expert advice is sought from-Department of Defence, The Air Force Association, Australian War Memorial, Antique Aeroplane Association of Australia, The Australian Society for Aero-historical Preservation.
Mining Equipment
(Question No. 406)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the Joint Coal Board report for 1979-80 which notes that for expansion of the coal industry to take place to its full potential by the year 2000 it will be necessary that, among other things, local industry play a greater part in the servicing and manufacture of mining equipment.
(2) If so, what steps will the Government take to assist industry and ensure that this recommendation is achieved.
Sir Phillip Lynch The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Government is pursuing policies for manufacturing industry which will encourage and enabJe firms to take advantage of opportunities presented by the upsurge in Australia's resource development.
It is not for the Government to take steps to guarantee that the local mining equipment industry plays a greater part in the expansion of the coal industry, or for that matter any other mining industry, but rather to ensure the existence of an environment in which the manufacturers of mining equipment may themselves seize opportunities of the kind alluded to in the Board's report.

2362 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Central to this approach are the Government's policies to encourage the development of competitive manufacturing industries involving specialisation in particular skills and products and use of advanced technology.
In the case of the mining equipment industry, assistance is available via the tariff. In addition a number of generally available measures such as the investment allowance and the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Scheme can be of help to manufacturers seeking to improve their production processes and keep pace with technological advances to maintain international competitiveness.
Committee ofPrivileges Report
(Question No. 407)
Mr Jacobi asked the Leader of the House, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Does he intend to have brought before the Parliament for consideration a Parliamentary Witnesses Protection Bill as recommended by the House of Representatives Committee of Privileges in its report relating to the alleged discrimination and intimidation of Mr David E. Berthelsen in his public service employment because of evidence given by him to a subcommittee of the Joint" Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence.
(2) If so, will the proposed legislation provide for the prosecution of persons who tamper with, intimidate or discriminate against witnesses who give (or have given) evidence before a Parliamentary Committee or the House and also provide a statutory cause of action in which witnesses who have suffered intimidation or discrimination would have the right to sue for damages those responsible for the intimidation.
(3) When is it intended that the legislation will be introduced.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
An opportunity will be provided as soon as possible for members to debate the recommendations of the report of the House of Representatives Committee of Privileges referred to by the honourable member. The Government will consider its position on the outstanding issues raised in the report when it has been debated.
Committee of Privileges Report
(Qnestion No. 408)
Mr Jacobi asked the Leader of the House, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Has he or the Government yet considered the recommendation of the House of Representatives Committee of Privileges in its report relating to the alleged discrimination and intimidation of Mr David E. Berthelsen that consideration should be given to conferring power on Mr Speaker when the Parliament is not sitting, to make an interim referral of an issue to the Committee of Privileges, such action to be referred to the House for its approval at the first opportunity; if so, what action is proposed in respect of the recommendation.
(2) When will the House be given an opportunity to further debate the report and recommendations of the Committee.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
See my answer to Question No. 407.

Alternative Fuel Technologies
(Question No. 410)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
Does the Government accept the conclusion of the National Energy Advisory Committee in its 9th report that Government initiatives on alternative on alternative fuel technologies will be required given (a) the large capital investments required for such alternative fuel processes, (b) the reluctance of investors to provide capital for processes in which there has been little or no commercial experience and (c) the inevitable influence of Government policies on liquid fuel prices and on the costs of production and processing; if so, what initiatives will the Government take and when; if not, why not.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The issues identified in NEAC Ryport No.9 Liquid Fuels: Longer Term Needs, Prospects and Issues were further developed, as they relate to alternative liquid fuels, in NEAC Report No. 12 Alternative Liquid Fuels. This report, which was released on 2 February 1981, recommends that the Government should vigorously encourage the development of alternative liquid fuels, but that commercial criteria should be applied to any decision to produce these fuels on a significant scale. The Government's fundamental responsibility in the development of alternative liquid fuels is seen as being to ensure an investment climate conducive to the commercial development of such fuels by the private sector.
The Government has already introduced policies which are consistent with this approach. These policies include the following elements:
Pricing-The Government has a policy of pricing indigenous conventional crude oil to refiners at the import parity price, which is ased on the official price of Saudi Arabian Light Crude oil. As a consequence of this policy, the products of synthetic fuel plants will be competing against conventional petroleum products whose prices are based on the import parity price for crude oil.
Tax-Synfuels industries would be eligible for existing tax concessions, which include the following (rates shown are those proposed in the Prime Minister's Parliamentary Statementof30Apri11981):
the generalIS per cent investment allowance;
the 18 per cent loading on depreciation allowances on eligible plant ordered after 19 August 1980; and
concessions to mining industries for exploration and development insofar as applicable to exploration and development of coal, oil shale, natural gas or other minerals used as feedstocks for synfuel processes.
In addition, the Government has removed excise from ethanol and LPG used for transport fuel.
Foreign Investment-The Commonwealth has a well established and clearly stated foreign investment policy which welcomes foreign investment in Australia because of the contribution it makes to the development of Australia's industries and resources. The policy seeks to encourage foreign investment on a basis that recognises the needs and aspirations of Australians. The Government considers that Australians should have opportunities, wherever practicable, to participate with foreign investors in major projects.

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2363

Loan Council/Infrastructure Finance-In June 1978, the Australian Loan Council introduced a special category of loan programs for semi-government authorities to facilitate the planning and implementation of major projects of importance for development, with financing requirements which could not be accommodated within normal programs.
Environment-The Commonwealth has well established and clear requirements for assessing environmental impacts of proposals which involve the application of Commonwealth powers. This permits early identification and resolution of the environmental problems of any major development, including alternative liquid fuels projects.
Research and Development-The Government funds a wide variety of investigations into various alternative fuels under NERDDC. So far, over $15 million have been committed to synfuels research under this program.
Vietnam Veterans
(Question No. 498)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the article headed '470 Viet Veterans Suicide' on page 1 of the Melbourne Truth of 17 January 1981.
(2) If so, is the Minister able to confirm the figure of 470 Vietnam veterans suicides and is it a fact, as alleged in the article, that this figure represents approximately a hundredfold increase in the number of suicides in the general population.
(3) What occurrences between 13 October 1980, when the Prime Minister in a letter to Mrs P. Voltz of Oakleigh, Vic., stated that the Government recognised that existing health and welfare programs adequately covered the needs of veterans, and 14 January 1981, when the Minister made a statement on free hospital treatment offered to Vietnam veterans, led to a change in Government policy.
(4) What arrangements for the new counselling service for Vietnam veterans as announced by the Minister on 14 January 1981 exist at 24 February 1981, including details of (a) numbers and names of persons providing counselling, (b) their locations, (c) whether they are attached to the Department of Veterans' Affairs; if so, on what basis, (d) their qualifications, professional and otherwise and (e) the numbers of members of the Vietnam Veterans Action Association who are directly involved in the counselling services.
(5) What sum has the Department of Veterans' Affairs made available for the new counselling service 1980-81.
(6) Is it a fact that in answer to Question No. 5310 (Hansard, 18 September 1980, page 1610) the Minister for Defence said in relation to the use of cacodylic acid in Vietnam (a) that documentary confirmation is lacking and (b) that no record has been found indicating any operational use by Australian forces of 2,4,5-T.
(7) Did the Minister state on 14 January 1981 that the Department of Defence is supplying the Commonwealth Institute of Health with a great deal of information relating to the question of exposure to chemicals.
(8) If so, what are the reasons for the apparent discrepancies between these 2 statements.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.

(2) No. To confirm or deny the number of suicides, it would be necessary to identify all Vietnam veterans who have died and investigate the cause of death. This information is not currently available, but mortality studies, including study of deaths by suicide, will be undertaken by the Commonwealth Institute of Health in the course of the epidemiological study of Vietnam veterans.
(3) The Government has kept under examination the needs of Vietnam veterans and the means available to meet them. Concern was felt at statements made in late 1980 about ill health of a number of Vietnam veterans and claims that their emotional states of mind put their lives at risk. In an effort to help veterans with any immediate health and emotional problems, the Government took action to provide the urgent hospital treatment and the counselling assistance outlined in my Statement of 14 January 1981.
(4) An interim counselling service was immediately set up on 14 January 1981 pending the consideration about a more permanent counselling structure.
(a) & (b) The following officers were allotted as immediate contacts for Vietnam veterans, at the locations shown:

State Officer

Location

NSW Miss Helen Ryan

Mrs Joy Davies Vic. Mrs Liz Johnston

Mr Colyn Pietzch

Qld Mr Paul Carty

WA Mr Harold Grant

Mrs Joan White

SA

Miss Nancy Friee

Tas Mr Neil Hammer

Repatriation General Hospital, Concord
Depa"rtme"nt of Veterans'
Affairs Branch Office Repatriation General Hospi-
tal, Heidelberg Department of Veterans'
Affairs Branch Office Repatriation General Hospi-
tal, Hollywood
Depa"rtme"nt of Veterans'
Affairs Branch Office Repatriation General Hospi-
tal, Hobart

(c) All are permanent officers of the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
(d) All are professionally qualified social workers.
(e) There are no members of the Vietnam Veterans Action Association directly involved in the counselling service.
(5) No specific sum has been set aside for the cost of the counselling service in 1980-81. It is expected that any expenditure will be covered by the appropriations made in the appropriation Acts for the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
(6) Yes.
(7) Yes.
(8) There are considered to be no discrepancies between these two statements.

Post Offices
(Question No. 532)
Mr Free asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) How many post offices have been closed in New South Wales since 1 January 1980.
(2) Where was each located.
(3) What was the reason for each closure.
(4) What alternative service was available to local residents in each case.

2364 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr SinclairThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Fifty-one non-official post offices were closed in New South Wales in the period 1 January 1980 to 28 February 1981. (One was re-opened subsequently, see footnote *).
(2) The offices which were closed are listed below.
(3) & (4) The main reason for the closures was that the level of postal business being transacted was not sufficient to justify continued operation.

Details are given below of additional reasons for individual closures and the alternative services available to local residents. Services and facilities now provided are considered adequate to meet the postal needs of customers in each area.
The decision to close each of the offices was made only after careful consideration of all the factors involved, including alternative services available and the likely effect of the closure on the local community.

Location Banksmeadow
Birdwood Boorowa East
Bukkulla Bundook Campbells Hill
Cascade Castle Cove
Coal Point Coolongolook Cooyal CundleFlat Cunjurong Point DubboNorth
Erigolia Garra Gongolon Goolma
Goonumbla Greenland
Harefield Hobbys Yards Hollisdale Isabella Kangaloon Knorrit Flat Koolewong
Kurri Kurri West

Additional reasons for closure

Alternative services available

Postmaster resigned
Manual telephone exchange attached to office closed
Postmaster resigned
As above Manual telephone exchange attached to office
closed Postmaster resigned
Premises destroyed by fire Postmaster retired Shop and business, conducted in conjunction with
post office closed
Postal business occupied Postmaster for only 86 hours per annum
Postmaster resigned As above Manual telephone exchange attached to office
closed Postmaster resigned As above
Manual telephone exchange attached to office closed
Postmaster resigned As above Manual telephone exchange attached to office
closed Postmaster retired No suitable alternative accommodation Postmaster resigned Postmaster retired Manual telephone exchange attached to office
closed Postmaster resigned Manual telephone exchange attached to office
closed As above As above Postmaster resigned Manual telephone exchange attached to office
closed Postmaster resigned No suitable alternative accommodation
Postmaster resigned

Street posting box retained Botany and Mascot Post Offices, 1.2 and 2km
away respectively Roadside mail service provided
Two licensed stamp vendors in area Street posting box retained Boorowa Post Office, 800 metres away Roadside mail service provided As above
Licensed stamp vendor in former post office premises
Street posting box retained Rutherford Post Office, 2km away Roadside mail service provided Licensed stamp vendor in former post office prem-
ises Street posting box retained Roseville Chase and Roseville East Post Offices,
each 2.5km away Licensed stamp vendor in area Street posting box retained Community mail agency established in local store Roadside mail service provided As above
As above Two licensed stamp vendors in area Street posting box retained Dubbo Post Office, 1.2km away Roadside mail service provided
As above As above As above
As above As above
As above As above
As above As above As above As above
Licensed stamp vendor in former post office premises
Street posting box retained Letter delivery service provided Woy Woy Post Office, 2.6km away Licensed stamp vendor in former post office prem-
ises

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2365

Location

Additional reasons for closure

Alternative services available

Loftus
Majors Creek Maryvale Matheson O'Connell Ootha Parkville Sandy Flat Seven Hills North
Tanja Tucabia Tucklan Two Mile Flat Uarbry Upper Lansdowne Upper Pappinbarra Wallangra Warnervale
Wetherill Park
Wychbury
Yarrabandai Yarras

As above
As above As above
As above As above As above
As above Manual telephone exchange attached to office
closed Postmaster resigned
Postmaster retired Postmaster resigned As above Manual telephone exchange attached to office
closed Postmaster died Postmaster resigned Manual telephone exchange attached to office
closed Postmaster resigned
Postmaster resigned No suitable alternative accommodation
Premises destroyed by fire No suitable alternative accommodation
Postmaster resigned
As above Manual telephone exchange attached to office
closed

Street posting box retained Kurri Kurri and Weston Post Offices, 2km and
1.6km away respectively Licensed stamp vendor in area Street posting box retained Sutherland Post Office, 1.6km away Community mail agency established Licensed stamp vendor in area Community mail bag service established Roadside mail service provided As above Licensed stamp vendor in area Roadside mail service provided Roadside mail service provided Licensed stamp vendor in area Community mail bag service established Licensed stamp vendor in area Street posting box retained Seven Hills and Lalor Park Post Offices, 1.7km
and 1.5km away respectively Roadside mail service provided Community mail agency established Roadside mail service provided As above
As above As above As above
Licensed stamp vendor in area Community mail bag service established Street posting box retained Letter delivery service provided Wyong Post Office, 5km away Licensed stamp vendor, 1.6km away Street posting box retained Letter delivery service provided Smithfield Post Office, 3km away Street posting box retained Post offices at Burwood, Burwood North,
Croydon North, Five Docks: 1.5km, lkm, 1.5km and 1.5km away respectively Roadside mail service provided As above

* Kotara Post Office closed during the period nominated because the Postmaster resigned and no suitable person was avail-
able to continue the office. Subsequently, the premises became unavailable. The office re-opened on 2 March 1981, after a suitable applicant was appointed as Postmaster, in a gift shop in the vicinity of the former location.

Small Business Bankruptcies
(Question No. 537)
Mr Free asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
How many small businesses went bankrupt or were liquidated in each of the financial years from 1972-1973 to 1979-1980 inclusive.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Neither the bankruptcy legislation nor the companies legislation contains any definition of a small business. The existing statistical information available in relation to individual and corporate insolvencies has not been collected in a way which would enable the presentation of statistics on the basis of any meaningful distinction based on the size of the business.

The annual report on the operation of the Bankruptcy Act now contains statistics on the number of business bankruptcies, which are defined as 'bankruptcies of employers and persons engaged in a trade, business or profession on their own account' (the remaining bankruptcies are treated as nonbusiness bankruptcies).
The statistics of business bankruptcies as defined in these annual reports for the relevant period are as follows:
1972-73-n.a. 1973-74-n.a. 1974-75-1,252 1975-76-1,243 1976-77-1,270 1977-78-1,752 1978-79-1,986 1979-80-2,530
In considering these statistics the following points should be borne in mine:

2366 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Statistics for 1972-73 and 1973-74 are not available in a form which would enable reliable infomation to be given.
The term 'bankruptcy' is used to refer to a matter that has been the subject of a separate debtor's petition or creditor's petition. It is possible to present a single petition covering two or more partners or joint debtors. For example, in the ACT, New South Wales and Victoria for the period of I January to 30 June 1979 there were 941 bankruptcies and 1,136 bankrupts.
The figures in this table refer to petitions under Part IV of the Bankruptcy Act. They do not cover Part X or Part XI matters.
Most liquidations of bodies corporate are carried out under the winding up provisions of the companies legislation of each State and Territory. Liquidations commenced under the ACT Companies Ordinance during the financial years 1972-73 to 1979-80 were as follows:

Financial year

Members' voluntary

Creditor's voluntary Court

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

n.a.

2

6

n.a.

6

14

n.a.

22

11

76

14

10

98

14

14

192

26

20

133

25

19

208

25

18

In interpreting these figures the following points may be of assistance to the honourable member:
As is obvious the majority of liquidations arc categorised as 'members' voluntary'. All liquidations so categorised relate to companies that are solvent. Some are indicative of group rationalisations rather than company failures.
The other two categories of liquidations normally relate to companies that are unable to pay their debts as they become due.
These figures do not indicate the liquidations of 'foreign companies' operating in the ACT.
Particulars of these liquidations would be held in the home jurisdiction of the body corporate concerned and would be the responsibility of the appropriate State Minister.
The figures do not distinguish between ACT incorporate companies operating within the ACT and those operating elsewhere.
It is estimated that a substantial number of ACT incorporated companies do not operate in the Territory.
The figures do not distinguish between companies that conduct a small business, companies that conduct a large business, or companies that do not conduct any business at all. For example, some companies are investment companies.
Many company failures are not represented by liquidations but by companies struck off the register of companies by the Registrar pursuant to section 308 of the Companies Ordinance.
These companies have ceased to operate or to carry on business. Normally they have lost all of their assets and frequently have substantial liabilities. There are generally no parties interested in instigating liquidation proceedings as there are no assets which could be realised for the purpose of paying a dividend.

STD and ISD Telephone Services
(Question No. 555)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Have 4,000 Western Australians opted out of the STD system in their telephone service?
(2) How many Western Australian subscribers have to this point requested to opt out of the international subscribers dialling service?
(3) In view of the fact that many of those who opt out of both services do so to avoid the consequences of being confronted with large bills resulting from their own excess use or the use made by others of their phones, will he waive the $3 disconnection charge and treat future requests as part of Telecom's normal service.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There are some 400,000 subscribers in Western Australia connected to automatic exchanges from which STD is available. While precise figures are not kept, around 12,000 have elected to have their services barred from STD. There is a charge of $3 per annum involved.
(2) Telecom Australia provides the international subscribers dialling service only to those subscribers who apply to be connected to such a service.
(3) Advances in technology are enabling Telecom to introduce a system known as Call Charge Record (CCR) which will automatically record details of subscriber dialled international calls. That is, Telecom will be in a position to provide customers with the same degree of accountability on ISD calls that is currently provided with operator connected trunk or international calls. In other words, Te1ecom is automating an already existing facility.
Should any subscriber wish to take less than full advantage of the telephone service, there is a standard fee of $3 per annum which will ensure that access from the service is restricted in a prescribed way. The provision of access barring facilities involves clerical costs in processing the application, the equipment installation itself and continuing maintenance checks to ensure the correct operation of the facility. Telecom advises that the fee of $3 per annum does not cover these costs.
Proposed Racing Circuit
(Question No. 591)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'Proposed racing circuit poses environmental problems' in the 'Bogong', the journal of thc Canberra and South East Region Environment Centre, Volume 2, No. I, February-March 1981.
(2) Is there any substance to the allegations in that article, that (a) the motor racing circuit at Warwick Farm, NSW, was recently closed; if so, when was it closed and did that closure follow nearby residents' protest about noise: (b) a syndicate of 4 persons approached the Government, 2 years ago with the proposal for a world class racing circuit in Canberra and (c) the Government has committed approximately $2.5 million for land acquisition and infrastructure works for the project; if so, in which Budget was this allocation made and what is the relevant appropria.tion line number or numbers.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2367

I am informed by my Department that:
(1) Yes-it represents one facet of opinion on the possible development of an international motor racing circuit in the Australian Capital Territory.
(2) (a) Following recommendations on the unsafe conditions at the track by the NSW Police Department the licence (under the 'Speedway Racing (Public Safety) Act 1957') which expired on 13.12.73, was not renewed by the NSW Chief Secretary's Department.
I understand a proposal in 1973 to build a short circuit track (approximately 1 mile) at a cost of $50,000 was abandoned as it was not in the interest of horse racing and local community groups had protested about likely noise pollution.
(b) Yes-it is true that a group representing motor racing clubs in the Australian Capital Territory approached the Government two years ago with a proposal for the construction of an international standard (Fv1'mula 1) motor racing circuit in the ACT.
(c) No-the matter is still under consideration.
Carlton Football Club-Tax Investigation
(Question No. 604)
Dr Everingham asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 25 February:
(l) Has he accepted an honorary position with the Carlton Football Club.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to an article in the Age of 22 September 1980 which notes that a V.F.L. Club lost its books rather than have its players burnt by the taxman.
(3) Will he check the accuracy of this report and inform the House of the source of the club's knowledge that a tax investigation was imminent.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. I have been the No.2 ticketholder for the Carlton Football Club since May 1976. I am an honorary member of the Carltonians which is a group of supporters of the Club not under its jurisdiction.
(2) Yes.
(3) I draw the honourable member's attention to the Treasurer's reply to Question No. 218 of 27 November 1980.
Social Welfare Supplementary Assistance
(Question No. 623)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(1) Further to the Minister's reply to question No. 142 (Hansard, 4 December 1980, page 470), by how much has the cost of average rental accommodation increased since the last increase to supplementary assistance was made on 14 November 1974.
(2) Is it a fact that the cost of Queensland Housing Commission rental accommodation has increased from $16.25 per week in June 1974 to approximately $45 per week in June 1980.
(3) Will the Government give serious consideration to increasing the supplementary assistance in line with inflation in rents as indicated by increases in State Housing Commission rents; if not, why not.

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The private housing rent component of the Consumer Price Index increased by 71 per cent between the December quarters of 1974 and 1980 and the government housing component by 198 per cent. However, on average, government rents are still much lower than private rents, as shown by the recently published Australian Bureau of Statistics Survey of Housing Occupancy and Costs, Australia, August 1980, which estimated that, at the survey date, the average weekly rent of houses in State capital cities was $32.43 in the case of government landlords and $56.17 in the case of private landlords (other than the individual's employer).
(2) These rent levels are determined by the Queensland Housing Commission. Recent policy is that they be marketrelated. It is my understanding that the rents quoted by the honourable member are broadly correct and reflect rents charged by the Commission for three-bedroom houses.
(3) The level of supplementary assistance is determined in relation to other priorities in the Budget context. Although changes in rent levels are a factor to be considered in assessing the levels of this supplement for rent paying pensioners with little or no private income, it should be noted that pensioners and beneficiaries who are tenants" of State-Housing Commissions may avail themselves of the assistance provided by those authorities by way of rental rebates or rent reductions.
Institute of Health Epidemiological Study
(Question No. 643)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on26 February 1981:
(I) Has all, or any part, of the Commonwealth Institute of Health epidemiological study research team been moved from the University of Sydney to other premises; if so, (a) what are the new locations, (b) when did the move take place, ec) what was the purpose of the move and (d) who are the personnel who have been moved.
(2) What were the names, qualifications, substantive gradings and salaries of all personnel on that survey team as at (a) the commencement of the survey and (b) 25 February 1981.
(3) What are the details of the progress made by the Commonwealth Institute of Health in the conduct of the epidemiological study as at 25 February 1981.
(4) Has the epidemiological study research team identified the number of Vietnam veterans and public servants required who served in Vietnam during hostilities there necessary for the study to produce conclusive results; if so, what is the number required.
(5) How many (a) Vietnam veterans and (b) public servants have been (i) identified and (ii) examined and assessed, as at 25 February 1981.
Mr MacKel~,'r-The answer to the honourable member's questkn is as follows:
(1) The Australial veterans' herbicides study group of the Commonwealth Inst' tute of Health moved to city premises at 9th Floor, St James '':::entre, 107-111 Elizabeth Street, Sydney, on Monday 9 February 1981 because accommodation at the Institute of Health became too limited for the existing staff, and suitable accommodation became available which was already leased by the Commonwealth. Personnel moved were:
Associate Professor R. MacLennan (Principal Investigator); Mr R. J. Pople (Administrative Manager); Ms G. Rose (Senior Research Officer); Dr A. Long (Research Medical Officer); Dr K. Byth (Statistician); Ms K. Jones

2368 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(Medical Records Officer); Ms R. Norton (Research Officer); Mr S. Vrana (Administrative Assistant);Ms J. Lourey (Word Processing Typist); Ms K. Thomson (Clerical Assistant); Dr A. Kameron, Management Consultant from W. D. Scott & Co., is also located at St James Centre.
Mr F. Morton (Computer Systems Officer) remained at the Commonwealth Institute of Health because the computer terminal is still located there. Transfer of the terminal is in train.
(2) (a) Assessment of survey parameters commenced in March 1980. Personnel at that time were:
Associate Professor R. MacLennan (Research Medical Officer Grade 3), MB.BS (Qld), M.S. (Tulane), FRACP, MRCP, DCH, DTM ~nd H., Salary $38 744 (as part of duties only).
(2) (b) Personnel on the survey team at 25 February 1981:
Associate Professor R. MacLennan (Research Medical Officer Grade 3), MB.BS (Qld), M.S. (Tulane), FRACP, MRCP, DCH, DTM and H., Salary: $41 865; Ms G. Rose (Senior Re~:arch Officer, Grade 2), B.A. (Melb.)., Salary: $19453; Mr R. J. Pople (Administrative Manager), Salary: $24954; Dr A. Long (Research Medical Officer Grade l), M.B., B.S. (Temporary, position under advertisement), Salary: $25 559; Dr K. Byth (Clerk Class 8-Statistician), B.Sc., (Qld), M.Sc. (Qld) , Ph.D. (Lond.) DIC., Salary; $21 491; Ms K. Jones (Medical Records Officer Grade 3), Salary: $15 981; Ms R. Norton (Research Officer Grade 1), (Temporary, position under advertisement), M.A., Salary: $12652; Mr S. Vrana (Clerk Class 5-Administrative Assistant), Salary: $15 981; Ms K. Thompson (Clerical Assistant Grade 2), Salary: $9 946; Mrs S. Tate (Clerical Assistant Grade I), Salary: $9 541; MsJ. Lorey (Word Processing Typist Grade 1), Salary: $11 429; Ms S. Issa (Typist Grade I), Salary: $9,664; Mr R. Curtin (Computer Systems Officer Grade 3), B.Ec., Salary: $22 359; Mr F. Morton (Computer Systems Officer Grade 2), M.Sc., Dip. Com. Sc., Salary: $18 879;
Note: Mr R. Curtin is located in Canberra and Mr F. Morton is located at the Commonwealth Institute of Health.
As at 25 February 1981 Dr A. Kameron, B.Sc., M.sc., Ph.D., from W. D. Scott and Co., was engaged on a consultancy basis to provide project planning and control assistance with the investigation.
(3) Instruments and questionnaires are currently in final draft awaiting printing. Addresses of persons selected by statisticians for a pilot study are available. Mailing facilities and interviewers are being organised in anticipation of the beginning of a pilot study, which is the next step in the plan. Assessment of the pilot study results will determine the method of the main study.
(4) The study team has acquired lists of Army personnel who served in Vietnam. Complete information regarding Navy, RAAF and public servants has not yet been received. Numbers are sufficient for the aims of the investigation provided the response by veterans and their families to the survey questionnaire is at the required statistical level.
(5) See (4) above. No veterans or public servants have been examined or assessed to date. No examination or assessments can proceed until the pilot study commences. No valid assessments can be made until the major study of approximately 40 000-42000 Vietnam veterans has been completed.
Television Services for the Hearing Impaired
(Question No. 741)
Mr Humphreys asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:

(1) Was his Department represented at a meeting concerning Television Services for the Hearing Impaired held on 10 October 1980.
(2) If so, what follow-up action has been taken by his Department to implement the recommendations of that meeting that (a) special funding be provided and a National Captioning Centre be set up, (b) decoders be provided for eligible hearing-impaired individuals through the Department of Social Security's Rehabilitation Service, (c) research be initiated into problems and options for the introduction of a caption service and (d) a policy regarding the standardisation of a video text technique be adopted.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) No formal recommendations were adopted at the meeting which took the form of exploratory discussions concerning captioned television for the hearing impaired. However, as to the specific points raised I refer the honourable member to the answers given by the Minister for Communications to Question No. 744 and by the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security to Question No. 749.
Funding for Development of Medical Aids and Equipment
(Question No. 773)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(1) Has he taken action to ensure that inventors and manufacturers in the Australian Capital Territory are being supported and encouraged by being given access to funding for the development of medical aids and equipment, such as wheelchairs, for disabled persons; if so, what action.
(2) What technical or commercially viable projects for improved equipment for disabled persons in the ACT have received funding in this International Year of Disabled Persons.
(3) What funds are available for this purpose for the remainder of 1981.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I am advised by my Department that action has been taken by the ACT Advisory Committee for IYDP to encourage the involvement of all parts of our community in assisting disabled persons and is already well advanced. This has included, with the co-operation of the Confederation of ACT Industry, fostering of awareness and support of IYDP by way of an employer education programme directed to some 1,400 outlets. On an even broader plane through the Advisory Committee's Newsletter 'Delta', organisations and individuals are being encouraged to develop projects designed to assist disabled persons and to seek advice and assistance where that is needed.
The Assistance to Inventors Scheme administered by my colleague the Minister for Science and Technology, serves as an excellent means of encouraging individual initiative and provides for financial assistance, by way of a grant, of up to $10,000 for development of anyone project including the support and testing of prototypes of inventions. Aids to assist disabled persons are covered by this scheme.
(2) A number of requests have been received by the Advisory Committee Secretariat in recent months for funding to assist the development of innovative projects aimed at assisting disabled persons in the ACT community-surveillance devices to safeguard autistic children, alarms to assist blind and

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2369

visually impaired people crossing traffic intersections and a wheelchair with special features, for the physically disabled. A grant of $700 has already been paid to the autistic Children's Association of the ACT under a Special Childrens' Services Programme allocation to mark IYDP, to assist the development of various items of prototype equipment. A number of other inventions are being examined by the Advisory Committee for possible funding.
(3) As I have indicated, a well established scheme designed to encourage and support inventions operates at a national level. ACT inventors have access to that scheme. No funds have been set aside in the ACT specifically to assist the development of technical aids and equipment for disabled persons.

Land Auctions in the Australian Capital Territory

(Question No. 775)

Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:

(1) What was the average price paid at land auctions for home sites on (a) the northside and (b) the southside in the Australian Capital Territory for each of the last 5 years.

(2) What is the program for release ofland on (a) northside and (b) southside for 1981.

(3) Is he able to supply estimates of future trends in the average cost of home sites on (a) the northside and (b) the southside in the Australian Capital Territory: if so, what are they.

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows. I am informed by my Department that:

(1)(a) Northside-
(b) Southside-

1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 (to Feb. 1981) 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80
1980-81 (to Feb. 1981)

$
9,066 10,054
9,177 11,702 14,030 13,197 15,035 12,761 13,330 10,930

The increase in prices paid for northside land reflects the market demand for an increasingly scarce commodity as the
number of sites that could be offered for lease decreased. On the other hand the fluctuation in prices for southside land has occurred when less attractive sites with lower reserve prices have been offered for sale.

(2) On present indications it is expected that about 2,000 standard residential leases will be offered for sale during 1980-81. Apart from about sixty blocks on the northside of Canberra, this land is all located on the southside of Canberra.

(3) Reserve prices are fixed to recover overall the cost of providing serviced sites. Since no major contracts for residentialland servicing have been let since 1976, it is difficult to predict trends in costs, but because of inflation it must be expected that the reserve prices placed on sites will move upwards for both northside and southside land.

Noise Pollution in the Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 777)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:

What action has he taken to (a) prepare and (b) implement legislation for the control of noise pollution in the Australian Capital Territory.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that instructions for the preparation of an Ordinance to control noise pollution in the Australian Capital Territory were forwarded to the Attorney General's Department in April 1979. These instructions sought the preparation of legislation to reflect policy advice received from the Inter-Departmental Committee on Environmental Quality in the Australian Capital Territory. The Attorney-General's Department has raised a number of problems with the proposals set out in those instructions, the consideration of which has necessitated a review of complex technical matters which must be dealt with in the proposed Ordinance. Further instructions will be sent when these problems have been resolved.
I am aware of the feeling within the community that the introduction of effective noise control legislation is required as a matter of urgency and have, accordingly, requested that the problems be resolved and the legislation prepared as a matter of high priority.
Petrol Price in Canberra
(Question No. 778)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 11 March 1981.
What was the recommended and/or average price of super grade petrol in Canberra as at 30 June for each year from 1975 to 1980.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that the price of petroleum products was subject to price control in the Australian Capital Territory as at both 30 June 1975 and 30 June 1976. The prescribed maximum retail prices for premium grade petrol at those dates were as follows:
June 1975: Ampol-68.2 cents per gallon; Golden Fleece-67.9 cents per gallon; In any other case-67.2 cents per gallon.
June 1976: EITHER Ampol or Golden Fleece-17.5 cents per litre; In any other case-17,4 cents per litre; OR Golden Fleece-79.6 cents per gallon; Ampol-79.5 cents per gallon; Mobil-79.1 cents per gallon; In any other case-78.9 cents per gallon.
Price controls on petrol were discontinued on 26 October 1976. Since that date the price charged for petrol has varied between retail outlets and, therefore, I am unable to provide a firm answer to the actual or average petrol prices on the 30 June of each subsequent year. However, from information obtained for Consumer Price Index purposes, the Australian Bureau of Statistics compiles details of average prices in the capital cities for the week day closest to the 15th of the first month of each quarter.
The average retail prices for petrol in Canberra as estimated by ABS for the respective June quarters are as follows:
June 1977-17.8 cents per litre June 1978-19.0 cents per litre June 1979-25.3 cents per litre June 1980-34.9 cents per litre.

2370 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

2,4,5-T, 2,4-D: Vietnam Veterans
(Question No. 840)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
(l) Can the Minister say whether an independent research team has discovered that more than 50 per cent of Vietnam veterans are suffering brain damage symptoms, e.g., emotional imbalance, memory loss and a tendency towards outbreaks of violence.
(2) If so, can he also say whether the official results of this survey are to be published in the Australian Medical Journal.
(3) Did the research reveal that the brain damage referred to had been caused by an imbalance of copper and zinc levels in the bodies of the veterans.
(4) Is the imbalance the result of exposure to chemicals used in the Vietnam war.
(5) Do these chemicals include 2,4,5-T, 2,4-D and various arsenic-based chemicals.
(6) Are the pharmaceutical medications used to treat the damage available in Australia.
(7) Are these medications being imported from other countries by the Vietnam Veteran's Action Association.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) to (7) I am aware of Press reports quoting a spokesman for the New South Wales Vietnam Veteran's Action Association as making statements on the points raised in the honourable member's questions. However, as neither the Department of Veteran's Affairs nor I have received a research report on any of the malters referred to, I am unable to comment upon the accuracy of the Press reports.
Alumina Refinery at Wagerup, Western Australia
(Question No. 913)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to Alcoa's decision to delay work on its alumina refinery at Wagerup, WA.
(2) Is the Minister able to say whether the principal reason for this decision was a downturn in demand for aluminium in the United States of America.
(3) If this was the reason, what other projects in the aluminium industry may be affected by this downturn in demand.
(4) What assessment has been made by the Government of the likely demand for aluminium in the USA and Japan through to the mid 1980's.
(5) Is there any evidence of the fall in international demand affecting the price of alumina and aluminium on international markets.
(6) What published studies does the Minister rely on to form his assessments of trends in the international aluminium markets in the 1980's.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as fonows:
(1) Yes.
(2) and (3) The generally accepted view among aluminium indusry experts is that the United States aluminium market has a considerable influence on the fortunes of the aluminium

industry throughout the world, including the international alumina market. However, it would be misleading to attribute the decision by Alcoa of Australia directly to a short-term downturn in United States demand for aluminium. According to a spokesman from Alcoa of Australia the decision was due to a softening of the international alumina market.
Commodity markets are normally subject to cyclical influences on demand. In 1979 there was a marked world shortage of aluminium which resulted in a rapid run down of producers' stocks. Throughout 1980 stocks were replenished to normal levels. These influences resulted in aluminium producers running smelters at high capacity and alumina producers streamlining production facilities to produce additional tonnage. The current alumina over-supply, which is likely to persist into 1982 is partly a result of the above chain of events and partly a result of failure of the metal market to sustain growth projections in the short term.
Alcoa's decision is the result of the company's commercial judgement. According to the company's thinking, there would be little point in hastening such a project to completion before the market has returned to optimum conditions.
1 am not aware of other projects which may be delayed because of market factors. Taking both demand and supply factors into account, it is confidently predicted that the outlook for Australia's alumina and aluminium remains quite favourable and that any delays in completion of projects will be temporary. It is interesting to reflect that the construction of the Alcoa Pinjarra refinery was also undertaken in a situation of market downturn, but subsequent recovery in demand fully accommodated the tonnage produced.
(4) Current indications are that both the US. and Japanese aluminium demand are expected to grow at about 5 per cent per annum over the coming decade although yearly variations are almost certain.
(5) I am informed that alumina spot prices are substantially below levels of 12 months ago. However, the spot market comprises only a small proportion of the total trade: by far the greater part of our alumina production is sold under long term contracts and here increased price levels have been evident. Aluminium prices on the free market are currently about 90 per cent of the world producer price, but again the proportion of aluminium sold on free markets is small. In the medium term, aluminium prices are expected to increase at above general inflation rates.
(6) My Department receives a representative selection of aluminium trade literature. In addition, my Department is able to supplement this information through bilateral trade relations and Australian membership of the International Bauxite Association, through the network of Departmental representatives overseas and through frequent contact with the Australian aluminium industry.
Department of Industry and Commerce: Television Advertising
(Question No. 934)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expcnditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 (b) January 1980.
Sir Phillip Lynch -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Department (Project Australia Campaign)-S652,736; Australian Tourist Commission-- $161,593.

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2371

(2) No expenditure was incurred by the Department or its Instrumentalities during the months of December 1979 and January 1980.
Department of Employment and Youth Affairs: Television Advertising
(Question No. 943)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) $241,259 was expended on television advertising in 1979-80.
(2) (a) $627 was expended in December 1979 and (b) there was no expenditure in January 1980.
Department of the Capital Territory: Television Advertising
(Question No. 953)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Hodgman--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
1. During 1979-80, expenditures on television advertising by my Department and Instrumentalities under my control were as follows:
Department of the Capital Territory $2,114.62 (for bus service, road safety and holiday care of dogs), ACT Milk Authority $42,652.76, ACT Electricity Authority $15,258.00 (raising of public loan); and
(2) The proportion of these expenditures incurred during the months of (a) December 1979, were as follows:
Department of the Capital Territory $1,223.00 (57.82 per cent) (holiday care of dogs), ACT Milk Authority $3,121.15 (7.31 per cent); and (b) January 1980, Nil.
Re-alignment of the Cotter Road, Canberra
(Question No. 990)
Mr Porter asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 1 April 1981 :

(1) Has there been a re-alignment of the Cotter Road adjacent to the Yarra Glen-Adelaide Avenue Overpass; if so, why.
(2) If the re-alignment relates to perceived safety aspects, how many accidents have there been on that road in the last 3 years and have there been any fatalities in these accidents.
(3) What was the estimated cost of the roadworks.
(4) What sum has been spent to date.
(5) When did the work start, when was it due for completion and when will it be completed.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised by the National Capital Development Commission that:
(I) A re-alignment of Cotter Road adjacent to Dunrossil Drive and Dudley Street is being constructed at present. This involves the duplication of a short section of Cotter Road and reconstruction of the intersections with Dunrossil Drive and with Dudley Street.
The purpose of this work is to improve the operation of these intersections, by separating the turning traffic movements and providing median storage for these turning vehicles, which include official motorcades leaving from and returning to Government House at Yarralumla. This work will improve the safety of tfiese turning vehicles on a busy, high speed road.
(2) Accident records for 1980 are not yet available, but for the years 1977-1979 inclusive, the accident record for the section of road is:
1977-7 accidents (2 injuries) 1978-6 accidents (2 injuries) 1979-8 accidents (nil injuries)
There were no fatalities in this area during this period.
(3) The estimated cost of the works is $207,000.
(4) Progress payments totalling $85,000 have been made to 7 April 1981.
(5) Construction of roadworks commenced in December 1980 and is due for completion in May 1981. It is expected the work will be completed on schedule.
Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1007)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the information in the following attachments.

STATUTORY AND NON-STATUTORY BODIES UNDER THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND RESOURCES

Office

Name

First appointed

Current term

From

To

Date
of Domicile birth (State)

Occupation

Chairman (full-time) Member (part-time)

R.A.Daly G.H.Lavery

Export Development Grants Board
4.6.78 4.6.78 30.6.81 28.4.28 1.1.79 1.1.79 31.12.81 Age 67

ACT Vic.

Chairman, E.D.G.B
Chairman and Managing Director (retired)

2372 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Office

Name

Current term First - - - - - -

appointed From

To

Date of Domicile
birth (State)

Occupation

Member (part-time) H. Mills

1.1.79 1.1.79 31.12.81 Aile 64 NSW Chairman and Director

Member (part-time) R.Paddon

4.6.75 4.6.7830.6.81 Age 64 Vic. Director (retired)

Member (part-time) A K. Streber

1.1.79 1.1.79 30.6.81 Age 69 NSW Director (retired)

Note~Title of Legislation and Composition of Body: Export Market Development Grants Act 1974. Export Market Development

Grants Amendment Act 1978. The Board consists of: one full-time Chairman, four part-time members.

Support Finance and Insurance Corporation

Chairman (part-time) J. B. Clarkson

1.2.75 1.2.80 31.1.82 26.6.21 NSW Chairman and Managing Di-

rector

Deputy Chairman

(part-time)

AG.Oldham

11.4.78 1.2.80 30.6.82 1.10.16 NSW Chairman and Managing Di-

rector

Managing Director

(full-time)

S.Burton

3.3.79 3.3.79 2.3.85 5.2.25 NSW Managing Director, E.F.I.C.

Deputy Managing DiD.C. Hill

1.11.76 1.11.76 31.10.82 8.12.27 NSW Deputy Managing Director

rector (full-time)

Member (part-time) D.Dobbie

25.5.79 25.5.79 24.5.81 25.2.23 Vic. Managing Director

Member (part-time) C.M. Toop

1.2.75 1.2.80 31.1.82 3.3.14 NSW Managing Director (retired)

Member (part-time) J.B. Laurie

11.4.78 11.4.78 30.6.83 18.9.31 Vic. Managing Director

Member (part-time) H. N. Roscrow

9.4.81 9.4.81 31.1.84 6.8.26

SA Chief Executive

Member (part-time) A. L. Paltridge

26.4.78 2.8.78 1.8.81 25.6.22 ACT First Assistant Secretary,

D.T.R.

Member (part-time) AB. Avery

11.4.80 11.4.80 10.4.83 10.3.28 Vic. Managing Director

Member (part-time) J.W.Keany

9.4.81 9.4.81 31.1.84 25.5.23 ACT Assistant Secretary,

Treasurer

Note~Title of Legislation and Composition of body: Export Finance and Insurance Corporation Act 1974 (No. 1220f 1974).

Australian Overseas Projects Corporation

Chairman (part-

time)

E. P. McClintock (Sir) 23.11.78

3 years

Age 60 NSW Company Director

Deputy Chairman

(part-time)

AD. Chenery

- 23.11.78

3 years

AgeS9

SA Director and Senior Assist-

ant General Manager

Director (part-time) W.H.Clough

- 23.11.78

3 years

AgeS2 WA Managing Director

Director (part-time) I. M. Lloyd

- 23.11.78

3 years

Age SO NSW Chairman to Directors

Director (part-time) S. L. Wallis

- 23.11.78

3 years

Age 44 NSW Chief Executive; Company Director

Director (part-time) A L. Paltridge

.23.11.78

3 years

AgeS6 ACT First Assistant Secretary,

D.T.R.

Director (part-time) K. J. Rodda (OBE.,

E.D.) . . . . 23.11.78

3 years

AgeS6 Vic. Deputy Secretary, Depart-

ment of Housing and

Construction

Managing Director

(full-time)

K. A. McKechnie

1.1.79

S years

AgeS4 NSW Managing Director

Special Advisor

(Sir) B. J. Callinan

(CBE., D.S.O.,

M.C.)

7.12.78

3 years

Age 6S Vic. Company Director

Special Advisor

D.G.Price

7.12.78

3 years Age n/a NSW Director, Snowy Moun-

tains Engineering

Corporation

Note~Title of Legislation and Composition of Body: Australian Overseas Corporation Act (No. IDS of 1978). There are 7

part-time members including the Chairman and Deputy Chairman, and 1 full-time Managing Director. The Board, with the ap-

proval of the Minister, may appoint Special Advisors. The Board is formally appointed by the Governor-General. Other infor-

mation on membership of the Corporation is contained in the Australian Overseas Corporation Act 1978.

Joint Coal Board

Chairman (full-

time) . . . . , G. J. Tredinnick

22.8.77

7 years

15.7.24 NSW Full-time office holder

Member (full-time) A. C. Girard

. 22.12.89

7 years

NSW

Member (full-time) T. A Squires

. 22.6.77

7 years

9.12.19 NSW Full-time office holder

Secretary

M.C.Bridges

n/a n/an/a

NSW Secretary,J.C.B.

Note~Title of Legislation and Composition of Body: Constituted under the: Coal Industry Act 1946 of the Commonwealth

Parliament, Coal Industry Act 1946 of the New South Wales Parliament.

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2373

DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND RESOURCES Annual Salaries and Fees

Salary

Fee

Export Development Grants Board Chairman Member (part-time)
Export Finance and Insurance Corporation
Chairman (part-time) Deputy Chairman (part-time) Managing Director Deputy Managing Director Member (part-time) Australian Overseas Projects Corporation Chairman (part-time) Deputy Chairman (part-time) Director (part-time) Managing Director
Joint Coal Board Chairman Member

$ 38,265
48,089 44,304
48,089 44,105 36,094

$
4,300
10,675 6,420
4,300
10,675 6,420 4,300

(2) There are three basic rates of disability pension payable to veterans under the Repatriation Act 1920: The General Rate, the Intermediate Rate, and the Special (T. & P.I.) Rate. The maximum dependant's pension of $4.05 per week for a wife and $1.35 for a child is payable at a level commensurate with the incapacity of a eteran. The 10 per cent assessment means that incapacity has been assessed at 10 per cent of the maximum 100 per cent General Rate. The allowance of 14 cents per child per week is 10 per cent of the maximum rate payable to a child for a veteran.
(3) Commonwealth benefits for orphans are already provided for by the Government. There are no plans to extend further eligibility for benefits under the Repatriation Act 1920 in the form indicated by the honourable member.
Australian Capital Territory: Housing
(Question No. 1059)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(1) What is the average waiting time for (a) Government housing and (b) emergency housing in the Australian Capital Territory.

Appointment to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1015)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 1 Apri11981:
What are the (a) names (b) dates and terms of appointment; and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There are no independent Statutory Authorities coming within my jurisdiction.

(2) What criteria, apart from the loss of a house due to fire, are used to determine eligibility for emergency housing.
(3) What is the total number of persons currently on the waiting list for government accommodation.
(4) How many applications for emergency housing have been (a) made and (b) successful for each month since January 1980.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that: (I) (a) At 31 March 1981 the approximate waiting times for the various categories, depending on location sought, were:

Women Veterans: Dependant's Allowance
(Question No. 1045)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 2 Apri11981:
(1) Can a woman veteran, who has total care of her orphaned grandchild, and who is in receipt of a 10 per cent veterans' disability pension, claim the dependents allowance for these children, as is allowed for children or adopted children of the veteran; if not, why not.
(2) How is the dependents allowance of 28 cents per child per fortnight equated with a 10 per cent disability.
(3) Will the Minister consider extending this allowance to cover the orphaned grandchildren of veterans.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) A veteran responsible for the care of orphaned grandchildren cannot claim the dependant's pension for such children. Repatriation legislation provides that only the children or adopted children of an incapacitated veteran are eligible to be granted children's dependant's pension.

3 bedroom house-I 5-20 months 4 bedroom house-16 months 2 bedroom flat-3t-16 months Bedsitter flat-7-8 months
(I) (b) Applicants for emergency housing fall into two separate categories. The true emergency group comprise of applicants who demonstrate an inability to accommodate themselves that night in any way whatsoever, ego because their home has been destroyed by fire. These few genuine emergency applicants can be accommodated on the same day. Other successful applicants for what is called emergency housing are those who can demonstrate that their circumstances are such that they would suffer undue hardship if required to wait out their time on the normal housing waiting period and therefore that an advance allocation ahead of all others on the normal waiting list is justified. These applicants, who are really applicants for priority housing, are generally housed within a period of four to six weeks.
(2) Apart from a general requirement that applicants for emergency housing must meet the eligibility criteria for entry to the normal waiting list for government rental housing, there are no set criteria which emergency housing applicants necessarily must meet. It is impossible to list all the circumstances in which applicants might qualify for assistance. However, the

2374 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

answer to (1 ) (b) explains circumstances in general terms. (3) At 31 March 1981--1,889. (4)-

1980-January February March April May June July August September October November December
1981January February March
T0taL

(a) Appli- (b) Appli-

cations

cations

received approved

72

24

61

24

68

28

62

17

60

34

51

17

81

16

40

8

74

21

97

23

86

16

57

16

86

8

110

17

113

22

1,118

291

Nomad Aircraft Program
(Question No. 1066)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) What is the present status of the Nomad aircraft program
(2) When will the current authorised production cease.
(3) Will the Government approve further production of the Nomad, in view of the deferral of the Tactical Fighter replacement decision.
(4) Are programs for the development of other aircraft types for production in Australia currently being undertaken; if so, what are the prospects for each of these types being brought into production.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) On 15 December 1980 I announced that the Government had approved production of a further 55 Nomad aircraft, bringing the total number of aircraft authorised to date to 200. As at 30 April 1981, 128 Nomad aircraft had been ordered and of these 105 had been delivered.
(2) Production of the 200th Nomad aircraft is scheduled for completion in June 1984.
(3) Production authorisations beyond aircraft 200 will be considered by the Government at the appropriate time.
(4) There is a requirement to replace the RAAF basic pilot training aircraft (the CT-4 Airtrainer) and the advanced pilot training jet aircraft (the Macchi 326H) used by both RAN and RAAF. A Government-funded study by the Australian aircraft industry into the feasibility of designing and developing replacement aircraft locally has been completed. Principal recommendations are that local industry undertake the design, development, manufacture, sale and support of a basic trainer, and that for the advanced trainer, now required in a later time frame, discussions continue with selected overseas companies on the various possibilities for collaboration. The

project definition phase of the basic trainer project commenced in July 1980 and subject to satisfactory progress and further Government approvals the aircraft should enter production. Further studies are being carried out to examine possible collaborative programs for the advanced trainer aircraft.
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Finance
(Question No. HOl)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division 304-Administrative.
(2) Has there been an underspending in this division by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos 1 and 2) 1980-81; if so, what is the reason.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's questions:
(1) The original 1980-81 appropriations made for my department for Division 304-Administrative, and for Divisions for other departments, were those presented to the Parliament in Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1980-81. The proposals, while in broad terms based on estimates submitted by departments, followed Government consideration of those estimates in the light of its policies in respect of particular areas of expenditure and of general financial and economic objectives.
The general principles applied to the preparation of estimates by departments and authorities are set out in the Directions issued by the Secretary of the Department of Finance under the authority of the Audit Act 1901. These Directions are long standing and have been endorsed by successive Governments. The relevant general principles are set out in Finance Direction 6.3 and provide in essence that:
(i) Estimates shall represent a realistic assessment of the sums expected to be spent and shall be based on current or known costs. Items of a recurring nature may be estimated on the basis of experience.
(ii) Estimates shall not include amounts in respect of proposals which are so far from firm that it is not possible to form any real estimate of what payment, if any, will be made.
(2) The Department of Finance Information Paper, 'Statement of Savings Expected in Annual Appropriations made by Acts Nos 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos 1 and 2) 1980-81', sets out amounts by which departments estimated, at the time of preparation of the Appropriation Bills (Nos 3 and 4) 1980-81, expenditure under the appropriation items concerned would at 30 June 1981 fall short of the appropriation originally made. What actual underspending will occur in respect of those or other items cannot be stated with certainty at this stage. The estimated savings would reflect for the most part the following circumstances:
(i) currcnt expectation that events would not occur by 30 June 1981, in cases where financial provisions had been made in the Appropriation Acts (Nos 1 and 2) 1980-81 in the then expectation that they would occur by that date;
(ii) compliance with Government policy that, as far as practicable, savings be offered as offsets to additional funds sought in the Appropriation Bills (Nos 3 and 4) 1980-81; and

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2375

(iii) the results of efforts by departmental management to improve efficiency and thereby reduce costs.
Age Pension Means Test
(Question No. 1119)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) When was the age pension means test raised to $20 per week.
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to a resolution passed at the Lilley area Liberal Party Conference on 15 March 1981, calling on the Commonwealth Government to raise the means test for age pensioners to $30 per week without loss of their pension.
(3) Does the Government plan to raise the means test before the Budget sittings; if not, why not.
(4) Will the Government consider this matter in preBudget deliberations.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The amount of permissible private income ('free areas') before age pension is reduced was increased from $10 to $20 a week for a single person and from $17 to $34.50 for a married couple in September 1972.
(2) Yes.
(3) No. Possible changes to the age pension income test are regularly considered by the Government in the context of the annual Budget. In this way, they can be considered along with competing demands for increased spending and reduced taxation, against the background of the Government's overall economic strategy.
(4) The resolutions of the Lilley area Liberal Party Conference will be kept in mind by the Government during the 1981-82 pre-Budget deliberations.
South African Military Intervention in Angola
(Question No. 1153)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that the Reagan Administration is asking the Congress of the United States of America to lift the 1976 ban on aid to military and para-military operations in Angola.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to the fact that one of the Angolan rebel leaders, Mr Jonas Savimbi, will visit .Washington D.C. shortly to meet United States officials.
(3) Will the USA by this action be seen to be collaborating militarily with South Africa, without whose aid Mr Savimbi's group could not survive.
(4) Does the Australian Government support South African military intervention in Angola.
Mr Street-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) I have seen reports that the Administration is seeking to repeal the 1976 Clark Amendment which bans aid for the purpose of conducting military and para-military operations to groups or individuals in Angola except under certain precise conditions. The Administration has said that it seeks repeal on principle because the amendment is a restriction on executive authority.

(2) I have seen reports to this effect.
:,-'pr
(3) and (4) The United States Administration has said that its policy towards South Afrij:a is under review. President Reagan's nominee for the position of Under Secretary of State for African Affairs, Mr Chester Crocker, has recently visited a number of countries in Europe and Africa, including Angola, for discussions as part of that review. Until the results of the review have been announced, it is not possible to judge what effects any new United States policy might have, but the Government notes that in testimony to the United States Senate Foreign Relations Committee Mr Crocker said the United States Government did not intend to 'destabilize' the Government of Angola. The Australian Government recognises the MPLA as the Government of Angola. We have consistently deplored South African military intervention in Angola. South Africa's continued illegal occupation of Namibia has contributed dramatically to the heightening of tension along the border between Angola and Namibia. South Africa has mounted a number of raids into Angola allegedly against SWAPO positions which have caused direct contact between Angolan and South African armed forces. South African actions in Angola have been condemned by the United Nations Security Council which in June 1980 passed Resolution 465 (180) dealing with this question.
The Government regrets the suffering and loss of life which resulted from South African incursions. It considers the raids to be a violation of the principle of the mutual respect for the territorial integrity of all states. The Government also believes that the raids have contributed to the difficulties confronting the negotiations on the UNJWestern plan for a peaceful settlement to the issue of independence for Namibia.
Broadcasting of Electoral Speeches and Advertisements
(Question No. 1161)
Mr Lloyd asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
(1) Further to Senate Question No. 136 (Senate Hansard, 31 March 1981, page 936) why was no mention made of political advertisements over radio station 3SR by the Right to Life Association.
(2) How much time was made available to this organisation and at what cost.
(3) Has the actual time and cost already been included in the Senate answer.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) As the Right to Life Association is not a political party, and did not field its own candidates for election, its advertising was not required in the original question.
(2) The organisation bought ten minutes of time on radio station 3SR at a cost of $280.
(3) No.
Australian Cerebral Palsy Association
(Question No. 1188)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) Has the Minister received representations from or on behalf of the Australian Cerebral Palsy Association concerning initiatives which might be taken by the Government in the International Year of Disabled Persons.

2376 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) If so, do those initiatives include removing the means test from the invalid pension, particularly as it relates to persons with cerebral palsy, in order to bring it into line with the means test free status to visually handicapped invalid pensioners.
(3) Have representations drawn attention to the unrealistic limit on earnings by disabled persons in sheltered employment.
(4) Is the invalid pension means test limit $20 and has the means test applied since 1972.
(5) If the means test had been indexed in relation to the increase in average wages, what would the means test limit now be.
(6) Will he consider raising the means test limit to that limit.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) and (2) Yes.
(3) Representations have drawn attention to the limit on earnings for people employed in sheltered workshops.
(4) The maximum rate of invalid pension is payable to a single person without dependants if weekly income does not exceed $20. In the case of a married couple or where there are dependants the amount is higher. This figure has applied since the income test was introduced in November 1976. Prior to November 1976 a means test applied which took into account income and a notional value of property. Between October 1972 and November 1976 the limit of income and notional value of property for the payment of a maximum rate of invalid pension was $20.
(5) If the figure of $20 was increased by the movement in seasonally adjusted average weekly earnings between the December quarter 1972 and the December quarter 1980 (the latest available), the new figure would be $56.50.
(6) Possible changes to the invalid pension income test are regularly considered by the Government in the context of the annual Budget. In this way it can then be considered along with competing demands for increased spending and reduced taxation, against the background of the Government's overall economic strategy.
Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1302)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Nil.
Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1306)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veteran's Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Were any staff of the Department of Veterans' Affairs or statutory authorities under the Minister's aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
No.
Industrial Action: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1366)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(I) How many officers or employees in the Department of National Development and Energy have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How many man hours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) April 1979 to April 1980-(a) Nil, (b) 1.
April 1980 to AprilI981-(a) 124, (b) NiL
(2) One thousand and eighty-nine man hours.
(3) No.
(4)Yes, one officer was stood down from duty, without pay, for refusing to perform the whole or part of his duties in July 1979.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1406)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1 ) Yes, 15 officers were granted permission to engage in outside employment in 1979-80.
(2)-

Division
3 3 3

Salary Nature of employment

$ 17,209
13,807
13,398

Projectionist Taxi Driver Caretaker

Annvers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2377

Division
3 4 4 3 3 4
3 3 3 3 4 3

Salary Nature of employment

$ 20,618 10,747
9,152 11,895 22,359 12,940
15,376 16,799 21,431 13,041 17,673 22,977

Cook Cashier
Waiter
Registered Public Accountant Lecturer Miscellaneous whilst travelling over-
seas on leave Lecturer Lecturer
Lecturer Research Assistant
Instructor Aviation Lecturer

Overseas Travel: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1440)
Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, et cetera.
Mr Malcolm Fraser--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Twenty-six.
(2) $126,266.
Overseas Travel: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1453)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of the Department of Social Security travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances etc.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) 6.
(2) $26,773.
Overseas Travel: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1458)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances etc.
Mr Thomson---The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) 45 officers travelled overseas in 1979-80.

(2) The cost of this travel was $179,172. I3.

Air Travel in Australia: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet

(Question No. 1466)

Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

What sum was paid by his Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.

Mr Malcolm FraserThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Payments in \979-80 as shown in the accounting records of my Department are:

T.A.A. Ansett Airlines . . . . . MacRobertson Miller Airlines Airlines of South Australia

$
118,318 76,648
846 31

The above figures include some payments for freight in addition to air fares where claims for air freight have not been submitted separately.

Air Travel in Australia: Department of Science and Technology

(Question No. 1484)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(1) What was paid by his Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.

Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

TAA Ansett NT Air Charter East/West Stil-Air Kendall Williams M.M.A. Conair Bus Air Arnham Air Charter Air Tasmania Trans West Sky West Civil Flying Service Jan Bears Aviation SAAir Bizjet Avair

$ 474,674.56 230,983.59
1,800.00 300.00 605.60 189.00 93.00
24,501.76 532.00 110.00 861.00 245.00
4,337.70 1,599.66 1,120.30 1,090.00
62.80 262.00 120.00

Head Office: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1492)
Mr Bungey askcd the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

2378 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) Are any sections of the. Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.

(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if

so, when.

.

Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) nil.

(2) see (1).

Head Office: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1505)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(I) Are any sections of the Head Office of the Department of Social Security not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many st\lff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I ) Yes; the Department's Geneva Office which forms part of the Central Administration establishment contains two positions.
(2) No.

Head Office: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1512)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1980:
(I) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) Not applicable.

Home Telephone Rentals: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1518)
Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) nil; (b) 53.
(2) $7,639.

Recycling of Paper: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1573)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Has any action been taken by his Department to recycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Department of Communications does not presently transfer bulk paper to a processing plant for recycling. The volume of paper is insufficient and the variation and quality of paper is not suitable for bulk re-cycling.
Tea Services: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1596)
Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many (a) full-time and (b) part-time staff are employed on teamaking and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) nil; (b) (i) 8; (ii) nil.
(2) (a) $62,562.48; (b) $196.96.
Radio Australia Transmitter at Carnarvon, Western Australia
(Question No. 1631)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What consideration has been given to the provision of an additional 250 kW transmitter at Carnarvon, Western Australia, for Radio Australia.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department has completed studies of the proposal to provide an additional 250 kW transmitter at Carnarvon, Western Australia. I expect the Government to consider a proposal shortly.
Australian Wool Harvesting Program
(Question No. 1644)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What sum has been spent, from all sources, on the Australian Wool Harvesting Programme since 1976.
(2) Will he supply figures showing (a) the amounts spent each year, (b) the sources of these funds and (c) the areas in which these funds were spent.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) During the period 1976-77 to 1979-80 inclusive, a total of $5.3m has been spent on the Australian Wool Harvesting Programme.

Answers to Questions

13 May 198\ REPRESENTATIVES 2379

(2) (a) and (b) The amounts spent each year and the sources of these funds are presented in the following table:

Expenditure by

Year

Wool
research trust fund

Australian
Wool Corpor-
ation

Consolidated
revenue

Total

$'000

$'000

$'000

$'000

1976-77

1,077

68

1,145

1977-78

1,413

86

1,499

1978-79

1,251

85

1,336

1979-80'

1,107

113

122

1,342

-_Tot.al_-_._4-,84_8 ._--1-13-----36-1 ---5,-32-2

* Total of recommended allocations: some accounts not yet finalised.

Although there is some wool harvesting research carried out by universities and State Departments of Agriculture in
addition to that funded by the above sources, no information on expenditure for this research is available.

(2) (c) The areas in which these funds were spent are set out in the following table:

1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Physical wool severance
Automatic mechanical shearing
Biological chemical de fleecing
Shearing systems investigations
General research
Technical extension
Shearer training
Secretariat expenses Total

$'000
17
106
700
167 40
52 63 1,145

$'000
67
111
927
189 7 2
54 142 1,499

$'000
78
146
747
209 21 37 72 26 1,336

$'000
53
154
745
180 39 39 116 16 1,342

NB: In cases where projects overlap between two or more areas, expenditure has been placed within that area considered to cover the higher part of the expenditure.
Age Pensions: Means Test
(Question No. 1674)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What would be the cost to the Commonwealth Government in a financial year if aged pensioners were permitted to earn (a) $25 and (b) $30 per week before affecting their pension payments.
Mr Hunt The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The estimated full year cost to the Government of increasing thc income that age pensioners are permitted to receive before affecting their pension entitlement is:
(a) some $30111 if the free area of income is increased by $5 a week, i.e. to $25 a week for single pensioners and to $22.25 a week for each partner in the case of pensioner couples.

(b) some $60m if the free area of income is increased by $10 a week, i.e. to $30 a week for single pensioners and to $27.25 a week for each partner in the case of pensioner couples.
These costs are based on rates of pension, and numbers of pensioners current, at December 1980, and are gross costs in that they make no allowance for the additional revenue which may result from the taxation of the payments concerned.
Fire Extinguishers
(Question No. 1741)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What action has been taken by his Department concerning the finding by the Department of Housing and Construction reported in the 1979-80 Annual Report of the Commonwealth Fire Board, that sci f-contained automatic halon gas fire extinguishers installed in fume cupboards where acid chemicals are used deteriorate rapidly.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department is aware of the Department of Housing and Construction advice to the Commonwealth Fire Board as detailed in the Commonwealth Fire Board 1979-80 Annual Report. My Department is advised by the Department of Housing and Construction in the design and installation of fire extinguishing systems for its laboratories.
In laboratories within the Department's Analytical Services Branch the only installation where halon gas cylinders are located within fume cupboards is in a laboratory specifically designed for pesticide residue analysis in which no acids are used.
Hazardous Chemicals
(Question No. 1751)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What progress has been made in preparing a national system of coding hazardous chemicals used for fire fighting purposes.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Commonwealth Fire Board has advised that on 4 July 1980, the Australian Transport Advisory Council endorsed the Australian Code for the Transport of Dangerous Goods by Road and Rail. This incorporated the UK Hazchem Code system which provides for a placard display externally on all vehicles carrying dangerous goods, giving information to emergency services on the immediate actions to be taken in the event of a mishap.
State and Commonwealth Governments have agreed to implement the new Code on a uniform basis throughout Australia as a matter of priority and each Government has the responsibility for bringing this about in the manner it considers appropriate.
These measures apply of course to hazardous chemicals generally and not only those used for Hre fighting purposes.
Hazardous Chemicals
(Question No. 1752)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

2380 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

What action has been taken to prepare uniform and properly publicised safety practices for hazardous chemicals in Australia.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Commonwealth Fire Board has advised that uniform safety practices for hazardous chemicals are now covered by the new Australian Code for the Transport of Dangerous Goods by Road and Rail which States and Commonwealth Governments have agreed to implement. It is now a matter for each Government to arrange this as it considers appropriate.
In the meantime, the Australian Chemical Industry Council has recommended to its members the voluntary placarding of vehicles with the Code's requirements on emergency information.
The Standards Association of Australia is also producing cards of emergency procedure guides for a number of chemicals for carrying in cabins of transport vehicles as a guide to drivers in the event of emergencies involving fire or escape of cargo.
Other safety practices for hazardous chemicals are covered in existing or proposed Occupational Safety and 'Health in Commonwealth Government Employment Codes of Practice prepared by the former Department of Productivity (now the Department of Science and, Technology).
Fire Extinguishers
(Question No. 1753)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Service, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(l) How many incidents of faulty or defective fire extinguishers were reported to the Commonwealth Fire Board in 1979-80.
(2) What type of extinguishers were they, and what action has been taken on the reports.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Two.
(2) The Commonwealth Fire Board has advised that the two types of extinguishers involed were Halogenated Hydrocarbon type (Halon 1301) and Water (soda acid) type. In both instances the defects were brought to the attention of the manufacturers and the Standards Association of Australia.
In the case of the Halogenated Hydrocarbon extinguishers which were of the stored pressure, modular type unit, the manufacturer has indicated that the faulty units have been recalled and the fault eliminated. Departments and authorities were advised of the defects and as a safety measure, were requested to ensure that any such units held were checked.
Defects found in the Water (soda acid) extinguisher related to the failure of plastic caps. Pressure testing of extinguishers has been recommended and also the Board will be recommending that the failed caps be replaced with metal type caps.
Australian Federal Police Force: Use ofDrug Addicted Dogs
(Question No. 1757)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many dogs, and of what breeds, were being used by the Australian Federal Police Force as at 30 June 1980.
(2) For what duties were they being used.

(3) Has any consideration been given to using drug addicted dogs in drug detection work; if so, what decisions were made.
(4) What salary and special allowances are paid to dog handlers in the Force.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) 15 German Shepherd dogs.
(2) Guarding, explosives detection, and general police work.
(3) I am advised that in accordance with established practice and consistent with the recommendations of the Australian Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs, the Bureau of Customs provides the services of drug detector dogs to the Australian Federal Police when requested. I am further advised that the dogs are not drug addicted.
(4) Salaries applicable to the members concerned plus a dog handler's allowance of 43 per shift.
Passports: Prosecutions
(Question No. 1758)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
How many prosecutions were launched by the Australian Federal Police in each of the last three years for false or amended (a) Australian and (b) foreign passports.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I have been informed by the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police that passport infringement records have only been maintained by the Australian Federal Police since July 1979 and do not differentiate between Australian and foreign passports.
In the period July 1979 to June 1980 ten prosecutions were launched relating to forged and amended passports. From July 1980 until the present time a further ten prosecutions have been launched.
These figures only relate to prosecutions launched under the Passport Act 1938. Other prosecutions would have been commenced under the Crimes Act 1914 but not statistical breakdown is available.
Fire Protection
(Question No. 1764)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What deficiencies in fire protection did the Commonwealth Fire Board find in its inspection of (a) the National Library, Canberra (b) Keswick Barracks, Adelaide, South Australia (c) the Customs House, Adelaide (d) Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park, South Australia and (e) Torrens Island Quarantine Station, South Australia, during 1979-80.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Commonwealth Fire Board found deficiencies during its inspections of the above establishments as follows:
National Library, Canberra Lack of an automatic suppression system throughout the
building Automatic closers for fire doors missing Egress provisions from basement and computer room
inadequate

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2381

Housekeeping and storage arrangements in certain areas not satisfactory
Keswick Barracks, Adelaide, South Australia Lack of fire isolation of some stairways and mess facilities
in the officers quarters Lack of emergency lighting in stairways Vertical escape ladders
Customs House, Adelaide Lack of fire isolation of stairways and emergency lighting Insufficient ventilation ofprinting room
Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park, South Australia Egress from solaria of some Wards inadequate Lack of fire compartmentation and unsatisfactory heat-
ing arrangements in RALAC building
Torrens Island Quarantine Station, South Australia Lack of direct alarm line to South Australia Fire Brigade Unsatisfactory ventilation of battery charging room Lack of access track and fire breaks around perimeter.

Importation of Vehicles at Reduced Rates of Duty

(Question No. 1765)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) How many vehicles purchased by Australian residents whilst overseas have been imported into Australia at reduced rates of duty during the last three financial years.

(2) What was the amount of duty foregone by the Commonwealth Government in respect of these imports because of any concessions that may apply.

Mr Moore--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(l) Separate figures for returning Australian residents are only available from I May 1979; the numbers are:

May-June 1979 July 1979-June 1980 July 1980-16 April 1981

131 2,316
742

Total

3,189 vehicles

Note: From 1 December 1978 the duty free concession for privately imported motor vehicles has been restricted to persons taking up permanent residence in Australia for the first
time. Returning Australians who had purchased motor vehicles prior to 1 December 1978 are eligible for the duty free concession provided the conditions applicable prior to 1 December 1978 are complied with.

(2)-

May-June 1979 July 1979-June 1980 . July 1980-16 April 1981

$ 610,917
7,339,101
2,908,125

Total

. 10,858,143

National Capital Development Commission

(Question No. 1769)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Does the National Capital Development Commission charge a supervision or over-riding fee for projects being con-
structed by the Department of Housing and Construction; if
so, what proportion of project costs.

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by the National Capital Development Commission that in accordance with the government policy on inter-departmental payments, no supervision or other fees are charged by the Department of Housing and Construction where the Department is engaged by the Commission for design, and/or supervision of construction, of capital works.
Goodwin Homes Association
(QuestiouNo.1779)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Was the Goodwin Homes Association granted $243,773 in 1979-80; if so, for what reason.
(2) What specific functions does the Association perform.
Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
I am informed by my Department that-
(1) Yes. To assist with the operating costs of its two hostels.
(2) The Association conducts aged persons hostels at Ainslie and Farrer in premises constructed by the Commonwealth.
Australian Capital Territory Bushfire Council: Hire ofHelicopters
(Question No. 1785)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(I) What costs were incurred by the Australian Capital Territory Bush Fire Council in hiring helicopters in 1979-80.
(2) What re hiring or other receipts in respect of the helicopters were received in the same year.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
I am informed by my Department that the respective amounts Were:
(1) $38,044.
(2) $1,422.
Jobless Action
(Question No. 1788)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 198\ :
(1) Was Jobless Action granted $19,540 by his Department in 1979-80; if so, for what reason
(2) In making the grant was the grant of $15,000 to the same organisation under the Family Support Scheme recognised.
(3) What specific function does Jobless Action perform.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that- -
( 1) Yes. To assist with administrative costs and the Family Centre.
(2) Yes.
(3) Jobless Action is an Australian Capital Territory based unemployed people's organisation, providing counselling,

2382 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

welfare advice, information and referral services to the unemployed.
Lease of Homestead to Riding for the Disabled
(Question No. 1798)
!VII' Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Was the homestead in south west Belconnen, Australian Capital Territory, leased to Riding for the Disabled; if so, under what terms and conditions.
Mr Hodgman---The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that about 28 hectares at West Belconnen is leased to the Society at a peppercorn rental, for a 25 year period expiring in 2003. The Society is purchasing the improvements on the land, which include a cottage. The agreed value of $14,000 is being paid on terms over 25 years subject to 5t per cent interest.
Annual Report of the Australian Capital Territory Bush Fire Council
(Question No. 1809)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What is the area and location of land in New South Wales leased by the Commonwealth Government for fire protection purposes referred to at page 6 of the Annual Report of the Australian Capital Territory Bush Fire Council for 1979-80.
(2) Whal are the terms, conditions and tenure of the lease.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's questions is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that-
(1) About 25,000 hectares is held under the lease. The land extends westerly from the A.C.T. boundary to the Goodradigbee River and Peppercorn Creek. Its northern boundary is in the vicinity of Pig Hill, near Fairlight Station, and the southern boundary is on the Gurrangorambla Range.
(2) On I January 1964 a lease for a term of 20 years was granted by the New South Wales Government subject to an annual rental of $1,000. The lease was to enable fire prevention measures to be taken to protect the Australian Capital Territory from bush fires.
Australian Capital Territory Emergency Housekeeper Service
(Question No. 1812)
!VII' Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 ;
(1) Was the Australian Capital Territory Emergency Housekeeper Service granted $217,500 in 1979-80; if so, for what reason?
(2) What specific functions does the Service perform.
!VIr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable members's question is as follows:
[ am informed by my Department that--
(I) Yes. To meet the difference between revenue received from charges and operating costs.
(2) The Service provides assistance to aged, handicapped or chronically ill Australian Capital Territory residents.

Tuggeranong Family Action
(Question No. 18l3)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) Was the Tuggeranong Family Action granted $34,000 in 1979-80; if so, for what reason.
(2) What specific function does it perform.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
r am informed by my Department that-
(1) Yes. To assist with the operating costs of the Wanniassa Occasional Care Centre.
(2) Tuggeranong Family Action conducts the Wanniassa Occasional Care Centre which was constructed by the Commonwealthas part of the Erindale Centre.
Civil Rehabilitation Committee
(Question No. 1814)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1 ) Was the Civil Rehabilitation Committee granted $500 in 1979-80; ifso, for what reason.
(2) What specific functions does the Committee perform.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department thal-
(1) Yes. To assist the Committee with its work.
(2) The Committee assists ex-prisoners and families of prisoners.
Marymead Children's Centre
(Question No. 1815)
!VIr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) Was the Marymead Children's Centre granted $1,200 to complement or undertake Departmental responsibilities and $20,000 for welfare purposes in 1979-80; if so, for what reason.
!VII' HodgmanThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that -
(I) Marymead was given two grants in 1979-80-$1,200 to meet the cost of transporting children, placed in the Centre by Welfare Branch, to and from school. $20,000 for welfare purposes.
(2) The Centre provides a service to children of families in crisis situations.
Handicapped Citizens Association of the Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1816)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(\) Was the Handicapped Citizens Association of the Australian Capital Territory granted $45,200 to complement or undertake Departmental responsibilities and $68,000 for welfare purposes in 1979-80; if so, for what reason.

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2383

(2) What specific functions does the Association undertake.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(h) to co-operate with ACOSS and other State and Territory COSS to improve co-ordination of social welfare in Australia;
(i) to do all such other acts or things as may be conducive to the attainment of the foregoing objectives.

I am informed by my Department that-
(l) The Handicapped Citizens' Association was given two grants to enable the Association to continue its functions during 1979-80-$45,200 for salaries and $68,000 for welfare purposes.

Visits to Australian Capital Territory Forests
(Question No. 1830)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

(2) The Association operates sheltered workshops and hostel accommodation for handicapped persons as well as providing counselling, welfare assistance, social and recreation training to these persons.
Australian Capital Territory Council of Social Service
(Question No. 1817)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Was the Australian Capital Territory Council of Social Services granted $30,400 to complement or undertake Departmental responsibilities and $58,300 for welfare purposes in 1979-80; if so, for what reason.
(2) What specific function does the Council undertake.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that-
(l) No. The Council was granted $58,300 in 1979-80, of which $46,300 was for assistance with administrative costs (including $30,400 for salaries) and $12,000 was for a Human Services Data Base project.
(2) The Council's functions are listed in its Rules of Association as:
(a) to carry out programs designed to contribute to the elimination of poverty and the promotion of well being of disadvantaged and vulnerable individuals and groups;
(b) to promote consultation and co-operation amongst non-Government organisations and Government Authorities involved in social welfare activities;
(c) to promote, assist or carry out special projects of research to advance the work of statutory authorities and voluntary bodies in alleviating poverty and distress;
(d) to develop an informed public opinion on matters related to social welfare by arranging or providing for or assisting to arrange or provide for the holding of exhibitions, meetings, lectures or siminars calculated directly or indirectly to further the objects of the Association;
(e) to promote the publication and circulation of reports, periodicals and other documents for the furtherance of these objects;
(f) to provide an advisory service on matters of social welfare for statutory authorities and voluntary organisations at the Association's initiative or upon request:
(g) to act as a channel of inquiry and liaison with statutory authorities and Governments in the promotion of social welfare services of a charitable, benevolent or general nature;

(I) Did the 1977-78 Annual Report of his Department state on page 24 that the number of recreational visits to the forests was assessed as exceeding 350,000.
(2) Did that report also show at Table 11 that visitors to forests was 235,000.
(3) What is the reason for this apparent difference and the basis of assessment of the 2 different estimates.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
I am informed by my Department that-
(I) Yes.
(2) No, the figure given was 335,000.
(3) The figure stated on page 24 was an error, it should have read 335,000. The assessment is made using traffic counters located in each forest and by random surveys conducted during weekend patrols.
Cycle Paths
(Question No. 1831)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Have any assessments been made of the numbers of cyclists using the cycle paths in Canberra; if so, what were the results.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by the National Capital Development Commission that in March/April 1980, a survey was carried out on cycle usage on Canberra's cycleway network. The results of the survey are shown below:
SURVEY OF CANBERRA CYCLE NETWORK-MARCH/APRIL 1980 AVERAGE DAILY CYCLE VOLUMES

Location
Kippax Centre, Holt, to Conley Drive (via Ginninderra Creek) Melba
Ginninderra Drive/Copland Drive, Melba to Cohen Street, Belconnen (via West Bank of Lake Ginninderra)
Cohen Street, to Benjamin Way/Belconnen Way, Belconnen . . . . . . . .
Emu Bank to Ginninderra Drive, (via East Bank of Lake Ginninderra), Belconnen
Owen Dixon Drive, Giralang, to Ginninderra Drive, McKellar . . . . . .
Owen Dixon Drive, Giralang, to Maribyrnong Avenue, Ka1een . . . . . .

Average daily No. of cyclists
125
275 120 120 70 170

2384 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Location
Maribyrnong Avenue to Shannon Crescent, Kaleen . . . . . . . . . . .
Benjamin WayjBelconnen Way to Haydon Drive, Bruce . . . . . . . . .
Haydon Drive, Bruce, to Dryandra Street, O'Connor . . . . . . . . . .
Dryandra Street to Hovea Street, O'Connor Wattle Place, O'Connor, to Northbourne
Avenue, Lyneham . . . . . . . Northbourne Avenue, Lyneham, to Phillip
Avenue,Dickson . . . . . . . Wattle Place to Condamine Street, Turner Condamine Street to Barry Drive, Turner Barry Drive to City Education Centre, City City Education Centre to Balmain Crescent,
Acton . . . . . . . . . . . City Education Centre to Parkes Way,
Acton . . . . . . . . . . . Parkes Way to Flynn Place, Parkes Flynn Place to Bowen Park (via Bowen
Drive), Yarralumla . . . . . Bowen Park to Manuka Circle, Barton Flynn Place to Lotus Bay, Yarralumla Lotus Bay, Yarralumla to Carruthers Street,
Curtin . . . . . . . . . . . Carruthers Street, Curtin to Sulwood Drive
(east), Kambah (via Athllon Drive) Sulwood Drive (east), Kambah, to
Drakeford Drive, Wanniassa Sulwood Drive (west), Kambah to
Drakeford Drive, Wanniassa Newcastle Street, Fyshwick, to NSW/ACT
Border . . . . . . . . . . .

Average daily No. of cyclists
100
180
460 200
500
630 630 600 110
200
830 620
210 80 380
190
300
200
200
30

National Conference Towards an Australian Family Policy
(Question No. 1832)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Was a Departmental representative sent to the national conference 'Towards an Australian Family Policy' in May 1980; if so, what was the cost.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that a Departmental representative was sent to the aforementioned conference at a cost of $349.15.
High Court Building
(Question No. 1834)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to question No. 4017 (Hansard, 15 April 1980, pages 1761-62) what portion of the increase each year in the estimated cost of the High Court Building is attributed to (a) adjustment to provisional sums, (b) factors outside the builder's control and (c) adjustments in the contract price because of rise and fall provisions.
(2) Will he set out in detail how the $15.8m for rise and faJl provisions is calculated.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I am informed by the National Capital Development Commission that the apportionment of the increase each year in the estimated cost of the High Court of Australia is as set out in the following table:

HIGH COURT BUILDING ($ million)

Financial year
1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Increase Resulting from adjustment to provisional sums
4.9
0.8 2.9 2.7

Increase resulting from factors outside
the builder's control
2.0
0.6 0.7 0.2

Increase Resulting from
rise and fall provisions
2.6 1.5 3.4 4.2 4.1

Total increase for year
9.5 1.5 4.8 7.8 7.0

(2) The rise and fall adjustment to the contract for the High Court of Australia building was calculated on the basis of movements in both the average wages payable on the project and the Australian Bureau of Statistics index for building materials.

Australian Capital Territory Forestry Activities
(Question No. 1837)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

The contract value of the work remaining to be completed on the project was adjusted each time movement took place in either wages or the materials index. The calculations were made in accordance with a formula which adjusted the value of the balance of the contract by the predicted cost increase resulting from the wage and price movements.

What has been the total (a) expenditure and (b) receipts for the Australian Capital Territory Forestry activities in each of the last 3 financial years.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2385

(a) expenditure (b) receipts

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

$

$

$

3,376,370 3,890,307 4,485,073

3,289,758 3,866,763 4,453,449

Purchase of Blankets for the Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1840)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What quantities of (a) woollen blankets and (b) blankets made of man-made fibre have been purchased for the Department of Veterans' Affairs in each year since 1976-77.
(2) What guidelines currently govern the purchase of blankets for the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Since 1976-77 the quantities of woollen blankets purchased by the Department of Veterans' Affairs have been 12,605 in 1976-77 and 12,500 in 1979-80. Blankets made of man-made fibre are not generally purchased.
(2) Purchasing procedures for items required by the Department of Veterans' Affairs are laid down in Finance Regulations and Directions under the Audit Act 1901. Current Government directives in relation to preparation of specifications and preference for Australian manufactured goods are also followed. Both contracts referred to in (I) were let to Australian manufacturers.
Applied Ecology Pty Ltd: Turtle Seminar
(Question No. 1865)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What action has the Government taken on the concern expressed at the Turtle Seminar conducted by Applied Ecology Pty Ltd in conjunction with the James Cook University in June 1979 at the large number of female turtles being harvested in the Torres Strait/Gulf of Papua area and the effects this harvesting is having on the wild turtle popUlation of the area.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Internationally, marine turtles are considered to be threatened with extinction largely as a result of past uncontrolled commercial exploitation. Australian territorial waters contain some of the largest populations of marine turtles remaining in the world and the Government acknowledges its responsibility for ensuring these endangered species are adequately protected and managed in such a manner that will assure their long-term conservation.
The Third Meeting of Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) held recently in New Delhi, considered and adopted Australian proposals to include two Australian species of marine turtle on Appendix I to the Convention. This has resulted in all marine turtles being listed on Appendix I to the Convention thereby prohibiting international commercial trade in products derived from them.

Torres Strait Islanders have traditionally hunted marine turtles for food and subsistence. The Torres Strait between Australia and Papua New Guinea, while protecting the traditional way of life, including traditional fishing, also allows for the adoption of conservation measures in respect of endangered or threatened wildlife. The Government is concerned to ensure that its obligations under this Treaty and CITES are honoured.
Following the closure of turtle farming activities in Torres Strait by Applied Ecology Pty Ltd, the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service engaged the Queensland National Parks and Wildlife Service to undertake a pilot study. The objectives of this study are:
to determine the need. for further detailed research on marine turtles in the region; and
to determine the impact of subsistence harvesting on marine turtle numbers.
The report of this preliminary study is expected early in the 1981-82 financial year.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1867)
Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20 per cent, by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) and (3) Except for those to senior officers, extensions to the Departmental switchboard are barred from access to the STD facility. Official trunk or STD calls must be approved by a senior officer. Personal trunk calls must be booked through the switchboard operator and recovery action taken.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1885)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20 per cent, by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled, if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.

2386 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. My attention had not been drawn to the report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979.
(2) Yes. Local calls are controlled by direct supervision. The large majority of telephones in my Department are barred to STD access and all long distance calls made on these telephones must be booked through the switchboard. All telephones with STD access are under the strict supervision of senior officers and/or are in operational areas where access is considered essential.
(3) No. STD access barring was considered the most effective and efficient method.
Sickness Benefit
(Question No. 1900)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Are eligible applicants for sickness benefit who are in part-time employment as juniors and who are receiving substantially less than the usual sickness benefit paid weekly to single under 18 year olds, entitled to the full basic rate for that category, of $36 per week.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
No. The Social Services Act provides that the weekly rate of sickness benefit payable to a person cannot exceed the weekly rate of salary, wages or other income which that person has lost by reason of his incapacity. This means that if a claimant's loss of income is less than the maximum amount of sickness benefit, the rate of sickness benefit payable is limited to the claimant's actual loss of income.
Superannuation
Mr Howard-On 31 March 1981 (Hansard, page 1087-8) Mr Tambling asked me, as Minister representing the Minister for Finance, a question, without notice, concerning superannuation coverage for the Northern Territory Government's permanent part-time employment scheme.
The Minister for Finance has provided the following information in answer to the honourable member's question.
The introduction of permanent part-time employment in the Australian Public Service and other areas of Commonwealth employment is currently under consideration by the Public Service Board and other employing authorities such as Telecom Australia.
The Department of Finance has been examining the superannuation arrangements that are capable of being provided to permanent part-time employees should the Government decide to extend superannuation cover to them.
Northern Territory employees comprise a relatively small proportion of the number of contributors to the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme. It would not be appropriate to consider extending cover under the Superannuation Act to permanent part-time employees of the Northern Territory before decisions have been taken on the terms and conditions to apply to permanent part-time employment in the Commonwealth generally. Such terms and conditions are primarily the responsibility of the employing authorities.

I understand the matter may take some time to resolve but arrangements have been made to keep the Chief Minister informed of progress.
Health Care Services
Mr MacKellar-On 30 April 1981 (Hansard, page 1807) Mr Cunningham asked me a question, without notice, concerning hospital insurance cover for confinements.
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Health funds generally have waiting periods not exceeding two months before basic medical and basic hospital benefits are paid to a new contributor. Basic medical benefits currently cover at least 75% of the Schedule medical fees with a maximum patient contribution of $10 where the Schedule fee is charged. From 1 September 1981 the basic table will cover 85% of the Schedule fees (with $10 maximum patient contribution). Basic hospital benefits provide full cover to the equivalent of the cost of shared ward accommodation in a public hospital (currently $50 a day). From I September, while the charges may increase, full cover for shared ward accommodation will remain.
Other exclusions from benefits such as for pre-existing conditions are not permitted for basic levels of benefits. This means that persons joining a health fund now, including obstetric cases, would be entitled to basic benefits after two months.
Because of the new arrangements to be introduced from I September 1981, and the changed circumstances that will apply to many people, health funds will be required to waive the waiting period for basic benefits for new members joining between I September and 31 October 1981. This is to allow people adequate time to make insurance arrangements so as not to be disadvantaged because of waiting periods that would otherwise apply.
People seeking higher insurance cover e.g. 100% medical and higher levels of hospital accommodation, generally are subject to further exclusions on the additional benefits (nine months waiting periods for obstetric cases, exclusions for preexisting conditions, maximum benefits etc).
These restrictions will not be subject to waiver between 1 September and 31 October 1981.
Fortescue Oil Field
Mr Malcolm Fraser-On 24 March 1981 (Hansard, page 812) Mr Keating asked me a question, without notice, concerning royalties for Bass Strait oil.
The following is in answer to the honourable member's question:
In accordance with the offshore petroleum legislation, royalties are assessed on the wellhead value which is determined by deducting from the selling price certain costs involved in the processing and transportation of the oil from the offshore platform to the selling point. Payments of crude oil excise are also deducted. Where crude oil excise is not payable, the wellhead value will be higher and royalty payments accordingly greater. The legislation provides for basic royalties to be shared 40 per cent to the Commonwealth and 60 per cent to the States.
The current arrangments for determining wellhead value in regard to Bass Strait production were agreed by the Commonwealth and Victoria. This joint approach will continue under

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2387

the revised offshore petroleum arrangements when they become effective under the offshore constitutional settlement, but in the event of any irreconcilable difference the Commonwealth will have the final say. The current royalty sharing arrangements are to continue under the new legislative arrangments.
Coastal Surveillance: Expenditure by Department of Transport
(Question No. 566)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) What sum was (a) appropriated and (b) actually spent by his Department on coastal surveillance for (i) 1977-78, (ii) 1978-79 and (iii) 1979-80.
(2) What were the main items of expenditure and the cost attributed to each item.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) During the period 1977-78, 1978-79 no specific sum was appropriated for coastal surveillance. Funds were included in appropriations to cover the total operations of my Department. In 1979-80 an amount of $1.5m was appropriated under Division 655/2/21 to finance the cost of evaluating Nomad aircraft for a role in coastal surveillance. No other funds were specifically appropriated.
(b) The amounts actually spent on coastal surveillance are reflected in various items of Divisions 655/1 and 655/2 e.g. salaries, overtime, communications, etc. No expenditure was incurred under Division 655/2/21.
(2) Except for Division 655/2/21 expenditure under each item attributable to coastal surveillance has not been determined because of the relatively minor nature of the coastal surveillance program compared with other Departmental activities. However an assessment of costs is being undertaken as part of the Government review of the coastal surveillance program.
Department of Transport: Functions
(Question No. 596)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
What are the functions of the (a) Policy and Planning and (b) Surface Transport Operations areas of his Department.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as following:
(a) The functions of the Policy and Planning area of my Department are:
Development of policies on the most effective allocation of resources among the various transport modes .
Encouragement and promotion of continuous socially acceptable improvement, innovation, growth and phase-out of modal and inter-modal commercial and personal transport
Assistance in the formulation of policy for transport undertakings which are authorities of the Commonwealth Government or in which the Commonwealth is a shareholder
Planning, direction and co-ordination of total departmental contribution to specified major transport projects, e.g. Major Airport Needs of Sydney (MANS) Study
Provision of the Secretariats for the Australian Transport Advisory Council, Aviation Industry Advisory Council, Marine and Ports Council of Australia, and Transport Industries Advisory Council

Development of Policies in association with other Departments where relevant, on Australia's involvement in international organisations and multilateral agreements concerned with transport.
Rationalisation and licensing of air transport services Approval of fares, freight rates and timetables for airline operations and administration of financial arrangements in relation to airlines Issue of approvals for export of aircraft and permits for import of aircraft and administration of aircraft acquisition policies
Negotiation and administration of international air transport agreements and administration of the regulation of international freights and services
Formulation of policy in regard to overseas and coastal shipping, including the licensing of vessels to trade on the Australian coast
Ensuring the provision of adequate shipping services to meet the needs of the export trade
Development of policy on national aspects of development of ports and ship repair facilities
Collection of stevedoring and related port statistics Administration and development of policy in relation to the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme Development of policies for the provision of financial assistance for road construction and maintainance for transport planning and research Development of policies in relation to financial assistance to State railway systems, rail standardisation and developmental rail projects; and Administration of grants to the States for the improvement of urban transport systems in capital cities. (b) The functions of the Surface Operations area of my Department are:
Provision, administration, operation and maintenance of marine navigational aids
Survey and inspection of Australian and foreign ships for compliance with Commonwealth marine legislation and international conventions on safety and pollution
Investigation of shipping casualties and oversight of general navigation safety matters
Administration of the Register of Australian Ships Oversight of the supply of seamen, manning of Australian ships and the qualifications of sea-going personnel Development of maritime communications and traffic operation systems Provision of operational co-ordination of coastal surveillance activities and servicing of the Australian coastal surveillance organisation Provision of a marine search and rescue service including a ship position reporting system Development and administration of policy relating to marine pollution and oversight of the functioning of the National Plan to Combat Pollution of the Sea by Oil Conduct of research into road safety, the development of vehicle safety, emission standards and uniform traffic codes Provision of advice to the Australian Motor Vehicle Certification Board on the compliance of vehicles with the Australian Design Rules
Establishment of policies, formulation of standards, conduct of research and development of educational programs related to road safety
Administration of road legislation providing funds to the States for construction and maintenance
Evaluation of State road proposals and maintenance of continual liaison with State road authorities on plans and proposals for roads other than National Roads
In co-operation with the States development of priorities and implementation of plans for National Roads; and
Co-ordination of the development of standards for, and studies into the location of the National Highway System

2388 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Australian Taxation Office: Reported Break-in
(Question No. 654)
Mr Willis asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(1) Did he request the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation and the Australian Federal Police to prepare a report for him concerning a reported break-in at the Sydney offices of the Australian Taxation Office at the end of 1980.
(2) If so; has he received the report.
(3) Does he intend to take any action over the incident and is he satisfied that a thorough investigation has been undertaken into all aspects of the affair.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No.
(2) No. See (1) above.
(3) I have nothing to add to the Treasurer's reply to Question No. 655 (Hansard, 9 April 1981, pp. 1598-9).
Nugan Hand Bank
(Question No. 661)
Mr Willis asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(1) Are the Australian Federal Police currently investigating the activities of the collapsed Nugan Hand Banking group.
(2) If so, who requested the investigation.
(3) For what period have these investigations been under way.
(4) Are the Australian Federal Police co-operating with investigators from any other organisation or Department concerning this matter; if so, which other organisation or Department.
(5) Are the Australian Federal Police co-operating with overseas organisations in their inquiries; if so, which organisations.
(6) When is the investigation expected to be conducted.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1), (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6) I have nothing to add to the Prime Minister's reply to Question No. 653 (Hansard, 29 April 1981, page 1774) and his reply on 11 March 1981 to a question without notice asked by the Leader of the Opposition (Hansard, pages 701-702).
Disaster Relief
(Question No. 666)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, ilpon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a State Emergency Service report on the damage resulting from a severe hailstorm which struck the North Brisbane bayside suburbs of Brighton and Sandgate on 16 December 1980.
(2) If so, did the report describe the storm as Queensland's worst natural disaster to that date since the formation of the State Emergency Service in 1975.
(3) Was any request received by him from the Queensland Premier for assistance from the Commonwealth Government for relief aid following that hailstorm'.
(4) Was it necessary for the Queensland Premier to declare the area adversely affected by the storm a disaster area, before

the Commonwealth Government would provide special assistance.
(5) With respect to the Commonwealth Government's undertaking to meet on a dollar for dollar basis State expenditures on standard measures for the immediate relief of personal hardship and distress, as referred to on page 79 of Budget Paper No.7, 1980-81, (a) what are regarded as standard measures, (b) must the State Government request assistance before it is given, (c) has assistance been provided to the Queensland State Government for (i) the Brighton hailstorm relief, (ii) North Queensland flood relief and (iii) Dalby flood relief.
(6) How many declared natural disasters have occurred in each State and Territory in each year since 1940, and in each case what sum has the Commonwealth contributed by way of disaster relief assistance.
(7) Is it a fact that Queensland suffers more from natural disasters such as drought, cyclones and floods, than any other State in the Commonwealth.
(8) While campaigning in the Electoral Division of McPherson, or at any other time, has he been informed of the Queensland Premier's recently expressed intention to request amendments to the disaster relief arrangements between the Commonwealth and State Governments.
(9) Has his attention been drawn to the report in the Courier Mail, 16 February 1981, in which the Queensland Premier is quoted as saying that the present disaster 'idief arrangements with the Federal Government do not cover disasters like the Brighton storm; if so, is there any substance to this claim.
(10) Is it a fact that once a State Government passes its prescribed base expenditure for natural disasters before the end of a financial year, the Commonwealth Government is obliged to contribute toward the total cost of disaster relief.
(11) Is it also a fact that when a State Government expends in relief aid on anyone disaster in excess of one tenth of its prescribed base expenditure for natural disasters, the Commonwealth is obliged to contribute towards relief measures on a $3 for $1 basis.
(12) How does the Government determine whether grants for relief of personal hardship and distress come within the conditions of the existing disaster arrangements and thereby qualify for Commonwealth reimbursement.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) In the days immediately following the storm, the Commonwealth received, through the Natural Disasters Organisation, regular situation reports from the Queensland State Emergency Service on the damage and the emergency relief operations, along with requests for Defence Force equipment and personnel to assist in the relief operations. Defence Force assistance was provided as requested. Other State Emergency Service reports are prepared for and used by the State and are not necessarily forwarded to the Commonwealth.
(3) Yes. Commonwealth assistance was, in any case, available to the State under existing natural disaster relief arrangements for a range of measures. Those applicable to the Brighton hailstorm and other similar occurrances were for relief of personal hardship and distress and for the restoration of public assets and emergency protection and repair work by State, local and semi-government authorities. The Queensland Premier advised the Commonwealth on 22 December 1980 of the implementation of these measures and sought agreement, for the purpose of determining Commonwealth assistance to the State under the arrangements, to variation of limits applicable in individual cases to certain of the

Answers to Questions

13 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2389

measures for relief of personal hardship and distress.l replied in January 1981 indicating the Commonwealth's agreement to the new limits proposed.
(4) The declaration of an area as a disaster area is solely a matter for the State Government. Commonwealth assistance for natural disaster relief is not contingent on a State making such a declaration.
(5) (a) Standard measures for the relief of personal hardship and distress under the natural disaster relief arrangements comprise:
(i) provision of emergency food (ii) provision of emergency clothing (iii) provision of emergency accommodation (iv) essential repairs to houses to make them habitable and
secure (v) repair and replacement of essential items of furniture
and personal effects
These measures are restricted to people in needy circumstances as a result of a disaster.
(5) (b) Not in respect of the standard measures.
(5) (c) (i), (ii) and (iii) Assistance has been provided in respect of claims made by the State Government in relation to these and other disasters.
(6) The natural disaster relief arrangements are not designed to provide assistance to a State on a disaster-by-disaster basis, but rather to assist a State in meeting the cost of natural disaster relief assistance provided during a year when it goes beyond the amount originally set to rellect the State's financial capacity. Accordingly, information in the form sought is not readily available. Details of Commonwealth assistance to individual States under the natural disaster relief arrangements are available in 1980-81 Budget Paper No.7 (pp 79-80, 139-141) and in earlier issues of this Budget Paper.
(7) It is not possible to assess from the information available to the Commonwealth whether Queensland suffers more from natural disasters than any other State. Such an assessment would depend not only on the frequency of disasters but also on the extent of damage, both to property and individuals, caused by disasters, not all of which would attract Commonwealth assistance.
(8) When the present arrangements were established in 1978, provision was made for regular reviews. On 4 March 1981 I announced that I had written to all State Premiers and the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory proposing that officials consult on a review of the current arrangements to enable consideration at the June 1981 Premiers' Conference. Prior to the announcement of the review, several Premiers, including Mr Bjelke-Petersen, had written to me indicating dissatisfaction with aspects of the arrangements as they affected their States.
(9) As indicated in (5) above, the Brighton hailstorm has already attracted Commonwealth assistance in respect of the immediate relief of personal hardship and distress. Expenditure by Queensland on longer-term relief and restoration measures that is in accord with the terms and conditions of the natural disaster relief arrangements would be eligible to attract Commonwealth assistance. Additionally, as was indicated in (1) and (2) above, Defence Force assistance was provided immediately following the storm to meet urgent State requests for manpower and equipment for the emergency relief and restoration operations.
(10) and (11) The Commonwealth contributes, on a $3 for $1 basis, to the cost of State expenditures on approved relief and restoration measures (including measures for the relief of personal hardship and distress) in excess of the State's base amount where such expenditures are in respect of a 'major' disaster, A 'major' disaster is, for this purpose, defined as a disaster in respect of which State expenditure on approved

measures exceeds one-tenth of the State's base amount. Where a disaster is not a 'major' disaster and/or the State has not exceeded its base amount, State expenditures on approved measures for the relief of personal hardship and distress attract Commonwealth assistance on a $ for $ basis. Further information can be found in 1980-81 Budget Paper No.7 (pages 79-80).
(12) The conditions under which Commonwealth assistance in respect of a State's expenditure on the relief of personal hardship and distress is provided, are described in (5) and (11) above. The States are required to submit audited statements to certify expenditure in accordance with agreed measures of assistance for natural disaster relief and restoration.
Uranium Resources at Nabarlek
(Question No. 780)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
Further to his statement of 24 November 1980 made to the Sydney Chamber of Commerce (Hansard, 26 November 1980, page 55) that on the basis of the estimated resources at Nabadek, Northern Territory about 60 per cent of those resources have already been committed under contract or firm letters of intent, (a) what are the estimated uranium resources at Nabadek, (b) to which countries have these commitments been made, (c) in each case what is the volume of uranium committed under (i) contract and (ii) firm letters of intent, (d) in each case what approvals have been granted by the Government and (e) in each case what safeguard arrangements apply to these commitments.
Mr Anthony-I refer the honourable member to my reply to his earlier Question on Notice No. 275 (House of Representatives Hansard, 27 April 1981, pages 1683-1684).
Taxation Levels
(Question No. 799)
Mr Willis asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
What are the titles and full references of the many expert inquiries that have believed that the highest level of tax that ought to be payable by any person is about 50 cents in the dollar to which he referred in the House on 26 February 1981 (Hansard, page 235).
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Taxation Review Committee (1975) stated in its full report (Page 192) that a reduction in the maximum marginal rate to the region of 50 per cent would be an appropriate long term target.
The Canadian Royal Commission on Taxation (1967) stated in its final recommendations (Para. 315) that the maximum marginal tax rate should be held down to 50 per cent.
The United States Treasury report, 'Blue Prints for Basic Tax Reform' (1977) proposed two model tax systems as the basis for future tax reform-both of which involved reducing the maximum marginal rate below 50 per cent.
Bushfires: Use of Water-bombers
(Question No. 814)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:

2390 REPRESENTATIVES 13 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) Has the Australian Government received a firm offer of sale of aircraft designed to be used as water-bombers against bushfires; if so, (a) when was the otTer made, (b) what was the name of the company making the offer and (c) what was the proposed contract price.
(2) Has he made a response to this offer; if so, what are the details.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) An offer was made to sell to the Australian Government two CL21S Water Bomber Aircraft with spares and ground support equipment.
(b) The offer was set out in a letter addressed to me dated 4 November 1980 from a Mr J. A. Nicas of Canadair Services Ltd, Montreal, Canada, the manufacturer of the aircraft.

(c) The total price in Canadian dollars for the package consisting of both aircraft, spares and equipment, was S11 ,840,000.
(2) In my letter ofreply to Mr Nicas I mentioned that the offer had been referred to my colleague, the Minister for Science and Technology for his consideration. Canadair Services Ltd were aware of the Prime Minister's press release of 22 September 1980 announcing that the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation was to conduct a study to evaluate the effectiveness of using aircraft to fight forest and bush fires.
I also pointed out that my Department had no expertise in bushfire fighting. Its involvement in the use of civil aircraft for this purpose would primarily be concerned with the prescription of operational safety requirements and airworthiness matters.
Since referring the matter to my colleague the Minister for Science and Technology, no further approaches have been made to my Department concerning the sale of these aircraft.


