House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 125, 1981 Wednesday, 28 October 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2565

Wednesday, 28 October 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view, of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the NHS and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bOllles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles, Mrs Child, Mr Duffy, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Dr Theophanous and Mr Willis.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government's decision to impose a tax on books, magazines and newspapers particularly educational publications and books of a religious nature, is abhorrent to the notion of the right to in,formation, a clear infringement of our democratic freedom, aild'that no such tax is levied on any other country with which Australia is usually compared.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will withdraw its announced intention to impose a sales tax on books, magazines and newspapers.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann.
Petition received.
Sales Tax on Pu~lications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonweallh of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully. showeth:
That the proposed sales tax of 2.5 per cent on books, magazines and newspapers represents a tax on knowledge which should not be contemplated in a civilised country. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that this proposed sales lax be withdrawn from the budget proposals.
And your petitioners as induty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Drummond; Mr Steele Hall, Mr Hurford and Mr McLean.
Petitions received.

Sales Tax on Publications
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: We the undersigned, wish to protest against the Federal Government's proposed 2t per cent sales tax on books, newspapers and magazines. This proposed tax is a tax on knowledge and an impediment to the free flow of information.
We respectfully request that these items be exempted from the sales tax provisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hurford.
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. The automotive products industry is vital to ,the livelihood and well being of many thousands of Australian workers and their families;
2. if imported automotive products are allowed to flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over \00,000 workers in the industry of their work opportunities.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent and Mr Milton.
Petitions received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This Petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Burke respectfully showeth that:
I. The automotive' products industry is vital to the livelihood and well being of many thousands of Australian workers and their families;
2. if imported automotive products are allowed to flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the industry of their work opportunities.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this indus-- try and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Theophanous.
Petition received.
Rights of Disabled
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The failure of the Federal Government to seek information from the censlis re disabled people-i.e. partial or total disability-to enable for adequate planning of, and fo'r, types of services needed by disabled people to be undertaken.
2. The failure of the Federal Government to lead the way in employment of disabled people by employing a greater number of such people within the Commonwealth Public

2566 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Petitions

Service - note the small number currently employed within the Service.
3. The wastage of the Federal Government funds perpetuating large, bureaucratic institutions and organisations where there are often few disabled people on their boards and little emphasis is placed on consumer participation in decision making.
4. The failure of the Federal Government to encourage independence of disabled people, or to develop 'normalised' support systems-attendant care.
5. The failure of the Federal Government to provide 'noninstitutionalised' specialised accommodation for those people who would not be able to benefit from, or cope with attendant care.
6. Failure by the Federal Government to alter, or create a 'disability' allowance means test free for all disabled peoplethis would assist with necessary equipment and mobility costs.
7. Failure to provide a national compensation scheme thus saving time and enabling people to be automatically covered in the event oFa disability.
8. Failure by the Federal Government to abolish tariffs on all equipment available to the disabled-e.g. Optacon.
9. Mismanagement of Federal LY.D.P. Funds-e.g. nonreceipt by some States of Funds through unresolved negotiations.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that immediate acton be taken to remedy the above stated and that the Federal Government recogni~e that disabled people are citizens who should have equal rights.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Food Aid to Polish Government
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that recent events in Poland are 'of such seriousness as to justify Australia's direct involvement in attempts to relieve tension there.
Your petitioners note that food shortages are a major cause of civil unrest.
Your petitioners further note that Australia has the capacity to make direct donations of food at short notice.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray;
That the Federal Government make the Polish Government an immediate and substantial offer of food aid.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Metric System
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth objection to the Metric System and request the Government to restore the Imp,erial System.
And your petitioners asin duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ian Cameron.
Petition received.

Telephone Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that:
The meeting of the Telecom rural subscribers action group views with alarm Telecom's present policy on automatic telephones and demands all subscribers be treated as equal citizens in that the cost of installation of automatic telephone services be the same in country areas as in the cities.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ian Cameron.
Petition received.

Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that the proposed changes to assistance to the passenger motor vehicle and components industries after 1984 shall lead to the collapse of the vehicle manufacturing industry in Australia.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Industries Assistance Commission report be not given effect.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.

Sales Tax Legislation

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-
ition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:

I. That the Government's Sales Tax legislation imposes an unreasonable burden on the community generally, especially pensioners, families, those in receipt of smaller incomes and
small businesses.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will withdraw or repeal its sales tax legislation.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by MrCross.

Petition received.

Sales Tax Legislation

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-
ition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully
showeth:

I. The Government proposes to impose a sales tax of 17t% on manufactured pet foods which were previously exempt.

2. That this new tax will impose an unreasonable burden on

pceeitpotwonfearss, mmaalnl yinocfomweh.omYoaurer

pensioners petitioners

and citizens in rethereFore humbly

pray that the Government will withdraw or repeal its Sales

Tax Legislation.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Cross.

Petition received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. ,The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:

Petitions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2567

That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade postal and mail services throughout-Australia will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
Downgrading a large number of official post offices;
Reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period;
Reducing the number of street posting boxes;
Delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices;
Downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff;
Usirig private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.

Postal Services

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The

humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Common-

wealth respectfully showeth:

.

That the plan by the Australian Postal 'Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Toora Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action tei prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the
postal and mail services of our community.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Cunningham.

Petition received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Bunyip Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.

That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Trafalgar Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Wilmot respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Beaconsfield Post Office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Burr.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Macquarie respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade Postal and Mail services throughout Australia, will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
Downgrading a large number of official post offices;
reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period;
reducing the number of street posting boxes;
delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices;
downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff; and
using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFree.
Petition received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:

Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

2568 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Petitions

That the projected repeal by the Queensland State Government of the Aborigines Act 1971-79 and the Torres Strait Islander Act 1971-79 will almost certainly lead to the degazettal of all Aboriginal reserves in Queensland. as has already been the case with Aurukun and Mornington Island.
That if. as is likely. the Aboriginal communities from these reserves are placed under similar shire council legislation on firty year leases. they will be exposed to serious encroachment on their land by mining and tourist interests.
That it is also quite clear. on past evidence. that these interests will have the full backing of the Queensland Government and the rights of Aboriginal people to land rights and self-management will not be granted by that Government.
That the Commonwealth Government has the power to legislate and acquire land for Aboriginal people under its constitutional powers since the amendments to the Constitution in 1967. but it is your petitioners' sincere belief that it failed to act in 1978 and thus. failed in its duty before the people of Aurukun and Mornington Island.
That the Aboriginal people of Queensland have stated that they want land rights and self-management.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government make use of its constitutional and legislative powers to grant full land rights and self-management to the Aboriginal people of Queensland.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.

Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:

The Federal Government should provide sufficient funds

for State Education Systems that will ensure the maintenance

of the current high quality of Education and the continuance

of educational services to all children in a happy and stress

free environment.

.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Drummond.

Petition received.

Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the proposed imposition of Sales Tax on items concerned with home building. clothing. footwear. books and newspapers. wrapping for food.
Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament to exempt these items from the proposed Sales Tax as requested by the Senate to avoid such taxes on necessities of life becoming a further burden on home builders. families and children or inhibiting the free flow of information through books and newspapers or reducing employment opportunities for people in the industries concerned and beyond.
And your petitioners as in duty bound. will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.

Aspect House for Handicapped Children
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. All children in Tasmania are not treated equally.
2. Persons with intellectual. physical and mUltiple handicaps in particular will be denied access to Aspect House, 6 Warragul Avenue. New Town in Tasmania if the house is closed.
3. Aspect House is faced with imminent closure because of lack of Government policy and on-going funding.
4. Aspect House is the only community-based facility in an ordinary house in an ordinary suburban setting which provides relief to parents and families engaged in the onerous and demanding task of rearing their handicapped children in the community.
5. That the rights of all children to live with their families should be respected.
6. That we seek Government to take immediate action to prevent the closure of this unique facility.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not protecting family home buyers from the severe effects of increased and increasing rates by interest on home mortgage loans.
Your petitioners. therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action through tax relief and other measures to avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on home mortgage loans which cause detrimental financial. social and psychological pressures on families. and in many cases. positive hardship.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jarman.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker ;lnd Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
There is an urgent need for the provision of Australia Post facilities in the area of West Sunshine and your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will do whatever it can to assist in this matter.
by Mr Barry Jones.
Petition received.
Medibank
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled: The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully request that the Federal Government ensures that:
(a) It honours its 1975 election promise to maintain Medibank-a free. universal health insurance scheme. and instigate methods of improving hospital and health services for the Australian people.

Petitions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2569

(b) The community health program remains a Federal

Government responsibility, with increased Funding and

expansion of services.

.

(c) It abandons means testing and the re-Introduction of charges at public hospitals which will severely disadvantage low and middle income groups. '

(d) Every effort will be made to meet the health care needs and demands of the Australian community.

Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled will give earnest consideration to this most vital matter.

by Mr Barry Jones.

Petition received.

National Women's Advisory Council
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oFthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the National Women's Advisory Council has not been democratically elected by the women of Australia;
That the National Women's Advisory Council is not representative of the women of Australia;
That the National Women's Advisory Council is a discriminatory and sexist imposition on Australian women as Australian men do not have a National Men's Advisory Council imposed on them.
Your petitioners thereFore pray:
That the National Women's Advisory Council be abolished to ensure that Australian women have equal opportunity with Australian men of having issues of concern to them considered, debated an,d voted on by their Parliamentary representatives without intervention and interference by an unrepresentative 'Advisory Council'.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrJuli.
Petition received.
National Women's Advisory Council
To the Honourable the Spellker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the National Women's Advisory Council has not been democratically elected by the women of Australia;
That the National Women's Advisory Council is not representative of the women of Australia;
That the National Women's Advisory Council is a discriminatory and sexist imposition on Australian women as Australian men do not have a National Men's Advisory Council imposed on them.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the National Women's Advisory Council be abolished to ensure that Australian women have equal opportunity with Australian men of having issues of concern to them considered, debated and voted on by their Parliamentary representatives without intervention and interference by an unrepresentative Advisory Council.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by MrJu11.
Petition received.

Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic airfares. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.

Postal Services

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representative~ in Parliament assembled:

The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of

Australia respectfully showeth-Australia Post intends clos-

ing the Mount Gambier North non accounting Post Office on

31 December 1981.

'

YOur petitioners therefore humbly pray that-

We the undersigned, oppose the closure by Australia Post of the Mount Gambier North non accounting Post Office. We fully support and request the continued services of the Mount Gambier North Post Office.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Porter.

Petition received.

Interest Rates
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Australia assembled.
This humble petition of citizens of this country are concerned with increased house interest rates and that this Government has not taken action to peg increases in such rates. We ask that the Government establish a maximum fixed interest rate on a First Mortgage that.would cover' the entire period of time for which the loan is taken out. The rate of interest to be set at the time of signing the contract.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scott.
Petition received.

Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The petition of the undersigned in New South Wales respectfully showeth: that the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base of American B52 Bombers:

2570 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Petitions

Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA. and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian' nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of, \".hether B52's:
(a) Carried nuclear weapons. (b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another
State.
Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy.
Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation in the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region.
Jeopardises the welfare of the Citizens of Darwin, in the noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents.
Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Your Petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US. Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lionel Bowen.
Petition received.

Staging of American B52 Bonibers
To: the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The Petition of the undersigned in South Australia respectfully showeth: that the proposed use of Darwin Airpo,rt as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base of American B52 Bombers:

Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.

Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that

Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge

of whether B52's:

'

(a) Carried nuclear weapons. (b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another
State.

Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy.

Violates democratic procedures in commiting the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due con-
sultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in
this region.

Jeopardises the welfare of the Citizens of Darwin, in the noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents.
Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Your Petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure than any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hurford.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The petitidn of the undersigned members of parents and citizens associations respectfully showeth: that retention of the Schools Commission and the Curriculum Development Centre in their present forms is essential for the balanced and progressive allocation of educational resources and facilities in the Australian community:
That serious concern has been generated by the decision within the school commission guidelines, to cut funds to the general recurrent and capital programs by reallocation to transition, the decision not to implement the school improvement program" and the diviseness created between government and non-government schools due to increases of $43.25 million to non-government schools while government schools funds have not increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray: That the Government will reverse these decisions; will retain the Schools Commission and Curriculum Development Centre in their original forms; retain the schools commission proposals including recurrent and capital funding proposals; basket of services and the schools improvement program.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cross and Dr Everingham.
Petitions received.
Housing Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Ballarat respectfully showeth.
I. That the proposed imposition of 2t per cent sales tax to building materials will have a disastrous effect on the
, already seriously depressed industry. 2. That the latest interest rate rise of I per cent to home
mortgages will now end the hopes of ml\ny intending first home buyers, We believe the Federal Government must initiate a scheme of assistance, to first home buyers, as proposed by building industry representatives.
In conclusion we reject the Federal Government's lack of genuine interest in the home industry. We also clearly state that the effects of poi'nts I & 2 above are not acceptable to us.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the Government give immediate attention to an already seriously depressed industry and your petitioners, as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham and Mr Mildren.

Petitions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2571

Petitions received.
Telephone Exchange at Mount Mee
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Mount Mee respectfully showeth that the Telephone communication service of Mount Mee is in need of immediate attention. Problems associated with the telephones in the area include poor reception, continual ringing of unused telephones, no dial tones available when dialling, engaged signal when dialling into an open line, and crossed lines making private calls impossible. Due to this unsatisfactory service businesses are also suffering from the lack of communication.
Perhaps the most serious problem associated with the telephone service in the area is when emergency services (Doctors, Hospitals etc.) are required the telephone is often the only form of communication available to the residents of Mount Mee and our Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the persons responsible may consider immediate attention be given to the installation of a new Telephone Exchange which could accommodate the needs of the community and your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann.
Petition received.
Australian Broadcasting Commission: Melbourne Show Band
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the Australian Parliament in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria 'respectfully showeth that:
As regular. viewers and listeners of the ABC Melbourne Showband we were disappointed to learn of the dismissal of seventeen members of this outstanding orchestra.
We have had a great deal of pleasure over the past eight years viewing and listening to this band's fine music. It is the only full-time light orchestra in Australia and we are disgusted to think that such talented musicians should be dismissed in this manner.
We therefore call on the Federal Government to resind this decision and make more money,available for the continuance of the full Showband and your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles.
Petition received'.
Wynyard Airport, Tasmania
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that your petitioners resident in the Tasmanian North-West Coast and West Coast municipalities of Circular Head, Wynyard, Burnie, Penguin, Waratah, Zeehan, Strahan, Queenstown and Gormanston are desirous of retaining first class air service through the major airport serving the area, namely the Wynyard airport.
Since the Government has agreed to provide $5.5 million for Devonport which serves a smaller population and area, we ask the Government as a matter of urgency to also provide sufficient funds to upgrade Wynyard airport to the standard required fQr it to accommodate medium,size jet aircraft.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the

Parliament assembled will give urgent consideration to this request.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Groom.

Petition received.

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned Students and Staff of the University of Tasmania respectfully showeth that the introduction of tuition fees for second and higher University degrees would:

I. have substantial ill effects on the Australian economy in

particular, and society in general, by limiting access to edu-

cation for Australians,

'

2. be a barrier to increased equality of education for Australians,

3. directly inhibit the ability of Australians to undertake retraining in response to the changing demand for skills within
the Australian economy, and

4. curtail the substantial contribution to research and teaching that is currently made by postgraduate students within
Australian universities.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:

I. not allow the introduction of tuition fees for second and higher degrees, and

2. ensure that any tuition fees are not charged at Australian tertiary education institutions.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Hodgman.

Petition received,

Nuclear Power
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.

The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Ballarat respectfully showeth that Australia be recognised as nonsupportive of the neutron bomb and nuclear power generally.

Your petitioners humbly pray that the Government of

Australia clearly states the policy of non-support for the neu-

tron bomb and nuclear power.

",

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Mildren.

Petition received.

Motor Vehicle Industry

To the Honourable Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.

This humble petition of citizens of the Geelong region in the State of Victoria respectfully reque~ts the Federal Parliament
not to accept the lAC recommendations on the motor vehicle industry as they would, if accepted, have a disastrous economic effect on the region and would create massive unemployment.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever'pray.

by Mr Scholes.

Petition received.

2572 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

DR URHO KEKKONEN
Notice of Motion
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House notes the retirement of President Urho Kekkonen of Finland after a record term which began in 1956, recognises his dedication to the democratic cause, his work in reducing political tension in the Baltic area, and his work in bringing about the SALT agreements in Helsinki and wishes him well in his retirement.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE
Mr BEAZLEY-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. I refer him to his statement of last Thursday on the Sinai peacekeeping force in which he said:
No part of the peacekeeping force-including the United States component~-should have any association with the United States Rapid Deployment Force.
I also draw his attention to a report in the Melbourne Age of 26 October indicating that the United States Department of Defence had alerted a battalion of the 82nd Airborne Division to stand by for assignment to the Sinai peacekeeping force. I ask: Is the Prime Minister aware that the 82nd Airborne Division is a unit designated to the Rapid Deployment Force? In the light of his statement and the likelihood that a battalion which was an integral part of a major unit of the RDF would be used should a crisis situation in the area arise involving the Forces deployment, will he approach the United States Administration to designate other forces to the task? Would he not agree that, while the composition of the peacekeeping force is fluid, now would be a reasonable time for such an approach or has he information which suggests that the United States is firm on the designated units to be deployed? In this case, will he consider one of the conditions placed on the Australian commitment to be unfulfilled and that, therefore, no obligation remains for the Government to persist with its commitment?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, I can well understand the desire of the Opposition to frustrate United States efforts and the efforts of Israel and Egypt to achieve peace in the Middle East. It is time that we asked ourselves why it is that, whenever the United States takes a constructive effort around the world it draws criticism from this Labor Opposition, this socialist repUblican Opposition, of a massive and serious kind,

Mr Charles Jones-Tell us about your lies over Vietnam when you were the Minister. You were a liar then, Fraser.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Prime Minister will resume his seat. The honourable member for Newcastle will withdraw.
Mr Charles Jones-I withdraw.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Have we heard from the Labor Party one word of criticism of the Soviet Union which refused to allow the peacekeeping force that was in the area from 1976 to 1979 to continue? What criticism have we had from the Labor Party of the Soviet Union which made it plain that it would veto a continuation--
Mr Scott-Answer the question.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I will come to the question but I just wanted to say one or two things first. What criticism have we had from the Labor Party of the Soviet Union which has made it perfectly plain that it would veto the wishes of Israel, Egypt and the United States and many other nations to see the Camp David Accords put into effect? Why is it that the enthusiasm that the honourable member for Wills and the Leader of the Opposition had on earlier occasions for those Camp David Accords now seems to have run out the window? Quite plainly that enthusiasm has gone because of the socialist left in Victoria and because of the orders. I am delighted to see the honourable member for Reid agreeing with me.
Mr MiIton-Tell us about the League of Rights.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I think the League of Rights dislikes me even more than it dislikes the honourable member. The condition that we attached in relation to the multinational peacekeeping force and the United States involvement in it relates to the time when any particular United'States unit is allocated to that force. It would be an absurdity for us to suggest that, when a unit is taken out of that force, having fulfilled a normal tour of duty, we should try to place restrictions on the use the United States makes of that battalion. The question of the force being an integral force and not being used for other purposes obviously relates to the time for which units are in that force and in that force alone. We are not going to have any other country tell us how we can use our aircraft when they come back to Australia having been in the Middle East. It would be nonsense to suggest that we should be telling the United States from which division or which unit it should draw a battalion for this force. That is the important thing. If there were

Questions Without Notice

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2573

disturbances in other areas of the Middle East, quite clearly under those circumstances the maintenance and the integrity of the multinational force would be of paramount concern. That being so in those circumstances I could not conceive of any members of the force wanting to disrupt the operations of the force at that time by withdrawing some elements from it. I have been advised that there is no problem whatsoever in relation to those conditions that the Australian Government has made on its involvement, and I do not foresee any such problems.
EXPORTS: INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Mr HODGES-Is the Minister for Industrial Relations aware of Press reports attributed to the President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions rejecting claims that industrial trouble 'on the Australian waterfront was forcing Japan to look elsewhere for its coal requirements? Does the Government have any concern that industrial trouble is affecting Japanese markets or any other markets for Australian resources?
Mr VINER-I am aware of the reported comments of the President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions. I must express my regret that he should have made remarks of that kind because the undoubted fact of the matter is that industrial trouble which Australia has experienced over recent years, and is also experiencing this year, does harm our international markets and particularly our market with Japan. We are very dependent upon that market for the selling and the development of our resources. We know full well of the kind of industrial trouble that has hit the coal fields and the ports out of which the coal is due to be exported. We are acutely aware, of course, of the recent maritime strike and the boycotting of flags of convenience vessels, many of which are directly involved in the carrying of Australian coal to Japanese markets. To our great regret we are fully aware, for example, of the industrial trouble that has plagued the Pilbara in Western Australia, both at the mining sites and at the ports. All of these kinds of disputes must, by their very nature, cause consternation in the minds of Japanese managers who are not only looking at the fulfilment of their existing contracts--
Mr Keating~Ml Speaker, I take a point of order. Perhaps the Government will insist on the Japanese taking 100 per cent of contract tonnages just once in a while. They are picking up 65 per cent, yet you attack our unions.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.

Mr Keating-'-Why don't you stand the Japanese up, you gutless wonders? You wouldn't stand the Japanese up.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Blaxland will resume his seat.

Mr Anthony-Why don't--

Mr Keating-Particularly you, the greatest trading fool in the world.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! I warn the honourable member for Blaxland. The honourable member for Blaxlancl persistently comes forward on what purports to be a point of order but what is in fact part of a debate. I ask him not to do so again, or I will have to discipline him immediately.

Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, it is the un-Australian attitudes of Ministers which are being--

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.

Mr VINER-As I was saying, the undoubted fact of the matter is that the kind of industrial troj.lble which has plagued the resource industry in Australia in recent years must affect the minds of Japanese management in respect of both the reliability of supply of existing contracts and the making of new contracts for Australian resQurces.

Mr Hawke-You are not trying to tell anyone how to behave, are you?

Mr VINER-Quite clearly, both the honourable member for Wills and the honourable member for Blaxland fully support the kind of industrial trouble which this Government condemns because of the harm that it does to Australia's reputation.

Mr Hawke-Fancy this bloke telling anyone how to behave.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Wills will remain silent.

Mr Hawke-Well, what hypocrisy it is for this

man to preach to anyone.

.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will remain silent.

Mr VINER-I have in recent weeks begun--

Mr Hayden-For some people a lie is a matter of last resort; for this Minister it is a matter of first aid.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition knows that the statement he made is unparliamentary. I ask him to withdraw it.

Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I withdraw it. May I have your indulgence--

2574 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr SPEAKER-No, the Leader of the Opposition may not.
Mr Hayden-I want to raise a point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-I will hear a point of order.
Mr Hayden-My point of order is in relation to the provocative and unsus~ainable assertions of the Minister that members of the Opposition are promoting or committed to supporting, however he put it, various forms of industrial acts, without a skerrick of evidence to justify them. He is seeking to disrupt the proceedings this afternoon.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. ,
Mr Hayden-I merely suggest that you ought to call him to order now and again, instead of doing so to Opposition members all the time.
Mr SPEAKER-I point out to the Leader of the Opposition and all other honourable members on my left that the points being made by the Leader of the Opposition and by other honourable members are in rebuttal of what is being said by the Minister. The nature of a parliament is that a person can make his claims and then, in accordance with the Standing Orders, those claims can be rebutted at a later time. I cannot permit them to be rebutted by way of false points of order or by interjections.
Mr VINER-I was about to inform the House that recently I had begun a round of consultations with industry and the union movement. I have at , this stage, in discussing industrial relations matters with the mining industry, had it very plainly pointed out to me that the leaders of the Australian mining industry, in their dealings with their Japanese counterparts, have been informed' that the industrial relations record in Australia is damaging the'reputation of Australia--
Mr HawkeWhat about the record of the Industrial Relations Minister?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Wills will remain silent.
Mr VINER-I think it behoves both sides of this House to understand that Australia is in a competitive international market. They ought to know that Brazil, for example, is planning, with the Japanese, the opening up of iron ore deposits. They ought to appreciate, and I hoptL that the union movement appreciates, that what is vital to the economic future of Australia--
Mr Hawke-Hypocrisy!
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I have asked the honourable member for Wills to remain silent. I now ask him not to use unparliamentary language. I again ask him to remain silent, and I

warn him that if he continues to interject I will be reluctantly forced to discipline him.
Mr VINER-The full and proper development of Australia's resources is vital to our economic future. Therefore, I think it is imperative for the union movement and management within industry to come together to build a much better climate of industrial relations in the resource industry and to produce a climate of industrial stability so that Australia's reputation as a reliable supplier can be strengthened and not damaged by the kind of industrial action that we have seen in recent times.
AUSTRALIAN DAIRY CORPORATION
Mr KERIN-Did the Minister for Communications at any time during 1977, in his dealings with the previous Chairman of the Australian DairyCorporation, Mr Tony Webster, issue a direction to him or act in a way which Mr Webster would regard as the issue of a direction by the Minister in relation to proposed skim milk powder sales to places other than the Philippines? Is it correct that the Department of Primary Industry has extracts from the Minister's personal diary for 1976 and 1977? Will the Minister agree to table them in the House?
Mr SINCLAIR-With respect to the last part of the question, I am not aware that the Department has parts of my diary. Of course, it was involved with many parts of it. If the Department does have some parts of the diary I am happy to discuss those parts with the Department I can see no reason for tabling them in Parliament.
With respect to the first part of the honourable gentleman's question, there were many occasions when I discussed sales of manufactured milk products with representatives of the Australian dairy industry. Members of the Opposition in this place do not seem to realise that an extraordinarily difficult marketing task was facing the Australian Dairy Corporation at that time. Without doubt, there were many private contractors, private companies, which sought to make sales and which from time to time looked at the degree to which there were opportunities for selling these products. The prime responsibility for those sales lay with the Australian Dairy Corporation. On occasions it canvassed them with me. I cannot recall specifically, I am afraid, the details of every discussion I had in 1976. However, it is true that on every occasion when I had discussions I was very conscious of the fact that export approval was given by the Australian Dairy Corporation. In that sense I certainly gave no directions to the Chairman of the Atl~tralian Dairy Corporation

Questions Without Notice

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2575

for it was his responsibility, not the Government's, to determine who would receive the export permit and, of course, on what terms and conditions.
IRAN: RELIGIOUS PERSECUTION
Mr CARLTON-Is the Minister for Foreign Affairs aware of reports that innocent citizens exercising their right to protest against the Islamic regime in Iran are being executed without benefit of trial? Is the Minister aware of continuing reports of persecution of members of the Baha'i faith in Iran? If so, what is the Government's position on these matters?
Mr STREET-Since the dismissal of the former President of Iran, Bani Sadr, on 22 June this year, reports available to the Government indicate that almost 2,000 people have been executed in Iran, on the orders of the revolutionary court, for political offences. It has been reported that large numbers of people, including school children, have been summarily shot during or immediately after street demonstrations. These dead are reported to include not only political activists but also innocent bystanders and, as the honourable gentleman has said, members of the already much-persecuted religious minorities. Although the Government cannot confirm all individual reported cases it does seem that the reports that we have had are basically accurate.
It has become increasingly evident also that there has been an intensification at the highest level of the persecution of Baha'is by the Iranian authorities even though those authorities have stated that the charges against Baha'is are not related to their religion. The Supreme Court of Iran has confirmed sentences in which the faith of the Baha'is has been expressly cited. In the Yezd region of Iran in August, 150 heads of families of the Baha'i sect were arrested and their fate is still not decided. The Government is very gravely concerned at these violations not only of internationally accepted standards of justice but also, it appears, of basic Islamic principles. The Government calls on the Iranian Government to extend to all of its citizens the right to fair and open trial for all offences and to cease forthwith executions for political or religious reasons.
MISSING LIGHT AIRCRAFT
Mr MORRIS-My question, which is directed to the Minister for Transport, relates to the light aircraft which is missing in south-eastern Australia with four persons on board. Is the Minister able to confirm whether the missing aircraft was fitted with an emergency location beacon and whether a beacon signal was received from the

aircraft following its disappearance? Which Department of Transport aircraft are fitted with search meters to enable signals from an emergency location beacon to be located during aircraft searches? Can he advise the House which aircraft of the Department of Transport, fitted with such search meters, participated in the search for the light aircraft in the immediate period after its disappearance? If some Department of Transport aircraft were not used in the search, why were they not used? Finally, what is the latest information that the Minister can provide on the progress of the search?
Mr HUNT-I have had a preliminary report from the Department in respect of the missing aircraft, but I do not have at my fingertips the details with respect to the beacons to which the honourable member refers. However, I will obtain a full report on the matter and make it available later in the day to the honourable gentleman. I do expect another report from the Department today as a result of its most recent search for the missing aircraft.
SALES TAX
Mr CONNOLLY-I direct my question to the Treasurer. Does he have any evidence of business sector hostility towards the increases in sales tax?
Mr HOWARD-There can be no doubt that those businesses which for the first time have been made subject to sales tax in respect of their products do not particularly welcome the Government's decision. Nobody likes to be brought within the tax net for the first time; that is a self evident proposition. But I think much of the so called hostility of the business community to these changes has been exaggerated. Part of that has been due to a particularly virulent campaign waged by some groups which appear to believe that their products are deserving of specialised treatment so far as the application of sales tax is concerned.
It is instructive, therefore, to examine the latest Australian Chamber of Commerce-National Bank of Australasia Ltd survey, which contains a very high proportion of retailers and wholesalers in its coverage. Their responses to a question on sales tax certainly would not be regarded as being disinterested. It is significant that of those people surveyed in this particular survey-it is a fairly authoritative one so far as attitudes of the Australian business community are concerned-no less than 88 per cent, including a very high proportion of retailers and wholesalers, responded to the effect that they saw little or no impact or only a minor impact on their products so far as the new sales tax measures are concerned. I think that sort

2576 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

of survey is a more accurate reflection of what the Australian business community thinks of these changes, because on maturer reflection it believes that there is very great value in the modest broadening of the tax base contained in the Budget measures.
SALES TAX
Mrs CHILD-My question, which is addressed to the Treasurer, really follows on from what he has just been saying. Small businesses around the Henty area do not agree with what he has had to say. My question to him comes in three parts and it comes in a letter from one of the businessmen in my area. Has the Treasurer considered the cost of administering this tax in a small company? Does he realise that retailers do not differentiate between the cost of any article and sales tax and that they apply their margin to both? How can this legislation be other than inflationary as the additional cost over the counter could be more than double the tax collected? This is not a question, but a comment--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member is not entitled to do that. She has asked her question. I call the Treasurer.
Mr HOWARD-I thank the honourable member for Henty for the question. I say in reply, as I said in reply to an earlier question from her on the same subject a couple of weeks ago, that of course there is a cost to business in administering sales tax. I have never denied that. I have never run away from that fact, but I believe that the cost to the business community and to the community generally of a sales tax approach is infinitely lower than the cost of a value added tax or a broad based retail turnover tax which are the traditional alternatives so far as indirect taxation is concerned. Certainly, retail margins are applied on top of the increase represented by the sales tax.
That. has always been the case. So far as the inflationary effects are concerned, of course there is a price effect of indirect tax increases but it has to be remembered that because of the more modest increases which have ocurred in the price of oil over the last year the rate of increase in indirect tax collections this year will be slower than last year, despite the increases in the sales tax. It is also worth recalling that in this Budget we have increased indirect tax at about half the rate that it was increased in the Hayden Budget of 1975.
EXPERIMENTAL BUILDING STATION
Mr BRADFIELD-Is the Minister for Housing and Construction aware of industry concern that the important functions of the Government's Experimental Building Station in Sydney will

cease if plans for the station's disposal are pursued? Can the Minister advise, in a brief form, what stage has been reached in .that disposal process?
Mr McVEIGH-I have been informed of the views expressed by certain people about the Experimental Building Station, but they are ill informed. The Government has received nine offers from interested organisations. These offers are being evaluated in line with the Government's aims which are that it be taken over as a going concern, that it continue its role of impartiality and technical excellence, that it continue its activities in the building regulations area and the development of new building ideas and that the maximum opportunity be given to existing staff to continue their roles in the new enterprise. We are quite confident from the nine inquiries we have received that these requirements of the Government can be met.
'AUSTRALIAN PRESCRIBER'
Mr KENT-I direct my question to the Minister for Health. I refer to the Government's furtive decision to end its support for Australia's only independent review of drug therapy; the Australian Prescriber. Is the Minister aware of widespread professional disapproval of this move? How can he justify this short-sighted decision, particularly as it contradicts the recommendations of the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare entitled 'Another Side of the Drug Debate' and his own Department's recommendation to that Committee that the support for the Australian Prescriber continue? Will he therefore take steps to ensure the continued publication of this important journal?
Mr MacKELLAR-I am aware of the views expressed by a. wide variety of people within the medical fraternity in relation to the continued existence of the Australian Prescriber. The facts of the matter are that most of the material for that publication is written by people outside of my Department. In fact, my Department has acted as a sort of conduit to gather together this material and make sure that it is published. There has been a decision for my Department not to continue the publication of the Australian Prescriber, but there have already been approaches from other bodies, particularly from the Australian Medical Association, with suggestions that they can continue the publication of that independent publication in such a way that its purpose will be maintained. Those discussions will continue.

Questions Without Notice

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2577

LIVE SHEEP TRADE
Mr STEELE HALL-I direct my question to the Minister for Primary Industry. In view of the continued interest of Middle East buyers in purchasing live sheep from Australia and the underlying threat from some unions that they may take industrial action to disrupt that trade, can the Minister assure the House that his Department and the Government will co-operate with any State government which may be involved and with representatives of participating industries who may need direct support to prevent the disruption which could arise to this most important export industry?
Mr NIXON-The short answer to the honourable member's question is yes. We will co-operate with any State government and organisation that seeks to keep open trade with the Middle East. I answered a question on this matter in the House in the last couple of weeks. I pointed out then that the fact is-this seems to be misunderstood by the trade union movement-that the growth in carcass meat sales to the Middle East has been as fast as the growth in the live sheep trade. There has been no diminution of the carcass meat trade despite the growth of the live sheep trade. It is totally false for the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the unions involved in the meat industry to go round the countryside claiming that their jobs have been put in jeopardy because of the live sheep trade. That is not the fact at all.
Mr Young-It is.
Mr NIXON-There is no diminution of the carcass meat trade. The honourable member for Port Adelaide could not tell B from a bull's foot.
Mr Young-Lock some of your mates up.
Mr NIXON-Just be patient.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Port Adelaide will remain silent.
Mr NIXON-The honourable member has been overseas for too long; that is his trouble. It is about time he came back into the House and said something.
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will cease taking notice of interjections, and the honourable member for Port Adelaide will cease interjecting.
Mr NIXON-I repeat: The fact is that the carcass meat trade has not diminished because of the development of the live sheep trade. That is a factual statement. I gave that information to the members of the ACTU delegation that came to Canberra to meet me on this issue.
Mr Scott-They do not believe you any more.

Mr NIXON-That was prior to their taking that decision. I had an understanding with them that they would confer with me again on the issue after looking at the information. Regrettably that aspect of the arrangement has not been honoured. They have now taken a policy decision to try to stop live sheep exports. I know from first hand experience and knowledge that the pastoral industry and the farmers of this country will not stand for any interference with the live sheep export trade. That is the fundamental strength in the sheep industry at the moment. It will be foolhardy indeed for any trade union to believe that it can interfere with this trade in any way at all.
Mr SPEAKER-Before I call any other honourable member, I draw the attention of the honourable member for Hindmarsh to the fact that he has continually interjected today. I ask him to cease interjecting.
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
Mr HAYDEN-I draw the attention of the Minister for Trade and Resources to the decision by Swiss Aluminium Ltd to halve production at the Gove alumina plant, a decision which will lead to the dismissal of 250 people. Does he also recall ICI Australia Ltd's recent decision to cancel plans for a new petrochemical works at Geelong? Accordingly, I ask the Minister: Is this the beginning of the Government's resources boom? If not, what phase of the boom does it represent? Can the Minister say whether the boom has been postponed until after the next election?
Mr ANTHONy-It is interesting to know some of the statistics in relation to investment in the mining industry. For the year just completed the rate of investment in the mining industry has gone up by about 72 per cent and it is expected that it will increase by about a further 67 per cent in the coming year. Those are the estimates. So, a great deal of development is taking place, and the prospects are for further development in this country provided we can manage our circumstances economically and industrially. As I have said, one of the great essentials to the prospects for developing our resources in this country is our capacity to export, to meet our orders and to have a reputation for delivering on time. Certainly the performance of some of the unions does not make that job easy.
It is true that there is an international turn" down in the alumina-aluminium industry. There is a slackness. These cycles occur in all industries. At the moment there is a turndown and certain companies are being affected. Alusuisse at Gove is being affected and therefore it has to cut back its exports. It has already given notice that it will be

2578 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

reducing its exports by about 50 per cent. The Australian partners in Nabalco, basically CSR Ltd, will be continuing their production and are able to dispose of it. But that is only 30 per cent of the overall production out of Gove. It is regrettable that there will be a reduction. It is a pity that those who are defying the Nabalco company are taking the industrial action they are when the company is in difficult circumstances. A dispute has been going on there for many weeks, a dispute which has been provoked by local union leaders against the wishes of the Australian Council of Trade Unions. I would have thought that because the company has these difficult marketing circumstances there might have been a more understandable and co-operative approach towards keeping it going.
AUSTRALIAN WHEAT BOARD
Mr ROCHER-My question is directed to the Treasurer. Is it intended to allow the Australian Wheat Board to borrow extensively in the domestic money market? Will the difference between interest on government borrowings and rural credits or any other differentials be subsidised? If so, what control will the Government exercise over interest rates offered by the Wheat Board?
Mr HOWARD-The answer to the first two parts of the question is yes. The arrangement that has now been operating for two or three years whereby instead of the first advance to wheat growers coming entirely out of the rural credits department of the Reserve Bank of Australia, it comes rather from commercial borrowings, was instituted for monetary policy reasons. It is part of the arrangements the Government agreed to in order to preserve in an explicit way the implicit subsidy that had existed by reason of a subsidised interest rate prevailing in respect of rural credits advances. The Government has paid a subsidy, being the difference between the rate determined by the market and the rate that would have been payable if the advance had come from the rural credits department. I make it quite plain that it was a deliberate Government decision to keep faith with the industry to continue that subsidy, and it will continue.
On the question of control over the interest rate, I can assure the honourable gentleman that the Wheat Board, in co-operation with the Treasury and other advice available to the Government, ensures that very appropriate and attractive rates in terms of market conditions are obtained. I think most people who have observed the operation of the Wheat Board in this area over the past couple of years would agree that the operation has been managed ,in a very efficient

fashion and that the Wheat Board has not paid anything other than proper market rates. Therefore the subsidy paid by the Australian taxpayer has not been any greater than absolutely necessary.
NUCLEAR SAFEGUARDS AGREEMENT
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I refer the Minister for Foreign Affairs to the 'protracted negotiations on nuclear safeguards with Japan and, more particularly, to the recent round of unsuccessful talks held in Tokyo. Accordingly I ask: Will the Minister give the House an assurance that, as the due date for deliveries to Japan.draws very close, the Government will stand firm and refuse to water down any further its already unsatisfactory and inadequate nuclear safeguards requirements?
Mr STREETI can assure the Deputy Leader of the Opposition that no deliveries will be made to Japan under new contracts until a safeguards agreement has been negotiated. That willnot be on terms less stringent than those negotiated with other countries.
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY: AGRICULTURAL POLICY
Mr LLOYD-Is the Minister for Trade and Resources aware of the increasing trend in the European Economic Community to use an additional consumer price, or co-responsibility levy, to subsidise agricultural exports beyond the limit imposed by the one per cent value added tax ceiling? In the Minister's commendable criticism of EEC agricultural policy, now in concert with several other countries, is the point being clearly made that this new device is no more acceptable to the rest of the world than the more entrenched variable levy, export restitutions and common agricultural policy budget schemes?
Mr ANTHONY-I am familiar with the increasing use of the so-called co-responsibility levy by the European Economic Community. It is just another device in its armoury of extravagant farm support arrangements. It has used the coresponsibility levy for a number of years in the dairying industry. The EEC argues that it is a levy to suppress increased production. Of course, the net result over the period in which it has been used has been a huge increase in dairying production. This levy, added to the other. forms of support, is .used to subsidise the export of the EEC's production to other markets arouno the world.
Recently the EEC has used the coresponsibility levy in the sugar industry. This, in itself, is an additional means to support the export of subsidised sugar from the EEC. To talk in

Questions Without Notice

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2579

terms of the levy being a penalty on the industry is ridiculous when it is really being paid for by the consumer. When a 2per cent levy is added to a product and consumer prices are increasing at the rate of at least 8 per cent to 10 per cent a year, the consumer pays the levy and the producer is not penalised. That the EEC should use this device and continue its irresponsible behaviour is causing enormous resentment and challenges around the world. I fail to see how it can defend the increasing use of this practice along with its other practices.
VIDEOTEX SYSTEM
Mr DAWKINSI hesitate to disturb the Minister for Communications. I am not sure whether he is sleeping or praying. He probably has justification for both. My question relates to the Minister's announcement on Friday, 16 October that Telecom Australia could not begin a videotex service. Is it a fact, as reported in the Australian Financial Review, that British Telecom telexed Telecom Australia several days before that announcement saying that it understood the decision had been made and stating that it had already begun discussions with Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd on supplying that company with a system? I further ask whether Publishing and Broadcasting and/or British Telecom was directly or indirectly informed of the Cabinet decision before the public announcement by the Minister or any other government source?
Mr SINCLAIR-The answer to the last part of the honourable gentleman's question is no. The answer to his remark about praying is that I hope somebody will start praying for him pretty soon.
SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE
Mr WHITE~I refer the Prime Minister to reports today that foreshadow agreement by France, Britain, the Netherlands and Italy to take part in the Sinai force. What will be Australia's position if these countries take part but Canada does not?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-As a result of discussions that took place during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting the Government believes that the most likely way of achieving a balanced force-something which it wanted from the outset and which it made plain from the outset-would be for Canada and Britain to participate in the force along with Australia. That is why the decision was made in those terms. It is also why the United States was informed of our decision in the terms of which the honourable gentleman and the House are well aware. If, as a result of published reports that

have become evident over the last day or two, it appears that the countries the honourable gentleman mentioned-France, Britain, the Netherlands and Italy-will take part in the force, obviously that also will lead to a balanced force. The Commonwealth's concern all along is that there be a balanced force. We would obviously look at the matter on the merits to see which countries are actually going to perform and to contribute. But I am making the point that the participation of Canada is not the only way of achieving that particular objective. If these other countries--
Mr Scott-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. Could I ask the Prime Minister to speak into the microphone? We cannot hear him on this side of the chamber.
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Prime Minister.
Mrs Child-Start again.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, I was invited by the Opposition to start again. I think this is the first time. I have been shown that courtesy so I thank the honourable member for Henty. But I will spare the House going through it again. I very much hope that the countries that have been mentioned in reports over the last day or two do make firm decisions and firm commitments. I also hope that Canada is still prepared to participate and I welcome the reports concerning New Zealand. But what we are concerned about is achieving a balanced force and it looks at long last as though that will be achieved.
INDIAN OCEAN AIR SERVICES
Mr JOHN BROWN-I ask the Minister for Transport whether he recalls telling the House on \0 September in answer to a question relating to the South African Airways monopoly of the lucrative Indian Ocean airline traffic:
. . . I hope that Qantas will be able to develop a service across the Indian Ocean to Mauritius in the not too distant future.
I further ask the Minister whether his attention has been drawn to a statement by the Chairman of Qantas Airways Ltd, Mr Jim Leslie, as reported by Patrick Walters in the Sydney Morning Herald of 3 October, as follows:
I think it is fairly unlikely we will go to Mauritius.
I ask the Minister: Firstly, who is determining the Government's international aviation policy; secondly, which of the two statements is correct; and thirdly, does the Minister endorse the continued monopolisation by South African Airways of the lucrative Indian Ocean market?
Mr HUNT-The Government has taken a firm policy decision that Qantas services to South

2580 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

Africa will not be restored. However, Qantas has been investigating the possibility of opening services between Perth and/or other ports in Mauritius and Southern Africa. I know that the Chairman of Qantas, with whom I will be having discussions tonight, has taken those negotiations further. I am hopeful that we will be able to initiate a service across the Indian Ocean in the not too distant future. But whether Qantas will inaugurate services between Perth and Mauritius or other ports in Southern Africa will be a commercial decision taken by Qantas.
CLOTHING ITEMS: SALES TAX
Mr SHACK~I have a further question for the Treasurer on sales tax. Has the Treasurer's attention been drawn to the fact that some clothing retailers have recently substantially marked up the price of their items, blaming the price hike on sales tax increases? Is clothing presently subject to sales tax? If not, what action can consumers take in the face of such blatant misrepresentation and profiteering?
Mr HOWARD~I have been made aware of examples of some traders falsely representing to the public that price increases that they themselves have imposed are the result of sales tax increases. Specifically, any claim made by any trader anywhere in Australia that any price increase in recent times is due to a sales tax rise is blatantly and totally false. At the very minimum I would urge consumers in the face of that to take their complaints to the various consumer affairs bodies of the various States.
While I am answering that question, perhaps I could inform the House of a significant decision that the Government has taken regarding the sales tax legislation. The House will be aware that last week when I indicated that the Government would, at the expiry of the three-month period which commenced on 20 October, present Bills to the same effect to the Parliament in the new year, I indicated that I would inform the Parliament of the Government's decision regarding the commencement date of those new measures. I am now able to say that, for practical reasons only, the commencement date cannot be I January but must be a later date. The reason for this is in no way related to a view on the part of the Government that a commencement date on I January, under Bills passed after that date, would have been retrospective, but rather a view the Government has formed that for practical administrative reasons sufficient time must be given to the taxation authorities to send out detailed instruction kits and guides to some 40,000 traders who will be subject to the sales tax for the first time.

It would clearly be seen by many, and properly so, as a contempt of this Parliament by the Executive if action to do that were taken in advance of the legislation being passed. So I make it plain, in again confirming that the Government will present Bills to the same effect in the new year, that the commencement date of the legislation, instead of being 1 January, will be Monday 29 March. In all other respects the legislation and the intentions of the Government will be precisely the same. We will not be acceding to any of the requests on this matter conveyed by another place. In anticipation of the question that inevitably win be asked, the net effect to revenue in the current financial year is $79m.
URANIUM ADVISORY COUNCIL ANNUAL REPORT
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to answer a question asked of me yesterday by the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) concerning a matter in the annual report of the Uranium Advisory Council which I tabled on 22 October. I am able to advise the honourable member that the report of the Uranium Advisory Council on its review of the Atomic Energy Act and related matters, together with submissions which the Council received on this matter in response to its public call for submissions, are available to interested parties.
As is the usual practice with reports and advisings to the Government froin the Uranium Advisory Council, the report of the Council in relation to this matter appears in its annual report in Appendix H. I refer the honourable member to page 2 of the annual report of the Council, under the heading 'Submissions by the Public', which indicates that 46 ,public submissions on the review of the Atomic Energy Act were received by the Council,. some of them quite extensive. The report states that bound volumes containing copies of submissions are held by the Council library. They may be perused there by interested parties or may be borrowed for a limited period. Additionally, I have arranged for copies of bound volumes containing the public submissions to be placed in the Parliamentary Library.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Library
Mr SPEAKER-I understand that the honourable member for Shortland intends to lodge a request for detailed information relating to the admi nistra tion of parliamen tary departments.

General

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2581

Mr MORRIS (Shortland)-Mr Speaker, I seek information relating to the operation of the Parliamentary Library.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will give his request to the Clerk. If it is in order it will be printed. In due course I will give a reply which likewise will be printed in Hansard.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATIONS Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for
Communications)-For the information of honourable members. I present the interim annual report of the Department of Communications for 1980-81.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE VETERANS' RESIDENCES ACT
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-Pursuant to sections 10 and lOA of the Royal Australian Air Force Veterans' Residences Act 1953, I present the Royal Australian Air Force Veterans Residences Trust annual report and the associated Auditor-General's report for the year ended 30 June 1981.
CHILD MIGRANT EDUCATION REPORT Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for
Transport)-Pursuant to section 12 of the Immigration and Education Act 1971, I preserit the 1980-81 Child Migrant Education report.
ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN TELESCOPE BOARD
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-Pursuant to section 19 (2) of the Anglo-Australian Telescope Agreement Act 1970, I present the Anglo~Australian Telescope Board annual report for 1980-81.
AUSTRALIAN BICENTENNIAL AUTHORITY
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Pursuant to section 25 (4) of the Australian Bicentennial Authority Act 1980, I present the first Australian Bicentennial Authority annual report 1980-81.
COMMONWEALTH CATERING AND ACCOMMODATION SERVICES
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Acting Minister for Administrative Services)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd annual report for 1980-81.

DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Acting Minister for Administrative Services)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report for 1980-81 of the Department of Administrative Services.

LIBRARY COMMITTEE

Suspension of Standing Orders

Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (2.46)-1 move:

That so much of the standing orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Lalor from-
(I) moving that the Parliamentary Library Committee be (a) given specific terms of reference and (b) formally involved in the. consultative proces~es which lead up to the appoIntment of a new Parliamentary Librarian by the Presiding Officers, and
(2) advising the House of a decision by the Parliamentary Labor Party that its members should resign from the Library Committee and decline to fill the vacancies unless and until the Committee is given the powers re-
ferred to above.
In moving the suspension of Standing Orders-

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:

That the honourable member for Lalor be not further heard.

Mr BARRY JONES-It is the only means open to the Opposition at this late stage of the parliamentary session to indicate our grave concern about the way in which the Joint Parliamentary Library Committee operates.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes Noes

64 . 48

Majority

16

Adermann. A. E.
Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bradfield, J. M. Brown, N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D. B. Dean,A.G. Dohie,J. D. M. Drummond. P. H. Edwards, H. R.

AYES

Hyde,J. M.
Jull,D.F. Kaller, R.C. Killen, D.J. Lloyd, B. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C. Nixon,P.J. O'Keere, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.

2582 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Library Committee

AVES
Falconer. P. D. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles. G. O-H. Groom.R.J. Hall.Sleele Harris. G. McD. Hicks. N.J. Hodges. J. C. Hodgman. W. M. Howard.J. W. Hunl. R. J. D.

Sainsbury. M. E. (Teller) Shack. P. D. Shiplon. R. F. Sinclair. I. Mce. Sireel. A. A. Tambling. G. E. J. Thomson. D. S. Tuc~ey.c. W. Viner. R. I. While. P. N. D. Wilson. I. B. e.

NOES
Armilage. J. L. Beazley. K. C. Blewell. N. Bowen. lionel Brown. John Brown. Roberl Campbell.G. Ca&<.M. H. Charles. D. E. Child.J. Cohen. B. Cross. M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling. E. E. DawkinsJ. S. Duffy. M.J. Everingham. D. N. Free. R. V. Fry. K. L. Hawke. R. J. L. Holding. A. C. Howe. B. L. Humphreys. B. C. (Teller) Hurford. e. J.

Innes. U. E. Jacobi. R. Jenkins. H. A. Jones, Barry Jones. Charles Kealing. P. J.
Kenl. L. Kerin.J.e. Klugman. R. E. McLeay,Leo McMahon. los (Teller) Mildren. J. B. Millon.P. Morris, P. F. Morrison. W. L. Mounlford. J. G. Scholes.G.G. D. Sooll. J.l. Theophanous. A. C. Uren.T. Wallis.L.G. Wesl.S.J. Wiliis.R. Voung.M.J.

PAIRS

Dourchier. J. W. lusher. S. A.

Johnson. les Kelly.R.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?

Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (2.54)-1 second the motion. We have moved this motion because this issue deeply and immediately affects every honourable member of this House.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:

That the honourable member for Bonython be not further heard.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

66

Noes

48

Majority

18

Adermann.A. E.
Anlhony. J. D. Baume.M. E. Birney. R. J. Bradfield. J. M. Brailhwaile. R. A.
Brown.N.A. Bungey. M. H. Burr. M.A. Cadman. A. G.

AVES

Hunl. R.J. D.
Hyde.J. M. Jull.D.F. Kaller. R.e. Killen. D.J. lloyd. B.
lynch. Sir Phillip MacKellar. M. J. R. MacKenzie. A. J. Mclean. R. M.

AVES
Cameron. Donald Cameron, Ewe" Cameron, Ian Carllon. J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. C~leman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. .Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.c. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O-H. Grooffi,R.J. Hall,Sleele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

,
McMahon, Sir William
McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C.
Moore,J.C. Nixon, P.I. O'Keefe, F. l.
Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.
Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller)
Shack, P. D. Shiplon, R. F.
Sinclair, I. McC. Sireel, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. . Viner, R.1. While, P. N. D.
Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armilage,J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewell, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Roberl Campbell,G. CassiM. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling. E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy.M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. l. Hawke, R.J.l. Holding, A. C. Howc,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Innes, U. ". Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kealing, P. J.
Kenl,l.
Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E.
Mcleay,leo McMahon,les (Teller)
Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D.
SCOII, J.l. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wallis,l.G.
West,S.J. WiliisR. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Dourchier, J. W. lusher, S. A.

Johnson, les Kelly, R. J.

Mr SPEAKER-The question now is that the motion for the suspension of Standing Orders be
agreed to.

Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (2.59)-Mr Speaker, we need a bipartisan policy on the Library.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:

That the question be now put.

Mr SPEAKER-I call on the presentation of papers.

Mr Morris-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. You put the question that the question be now put, but you have not put the question for the suspension of Standing Orders.

Mr SPEAKER-I think the honourable gentleman is correct. 1apologise for that omission.

Library Committee

28 October: 1'981 REPRESENTATIVES 2583

Question put:

That the motion (Mr Barry Jones's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

48

Noes

63

Majority

15

AYES
Armilage. J. L. Beazley, K. e. Blewell, N. Bowen. Lionel 8rown,John Brown, Roberl Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins,J. S. Durry,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free. R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J.

Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Jones. Barry Jones, Charles Kealing, P. J.
Kenl, L. Kerin,J. e. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Millon,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mounlford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scali, J. L.
Theophanous, A. e. Uren,T. Wallis, L. G. Wesl,S.J. Willis,R. Young, M.J.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anlhony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Brad field, J. M.
-Brailhwaile, R. A. Brown, N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cameron, Donald Cameron. Ewen Cameron, Ian Carllon, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles. G. OR Groom, R.J. Hall,Sleele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Howard.J. W.

Hunl, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jull,D.F. Kaller, R.e. Lloyd, B. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A: J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P.e. Moore,J.e. Nixon, P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porler,J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shiplon, R. F: Sinclair, I. McC. Slreel, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. 'Tuckey,e. W. Vincr,R.1. While, P. N. D. Wilson,l. B. e.

PAIRS

Johnson, Les Kelly, R. J.

Bourchier, J. W. Lu!her, S. A.

Question so resolved in the negative.

NUCLEAR SAFEGUARDS AGREEMENT WITH EUROPEAN ATOMIC ENERGY
COMMUNITY
Agreement and Ministerial Statement
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-I hereby present the agreement between the Government of Australia and the European Atomic Energy Community concerning transfers of nuclear material from Australia to the European Atomic Energy Community, signed in Brussels on 21 September 1981. I seek leave to make a statement.
Leave granted.
Mr STREET-In presenting this agreement I am fulfilling a commitme,nt by the Government to ensure that the texts of all Australia's nuclear safeguards agreements will be presented in the Parliament as soon as practicable after signature with a full explanation of their provisions.
The conclusion of a nuclear safeguards agreement with the European Atomic Energy Community-Euratom-has been a major objective of the Government in the nuclear safeguards area. Upon entry into force it will open the way to exports of Australian uranium to all member states of the European Community under new contracts. The agreement is a significant step in the establishment of a network of bilateral nuclear safeguards agreements between Australia and our potential uranium customers, in accordance with Australia's nuclear safeguards policy announced to Parliament by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on 24 May 1977.
The agreement has been negotiated with Euratom as a single entity in recognition of the competence and responsibilities vested in Euratom by the member states under the Euratom Treaty. Australia had already accorded this recognition in the safeguards agreements negotiated with the United Kingdom and France. The present agreement gives full effect to our recognition of Euratom as an entity for transfers of nuclear material from Australia to all member states of the Community. Assertions have been made from time to time that this is not in accordance with Australian policy. These assertions are not correct. From the time of the announcement of Australia's nuclear safeguards policy, the Government made clear that it had recognised Euratom as a single entity and would deal with this reality. The Government is gratified that we have been successful in doing so.
The primary purpose of this agreement is to provide that when Australia supplies uranium to any of the 10 member countries of Euratom for

2584 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Nuclear Safeguards Agreement

peaceful purposes, this uranium will not be diverted to non-peaceful or explosive purposes. To this end, and in accordance with our nuclear safeguards policy, all of Australia's bilateral nuclear safeguards agreements incorporate stringent safeguards and controls on the use of the uranium we may supply to other countries for peaceful purposes. This agreement, as with the other bilateral nuclear safeguards agreements concluded by Australia since the introduction of our comprehensive nuclear safeguards policy, incorporates all the requirements of that policy. It provides for the prohibition of explosive or military use, the application of International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, 'fall-back' safeguards in the event that IAEA safeguards cease to apply, the application of internationally recognised levels of physical protection, and prior consent rights over retransfers to third countries outside the Community. The agreement provides for administrative arrangements to implement the provisions of the agreement and to track Australian supplied material throughout the fuel cycle of customer countries members of the EUropean Community. These detailed procedures enable us to establish that there is no diversion of Australian-supplied material to non-peaceful or explosive purposes.
I would now like to comment on some particular features of the agreement I have tabled. Like, the French and Swedish agreements which I tabled in Parliament in March of this year, this agreement includes provisions covering reprocessing of spent fuel containing material supplied by Australia. These provisions accord with the Government's policy of maintaining Australia's prior consent rights over reprocessing of Australian origin nuclear material, while establishing conditions in our bilateral agreements under which this consent may be exercised. I announced the Government's policy on these conditions in Parliament on 27 November 1980. The detailed procedures for implementation of the conditions in the agreement relating to reprocessing are contained in a separate document. That document, being of less than treaty status; is not being tabled but will be made available to members or senators on request through my office.
Unlike our agreements with France and the United Kingdom, the scope of the agreement with Euratom is limited to nuclear material only as defined in the agreement and is not reciprocal in that it covers only transfers of nuclear material from Australia to Euratom. This reflects the specific competence of Euratom in the nuclear field. Written assurances have been provided by the member states of Euratom which do not have

bilateral agreements with Australia of their willingness to negotiate additional arrangements with Australia to cover forms of nuclear transfers other than those covered in this agreement if and when appropriate, as well as an assurance from the Community that it will not impede such arrangements between a member state and Australia provided these are consistent with the Euratom Treaty.
Consistent with the division of competence between Euratom and the member states, the latter
will apply the necessary measures of physical protection. In this regard, member states not having bilateral agreements with Australia have provided written undertakings that they will fulfil within their own areas of competence the physical protection obligations of the agreement. All these assurances are incorporated in the agreement. The Euratom agreement, like our agreements with two Euratom member states, the United Kingdom and France, provides that the provisions in the agreement will be complementary to, and where appropriate supersede, the provisions of the bilateral agreements with the United King-
dom and France.
A side letter to the agreement sets out arrangements for the exercise of prior consent in relation to transfers to countries outside the Community of Australian origin nuclear material for the purposes of conversion, low enrichment and fuel fabrication. These arrangements accord with Australia's nuclear safeguards policy. The letter notes that in circumstances where member states of the Community use for these fuel cycle services
the facilities of countries with which Australia does not have a nuclear safeguards agreement, they may do so on an 'all-in, all-out' basis. This principle is already being applied pursuant to our agreements with Finland and Sweden. The side letter also provides that transfers outside the Community for reprocessing of Australian origin spent fuel may be made to countries with which Australia has a nuclear safeguards agreement in
force.
Of the ten member states of Euratom, France and the United Kingdom are nuclear weapon states which, under the Treaty of the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, are not obliged to renounce nuclear weapons or accept international safeguards. Under the Government's stringent nuclear safeguards policy, nuclear weapon states which wish to import Australian uranium must provide assurances that nuclear material supplied for peaceful purposes is not diverted to military or explosive purposes and must agree that the uranium we supply be covered by IAEA safeguards. The French and British

Nuclear Safeguards Agreement

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2585

governments have made these commitments in their separate bilateral nuclear safeguards agreements with Australia as well as through the Australia-Euratom agreement. They have themselves concluded separate agreements with the IAEA and Euratom to make their civil facilities subject to IAEA safeguards. Under Australia's agreement with Euratom, the non-nuclear weapon states member countries of the Community commit themselves to placing nuclear material subject to the agreement under IAEA safeguards applied pursuant to their NPT-based safeguards agreements with the IAEA, which provide for all nuclear material in their nuclear industries to be subject to such safeguards.
The tabling of this agreement makes a total of nine nuclear safeguards agreements covering sixteen countries concluded by the Government since the announcement of its nuclear safeguards policy by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on 24 May 1977. The Government is proud of its achievements in negotiating these agreements. We believe they provide a convincing demonstration of the international acceptability of Australian policy. They show that, while applying stringent non-proliferation safeguards to our uranium exports, we are prepared to make Australian uranium available to customer countries for legitimate peaceful energy purposes. The agreements show that Australia, by facilitating peaceful nuclear trade under stringent predictable conditions, is doing so in a manner which supports international efforts aimed ,at preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. The Government welcomes the conclusion of this agreement with Euratom (Quorum formed). It represents an important step forward in Australia's relations with the European Community and its member states.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) -by leave-The most significant part of the statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) is that which states:
The agreement provides for administrative arrangements to implement the provisions of the agreement and to track Australian supplied material throughout the fuel cycle of customer countries members of the European Community. These detailed procedures enable us to establish that there is no diversion of Australian supplied material to non-peaceful or explosive purposes.
Whilst we would all like to see that happen, it has not happened and is not likely to happen in the future. For example, although it was inexcusable for Israel to have destroyed the Iraqi reactor, that reactor was using French enriched uranium. It could have been using Australian uranium which was enriched to such an extent that it was deemed to be weapons grade material. So much for the concept of preventing proliferation and diversion!

The Israeli attack was inexcusable but the uranium in the Iraqi reactor was so enriched that it was deemed to be of weapons grade. It could well have been Australian uranium. It if were not Australian uranium there is no doubt that France would. have been equally pleased to know that Iraq had adequate supplies from Australia and was able to divert its other supplies to the process of enrichment.
Imake it very clear that the Opposition's policy is not to mine uranium until such time as the world can be satisfied that there will be no diversion and we have the technology to ensure satisfactory disposal of high level waste. Those two problems have not yet been solved. It does not help Australia one iota to be told that the situation is magnificent, that we are able to sell our uranium to the European Atomic Energy Community and that it is profitable. The point has been made time and again that when we sell our natural resources all we have left in Australia is the hole in the ground. Our uranium may well be diverted to other sources. Once the uranium goes into the enrichment process it is usually amalgamated with somebody else's uranium. Once it has been through the reactor and gone through the first cycle it is reprocessed and divided 'into plutonium and high level waste. At that -stage we certainly could not trace our uranium. It would be impossible to do so. No country in the world could do so. The International Atomic Energy Agency is presently bedevilled in trying to work out how to get an international standard for the safeguarding of plutonium, which comes from the second part of the process. It is nonsensical to talk about having an ability to track our uranium. The only satisfactory way in which Australia could ever monitor a fuel cycle would be for Australia to own and control the whole cycle. It would then know by audit what uranium it had, how it was used and what it got back. It could literally count it. That is the only satisfactory method. It is about time this Government woke up to that.
Let me deal with some of the other specifics in the Minister's statement. He claimed that we have an agreement with Euratom as a single entity. I suggest that is not the situation. Euratom at present includes Greece but what about Spain? Spain has not yet signed the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons. According to the Government's much vaunted policy, nonnuclear weapons states must be parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty before they receive our uranium. Assuming that Spain becomes a member of Euratom where does it leave us in relation to that leg of our policy?

2586 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Nuclear Safeguards Agreement

Another matter which is worthwhile noting, and which is somewhat disturbing, is what the Minister said about that part of the agreement which states that European countries which are members of Euratom now have all the necessary conditions settled for the supply of Australian uranium; I make the point again: Why are we giving away this very precious, very volatile, very dangerous fuel, when we are getting nothing back, nothing except a large hole in the ground and all sorts of other difficulties associated with our ertvironmnent?
When these countries that are getting the uranium also have the ,technology, would it not be appropriate to suggest that, from the point of view of our own interests in the future, we have a look at their technology, look at how they are making advances, if any, and see where their problems are? In other words, why should our scientists not be made aware of the technology that these people are using? They are so anxious to get the fuel that surely, on a quid pro quo basis, the Australian scientists, for the benefit of the Australian public, ought to have an opportunity to get up to date with the technology that these people are at least allegedly developing. After all, they get access to our uranium but we seem to be left with nothing at all except, as I said, for the hole in the ground. It is important that we develop national policies that protect our national interests and give us access to technological advances. This would give us an opportunity to assess the value of these so-called safeguard agreements.
Today in Question Time I raised'with the Minister the question of Japan. I am pleased with his answer. He said that there would be no watering down of the conditions with the Japanese, and that is important. But the real issue is that these conditions are still not adequate. The Japanese are pretty strong on any aspect of what they want to do in terms of trade. It is very clear that the Japanese do not want to be beholden to anybody else, not the least Australia, as to what they want done with their uranium. It is important that we satisfy the Australiim people that there will be no diversion of our uranium into any area that would
be dangerous from the point of view of future use. Japan does not have its reprocessing facilities in the country. It usually sends our uranium somewhere else once it has gone through the first cycle. Japan is going to the fast breeder technology. Japan will be using. plutonium. All these matters surely are of concern. One wants to guarantee that there will be no weakening of that situation, that we will not have to worry; that we can trust somebody in this area. I make it very clear that

nobody can be trusted in this area. There are 20,000 nuclear weapons now, many of them as a result of illegal diversion from what is deemed to
be peaceful use of uranium.

I come to another point which the Minister

made, and it relates to the question of excessive

secrecy. He made the comment that 'provisions

covering reprocessing of spent fuel containing

materials supplied by Australia' are in the current

agreement. He went on to say that detailed pro-

cedures for implementation of the conditions are

contained in a 'separate document' and that we

could get a copy of that document from his office.

I would like to think that this Parliament should

be able to see that document. I see no reason why

it should not be able to do so. I understand that

the document was made public by the Australian

Broadcasting Commission correspondent in Brus-

sels some months ago. If people in Brussels can get

it why cannot we get it in Canberra? It is unac-

ceptable that this Parliament cannot be entrusted

with the contents. The nature of the provisions

covering reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel is cru-

cial. What about all the other safeguard agree-

ments that have been signed? Will they be tabled?

What about the documents relating to reprocess-

ing? In other words, we want a bit of open govern-

ment in this area. On that score, of course, we

notice that the freedom of information legislation

is still not on the program.

'

I turn to the position in relation t6 France. Irrespective of the change of government in France, France does not seem to be changing its nuclear policies, particularly when it comes to tests in the Pacific. I am told that France is going to go ahead
with them. France could well be using our uranium or a substitute from somebody else because it is able to use our uranium in another area. We give it the facility one way or the other, directly or indirectly to carryon these nuclear tests in the Pacific. My questions clearly ~how ,that great damage has been done already in the Pacific area. So it is important to note that the Minister says:

To this end, and in accordance with our nuclear safeguards policy all of Australia's bilateral, nuclear safeguards agree-
ments incorporate stringent safeguards and controls on the use of the uranium we may supply to other .countries. for
peaceful purposes.

But we cannot get those safeguards from France. I
make the point that France is continuing to make and to explode nuclear weapons. I have told honourable members about the enrichment of
uranium for Iraq. We have also mentioned Muroroa Atoll which apparently has suffered severe damage. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) was going to make urgent inquiries as to

Nuclear Safeguards Agreement

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2587

the matter. We still have not received that reply. If the message is that there has been pollution of the Pacific waters-and the Pacific countries in this area are very concerned about the Pacific, as we all are-we ought to be giving a lead in this area and saying that we are not prepared to sell to France, which continues to despoil the Pacific in spite of all our protests. We want a guarantee that we do not have any pipeline leading to France which leads directly to nuclear weapons. France should not be allowed to get the uranium, let us make that very clear. Irrespective of the nature of their government, we are here to criticise things that can endanger us and the rest of the world, and we want to make that point very obvious again today.
I turn to one other matter. I notice that the Minister is very coy about mentioning this matter but I think we can tease it out of him in this way. The Minister said:
A side-Ietler to the Agreement sets out arrangements for the exercise of prior consent in relation to transfers, to countries outside the Community,-
In other words, transfers of our uranium go outside the Community. The Minister went on to say:
. . . for the purposes of conversion, low enrichment and fuel fabrication. These arrangements accord with Australia's nuclear safeguards policy. The letler notes that in circumstances where member states of the Community use, for these fuel cycle services, the facilities of countries with which Australia does not have a nuclear safeguards agreement, they may do so on an 'all-in, all-out' basis.
Let us look at this 'all-in, all-out' basis. We are aware also of agreements for supplying uranium to Finland and Sweden. It is pretty ch!ar that the uranium supplied to Finland and Sweden is enriched, and, I would say, it will be reprocessed, in the Soviet Union. One cannot find anywhere in this agreement that it is in the Soviet Union that this will happen. One is not going to raise this issue from the point of view of the Red bogy but at Question Time we had the Prime Minister castigating us at every level about the Russians or the Soviet Union. Here today in an agreement, we have agreed that the countries in Europe which want to go outside the Community can do so. In other words, the letter provides that:
. . . transfers outside the Community for reprocessing of Australian origin spent fuel may be made to countries with which Australia has a nuclear safeguards agreement in force.
I want to make it clear that this paragraph refers to the Soviet Union. The fact is that there is no real guarantee that supplies of Australian uranium to Europe, under present agreements, will not at some time be processed in the Soviet Union. I think that is a very coy way of approaching the matter because it obviously will happen. As I said, the Soviet Union does not get a mention

in this statement but it will get the uranium for reprocessing and enrichment. Why can the Government not be honest and straightforward with the Parliament instead of dressing up these crucial issues in language which amounts to nothing but a cover-up, particularly when we have to listen to all the nonsense at Question Time about how dangerous it is to be encouraging the Russians in one way or another when at the same time we are tabling statements that relate to the fact that we are going to trust them with the uranium. They have the facilities; they belong to the international safeguards agreements. In fact, they were one of th(( prime movers at Vienna along with the United States, sitting at the same table, working out the destiny as to who shares what in technology and who shares what from the point of view of international energy fuel. It is about time we as Australians got very definite as to what we want to do about these matters in Australia's interests.
I make the point again that at present there are no adequate safeguards. We cannot control this fuel unless we get to a position, which we have not yet got to, where we have satisfactory technology to prevent any diversion and satisfactory technology to enable disposal of high level wa!ite. The only way in which to do those two things is to own and control the fuel through the whole cycle. If anybody is able to use it, subject to those safeguards I mentioned, it should be on a leased basis, whereby Australia will lease the fuel only and take it back and solemnly audit that there has been no diversion. Then we could have some real debate in this Parliament about satisfactory arrangements.
ASSENT TO BILLS
Assent to the following Bills reported:
Customs (Valua tions) Amendment Bill 1981.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Bill 1981.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
Reports
Mr CONNOLLY (Bradfield)-I present the one hundred and ninety-first and one hundred and ninety-second reports from the Joint Commit.tee of Public Accounts.
Ordered that the reports be printed.
Mr CONNOLLY-by leave-The one hundred and ninety-first report is a handbook on Commonwealth Government Financial Administration, and the One hundred and ninety-second report is a discussion paper on the Collection and Dissemination of Statistics. These reports have

2588 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

not resulted from any specific inquiry or examination, but rather from the Committee's long standing interest in efficient and economical public administration.
The one hundred and ninety-first report is a handbook which covers matters administered by the Treasurer, (Mr Howard) the Minister for Finance (Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle), and their respective Departments. It explains, in concise and readable form, the procedures by which the Commonwealth accounts for the public moneys and other assets which are under its control. The handbook explains the financial documents presented to Parliament, the classification of Budget information, the monthly statement of Commonwealth Government financial transactions, the various Commonwealth accounts and funds, and the management of Commonwealth cash accounts within Australia and overseas.
The handbook follows essentially the pattern of a previous publication which was issued by the Public Accounts Committee and prepared by the Department of Finance in 1977, but has been updated and revised to take into account, in particular, the change brought about by the 1979 amendments to the Audit Act 1901. The Committee wishes to take this opportunity to thank the Department of Finance for its considerable assistance in the preparation of this publication.
In tabling this handbook in the form of a report to both Houses of Parliament, the Committee is convinced that the wider circulation it will receive should substantially contribute to an expanded awareness of the processes by which Commonwealth funds are receipted and expended. The Committee further believes that this report will prove to be a valuable and convenient reference source for senators and members and the community in general.
The Committee's one hundred and ninetysecond report on statistics takes, as its starting point, the 1974 report on the Integration of Data Systems known as the Crisp Report. That inquiry identified three major deficiencies in Data systems: Poor co-ordination of statistical collections; inadequate communication between producers and users of statistics; and poor accessibility to data that was collected. Unfortunately many of these problems remain in 1981.
As a result of the Crisp report the Australian Bureau of Statistics Act 1975 was passed to establish the Australian Bureau of Statistics as a statutory authority charged with co-ordinating statistical systems in Australia. However, the PAC believes that the central purpose has been missed because the Bureau's powers are still not

regarded as being sufficient. Accordingly, the Committee believes that the Bureau's powers should be clarified and strengthened.
There is a widely held view abroad in the business community that collections of basic economic data are, in some areas, wholly inadequate. In this regard I refer honourable members to an article in the Australian of 19 October 1981 where a Sydney stockbroking firm, Dominguez and Barry, had to research such sources as Reserve Bank bulletins, Budget papers, as well as the Australian Bureau of Statistics figures to determine the average per capita public debt, as the Government publishes no such figures. The article quotes these brokers as calling upon the Government for better statistical information on State and Federal borrowings and says that currently information in this area is very poor. However, the Committee believes that the Bureau must, of course, decide whether the cost of such additional collations are, in fact, justified.
This paper addresses itself in part to these problems. It also discusses the advantages of allowing the Bureau access to identified taxation data on businesses as a way of reducing the respondent burden for statistical collections. Access to taxation data, particularly businesses, was recommended in the 1974 Crisp report. Both the Bureau and the Taxation Office sent representatives to assess the systems of tax access for economic statistics operating in Canada and the United States of America in 1979. Surprisingly, no results of the joint investigations by the Bureau and Taxation Office have yet been presented to the Treasurer, to the best of our knowledge.
The proposed access to tax data is supported by the Australian Law Reform Commission, the Australian Taxpayers Association and the Confederation of Australian Industry. It is to be hoped that this discussion paper will stimulate debate on this sensitive issue.
Also, on the question of accessibility to data, it is pleasing to note the Bill introduced on 15 October 1981 by the Treasurer to amend the Census and Statistics Act to allow census data, with personal identifiers removed, to be made more widely available.
The Crisp inquiry had recommended even wider changes to the Act. These recommendations were endorsed by the Crawford report on structural adjustment. The Law Reform Commission also recommended certain liberalisations in 1979 and some of these have been accepted by the Government.
The Committee is still concerned that accessibility to data collection is not optimal, and that

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2589

savings can be made by reducing duplication of collections and making more useful data more widely available. Of course, increased accessibility carries with it the danger of infringement of privacy. The Committee is very conscious of this danger but feels guidelines put forward in a recent Law Reform Commission discussion paper, entitled 'Privacy and Personal Information', will provide adequate protection in this regard.
I will refer to one other issue raised in the report; that of the paper burden imposed on business by government. This was the subject of a recent interdepartmental inquiry but the outcome of that study disappointed the Committee. We feel that more can be done in this area and suggest that initiatives recently taken overseas, particularly in Canada and the United States of America, deserve serious consideration in Australia. The Committee believes that one initiative that would have a positive effect would be a central register of all statistical collections and for the Bureau to be given suitable powers to authorise and advise on the form of statistical collections by other Government instrumentalities.
The Committee hopes that the issues raised in this report, and the suggestions made, will encourage a wide-ranging discussion on matters that impact very heavily on Australia's overall economic performance in the future.
I wish to conclude by saying that these reports continue the Committee's philosophy of bringing wider notice to financial and management issues in the public sector. In so doing, it would welcome a dialogue with any person or organisation that believes it has a contribution to make. I commend the reports to honourable members.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-by leaveWe were told by the Joint Committee of Public Accounts that these reports were to be presented to the House tomorrow. Several members of the Committee-members on both sides of the House-wanted to comment on these reports as they raise substantial issues. Suddenly we find that the reports are presented today. I ask the Government to give consideration to bringing on the discussion of these reports at a later time. They raise very important issues, as I have already mentioned, especially the report on the Collection and Dissemination of Statistics: That report raises questions which are of great concern in relation to a number of decisions that have to be made by the Government and the Parliament about statistics collection, in particular the roles of the Government Statistician and the Taxation Office. There needs to be some clarification of the overlapping of these two departments. I will not take up the

time of the House to speak further on these reports. I simply say that I and other honourable members of the House would like the opportunity
to speak to the reports at a later time. I ask the Government to bring on the matter at some stage in the future.
Mr SHACK (Tangney)-by leave-I thank the House for giving me the opportunity to say a few words on the occasion of the tabling of these reports by the Chairman of the J<;>int Committee of Public Accounts. Before dping so, however, I address a comment to my Public Accounts Committee colleague the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous). It was my understanding that the reports we are discussing this afternoon were to be tabled in this chamber today and in the Senate chamber tomorrow.
The two reports, the one hundred and ninety-
first report on Commonwealth Government Financial Administration and the one hundred and ninety-second report on the Collection and Dissemination of Statistics-a Discussion paper-are very important documents, as both the Chairman and the honourable member for Burke have said. Those honourable members who have had the time today to look at the one hundred and eighty-eighth report, the annual report, which was tabled by the Chairman yesterClay, will see in that document that the Committee was extremely busy in the previous year, 1980-81, in producing reports and in addressing itself to the terms of reference given to the Public Accounts Committee; that is, examining instances of public expenditure.
I draw attention to these two reports because they are slightly different and important in that they do not address themselves to a particular investigation but, rather, they address themselves to the broader aspects of government administration. In the first place, the one hundred and ninety-first report attempts to create a better understanding and appreciation of the system of government administration. I was a tertiary student of politics. Bar for the quirk of events I might still have been at a tertiary institution teaching other people politics. One of the things lacking then-I think it would probably still be lacking today but for a report of this nature-was a comprehensive document relating to government financial administration. It is an extremely complex topic. The table of contents in this report runs through all the aspects of government financial administration-financial documents presented to the Parliament, how the Budget information is classified, monthly statements of Commonwealth Government financial transactions and so on. I do not think it is overstating it

2590 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Public Works Committee

to say that this is an extremely important and fundamental document. I refer. all honourable members to it. It is well worth reading. I know that it will be extremely welcome in tertiary institutions by people who are interested in how we run our affairs. It will be welcomed also by high school students. I believe that the Public Accounts Committee has done the nation a great service in producing in easy readable form this sort of booklet.
The other report, that on the collection and dissemination of statistics, is also an extremely important document. We all recognise the importance of government to collect statistics to form a data base on which to frame references and make decisions. On the one hand, there is a government need for information and, on .the other hand, we have to balance the cost of collection and the demands placed on those who have to respond by supplying the information. I have spoken in this Parliament before about the paper burden. I will not refer back to that speech. As the Chairman said, it is certainly mentioned in this report.
Again, the table of contents shows that the report is comprehensive in that it addresses itself to all the particular issues. I hope that through it being read in this place and outside there will be a greater discussion on the various issues related to the collection and dissemination of statistics. The Canadian system is important. The Canadians have streamlined their process by using, in a confidential and private way, statistics and information collected through the taxation system. So, without imposing on the House any further, I simply refer all honourable members to these reports. I believe that they will further advance an understanding and appreciation of how we run our financial affairs and how we can perhaps improve them in the future.
PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE
Reports
Mr BUNGEY (Canning)-In accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, I present the reports relating to the following proposed works:
Construction or working, living and area racilities ror Army and Navy personnel at Watsonia, Victoria; and upgrading or airport racilities ror the introduction or domestic wide-body aircrart.
Ordered that the reports be printed.
Mr BUNGEY-by leave-The Public Works Committee's report on the upgrading of airport facilities at a number of airports for the introduction of wide-bodied aircraft is the first report on this reference. It makes recommendations on works at Coolangatta, Sydney, Melbourne and

Perth. A second report will be presented early next year in respect of work at Adelaide and Hobart. In the limited time available to the Committee since the reference of these works on 27 August 1981, the Committee has not been able to schedule a hearing in Adelaide, from where a substantial number of submissions have been received from local organisations and the public. A public hearing will be set down for December. In order to avoid any substantial delay in complet-
ing the work at Adelaide, the Department of Housing and Construction will be proceeding with detailed planning of the Adelaide work. The Committee has been unable also to complete its examination of the proposed works at Hobart. These works also will be included in the second
report.
The Committee is concerned at the number of works being referred to it which are deemed urgent. For instance, the works at Watsonia for the Department of Defence which are reported on today are required to be completed by the end of 1982. This arises from the transfer, in late 1982, of the Army Apprentice School, to which the Army School of Music is administratively attached, from Balcombe to Bonegilla. This move has been planned for some years so that the consequential requirement for accommodation and facilities for the Army School of Music has been known for quite some time. Other recent references to the Committee have also had a similar degree of urgency-for instance, the references on facilities for wide-bodied aircraft, for further dredging work at Brisbane Airport and for the upgrading of the international terminal building
at Brisbane Airport.
The Committee is required by the Public Works Committee Act to report to the Parliament as expeditiously as possible. This it does. An average time between reference of a work to the Committee and presentation of the Committee's report is some three months. Three of the reports presented today and yesterday were, in fact, completed in two months from the date of referral by the House. When it is taken into account that the Committee allows at least one month on each reference for the receipt of public submissions, the House will readily understand the pressures put on the Committee when a number of works deemed urgent are referred to it. The Committee attempts to fit in with the Government's work program. It does all that it can to avoid delays to works. The Committee is not, however, prepared to compromise its scrutiny of referred works. It is felt that if the Government can reduce the number of references involving urgent works by better planning or by earlier reference to the

Public Works Committee

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2591

Committee the scrutiny of public works expenditure entrusted by the Parliament to the Public Works Committee will be facilitated.
In the report on the upgrading of airport facilities for the introduction of wide-bodied aircraft, the Committee is critical that a number of the works at airports had been commenced in 1980-81 without reference to the Committee. These works totalled some $6.08m although no single work at any airport was in excess of $2m, the cost requiring reference to the Public Works Committee. However, certain of these works have pre-empted effective Committee examination. The situation at Perth Airport, for instance, clearly demonstrates this point. During 1980-81, works totalling $1.9m were commenced involving both a departure lounge and an arrivals lounge and baggage handling area. Part of the proposed works for Perth Airport now being reported on involve extensions or adaptions to these earlier works commenced last year. In effect, the domestic terminal development has been decided and commenced without scrutiny by the Public Works Committee or without the opportunity for comment by the pubic, by local government or by other interested groups. In fact, I feel that had the Public Works Committee considered the works the current situation in the new arrivals area, where there are no toilet facilities, may well have been avoided.
The Committee understands that the works were required urgently to facilitate the introduction of wide-body aircraft by Trans Australia Airlines. But it cannot accept that proper investigation by the Committee would have unduly delayed the works. The Committee is heartened by the following comments of the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) in his second reading speech on the Public Works Committee Amendment Bill 1981:
II is understood that the Committee was particularly concerned with cases where major works costing over $2m have been phased in over several years with small projects, that is below $2m. These projects have either escaped Committee scrutiny, of if referred to the Committee, have been referred at a stage where proper Committee investigation has been preempted by the work already done. The Government expects work totaling over $2m to be subject to parliamentary scrutiny, and will do all it can to ensure that all works required to be examined by the Committee in accordance with the Public Works Committee Act will be so examined. I have assured the Committee that should it wish to examine any work below $2m the Government would treat any request sympathetically, and would facilitate Committee investigation of any such work.
Finally I thank all members of the Committee for their industry and dedication during this year. This year has been a very busy one for the Committee and the work load on members has been

heavy. All members have responded and worked well. I thank them for their help. In particular I thank the two vice-chairmen throughout the year; Senator Melzer in the first part of the year and, since July, the honourable member for Sydney (Mr Les McMahon). Similarly, I extend the thanks of all committee members to the staff of the Public Works Committee. They have been of great value to the Committee and the Committee's work has been possible only because of their loyalty and dedication.
NUCLEAR INDUSTRY
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The hazards involved in the uranium and nuclear industry resulting from Government moves to hand control of nuclear regulation to the States and the Northern Territory.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (3.57)-ln the last autumn session of Parliament, in the report of the Review of Commonwealth Functions brought down by this Government, one of the most disturbing future policy decisions was this:
Responsibility for the regulation and control of nuclear activities to be implemented by the States and responsibility for the financing of Northern Territory environmental regulatory services be transferred to the Territory Government (subject to the Territory establishing an independent environmental regulatory agency and continuing to have the Alligator Region Co-ordinating Committee and a Supervising Scientist consider the annual programs of the Northern Territory).
What this means is that this Government is seriously considering handing over to the Territory and the States regulatory and legislative matters concerning uranium mining and the nuclear industry. The Government does not deny this. If it implements this decision we will become the only nation in the world to decentralise control of the nuclear industry. In the United States of America, for instance, the Department of Energy, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission all have a central aspect of controlling the nuclear industry. If the Government proceeds with this decision, Australia will be in the unique position of placing its obsession with small government before its responsibility for the control of this industry. It is well known that the Opposition, for reasons that are well understood, opposes uranium mining and the extension of the

2592 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Nuclear Industry

nuclear industry in Australia. Those reasons relate to the impossibility of effecting acceptable waste disposal, nuclear proliferation and the danger of environmental contamination, particularly in the great Kakadu National Park which has now been placed on the World Heritage List. We can now add to this list of reasons substantial economic reasons and concern at the safety of nuclear plants.
As a prelude to what I want to say about nuclear regulation, I will run through some of the emerging economic arguments. World-wide concern is emerging with regard to the safety of nuclear plants and the cost of capital construction. This has led to a revision of the need for uranium throughout the world up to the year 2018. The Australian Atomic Energy Commission in 1975 assessed that world nuclear capacity would be 2;400 gigawatts. In 1980 it was forced to downgrade that assessment to 710 gigawatts. It says also that world demand for uranium by 1986 will be approximately 40,000 tonnes. We are faced with a falling world price. By 1986 we will be lucky if Australia's share of this 40,000 tonnes is 8,000 tonnes, but if the Government pushes ahead with the multiplicity of new mines that it is considering we will be producing some 14,000 to 15,000 tonnes bf uranium. That is almost double the amount that we can reasonably expect to sell on such a world market. That is the reason we have just heard the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) put through yet another so-called safeguards agreement, this time with the European Atomic Energy Community, treating it as a single agency and allowing it the right to reprocess waste fuel rods to plutoniumsomething which two or three years ago it pledged it would never be a party to. It is forced to do this because the world market is declining as I have just explained. This is well understood by the Minister in the Northern Territory, Mr Tuxworth. In a speech on 22 October he stated:
If I was an investor . . . I would probably think twice about pUlling my funds into a uranium project at this stage.
If we don't go by March it is likely that we won't go at all.
I put it on record that the uranium mining and nuclear industry represents the most dangerous, difficult and complicated means of boiling water ever conceived by mortal man. If this Government implements its decision, it will be proceeding against the interests of future generations of mankind. Mr Speaker, the industry is proceeding only in those nations which are deficient in hydrocarbon fuels, such as the European Economic Community countries and Japan, and in those countries whose governments aspire to manufacture and control nuclear weapons. But there is no

reason for us in Australia even to consider the expansion of the nuclear industry, Yet the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and Government members go around the country actually boasting that Australia will be a nuclear power within the next 20 years. When that is said, the questions that I and the Opposition put to them are: Why? What do they mean? How far does the Government intend to go? Who will control the industry?
The Prime Minister must understand that, when he talks about Australia being a nuclear power in 20 years, he is talking about not only uranium mining but also gasification plants, enrichment plants, nuclear power plants and waste disposal and perhaps reprocessing, For the ultimate logical result of the nuclear industry is fast neutron reactors and disposal of high level waste from such reactors. The construction of gasification and enrichment plants alone involves billions of dollars in capital expenditure and the consumption of vast amounts of Australian resources, particularly water and electricity. In case the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) and those honourable members on the other side of the House who are present in the chamber think this is a ridiculous scenario, I refer them to statements by people such as the Premiers of Queensland and Western Australia. The other day Mr Bjelke-Petersen said: 'We are just waiting to get into the act.' He was talking about uranium enrichment. Sir Charles Court in Western Australia stresses at every opportunity the need for a nuclear power station in Western Australia. I would like to refer him to the capital cost.
When I was in Washington in June this year the highest officials of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said to me: 'The industry is moribund in the United States because of accident fear at the plants and because of the capital cost of construction'. The State of Washington public power utility has dropped plans to construct five nuclear reactors because each reactor of 1,200 megawatts was going to cost $4,000m. What is more, no State in the United States is willing to be the first State to be permanently put aside as a repository for nuclear waste disposal.
Against these facts the Government is talking about Australia becoming a nuclear power in 20 years. It is considering handing over the regulation of not only the mining industry but also ostensibly a future nuclear industry to the States and to the Northern Territory. This is against the advice from the supervising scientists. It is against the advice of the Uranium Advisory Council. The Supervising Scientist, in a recent report of that body, stated:

Nuclear Industry

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2593

The Supervising Scientist must perrorm his runctions within a complex interlocking network or legislation and agreements.
I stress that the Opposition gives no support to uranium mining. I draw attention to the shocking, complex legislative and regulatory mess that has emerged from this Government's inability to control the situation. No less than seven or eight Commonwealth and State Acts are operative. We have the Atomic Energy Act, the Environment Protection (Alligator Rivers Region) Act, the Supervising Scientist legislation, the Environment Protection (Nuclear Codes) Act, and the Northern Territory Uranium mining environment controllegislation.
These facts emerge from this complex maze of legislation: The Nuclear Codes Act is supposed to specify standards and monitoring procedures which should be followed. The Northern Territory Uranium Mining Act is supposed to be the major instrument in controlling uranium mining under Northern Territory law which permits the Minister to issue authorisation to carry out uranium mining work subject to a long list of conditions. In the case of the Queensland Mines Ltd project at Nabarlek 44 such conditions were laid down which included numerous controls regarding management of contaminated water within an enclosed system. The Environment Protection (Alligator Rivers Region) Act appointed a Supervising Scientist and staff. It allows the Supervising Scientist to make recommendations regarding the implementation of mining procedures and safeguards. Although the Supervising Scientist is in a position to monitor standards he is really a toothless tiger because neither he nor the Northern Territory Department of Mines and Energy is responsible for daily monitoring. That is left to the company concerned under this inadequate conglomeration of Federal-State legislation. Further, there are no punishable offences created in this mishmash. Under it one small mine at Nabarlek with a uranium body of 12,000 tonnes has now been mined, as compared with a predicted 204,000 tonne mine at Jabiluka. But the conditions broke down at Nabarlek at its first major test, because the situation is so disparate and disjointed. Under these legislative controls-the system broke down, as evidenced by the Nabarlek spill.
Let us just have a quick look at the Nabarlek spill. There was an unauthorised release of water from Queensland Mines Nabarlek operation. This fact was covered up for four months. The Northern Territory and Federal authorities and the monitoring and supervising system were not able to discover this spill. They could not decide

whether water stored in the plant run-off pond overflowed or what effects the release had on the environment. Some of the Northern Territories authorities may even have known of the incident and assisted in the company's cover-up. The plant run-off pond was designed so that spills of noxious materials from the treatment plant were to be contained and not reach the environment. The level of radium in the plant run-off pond water was to average 58 pico-curies a litre.
On 8 May and 12 May 1980 raffinate, the acid waste liquid from solvent extraction plants, was diverted into the plant run-off pond. So the June water sample from the plant run~off pond contained 2,500 pico-curies a litre, 40 times the expected level.
On 6 and 7 March as a result of a tropical depression the whole system broke down and water was allowed by Queensland Mines to escape to the environment at Nabarlek. The company neglected to take samples of the water leaving the mine site. This incident was a clear infringement of the authorisation procedures. According to an agreement with the Supervising Scientist the company was obliged to notify him of any major infringement immediately and of any minor anfringement within a month. Over the next four months there was a heavy cover-up of this incident.
On 13 March a Northern Territory Inspector of Mines inspected the plant run-off pond and found no evidence of overflow. The assistant mine manager told him that there was no overflow. The company lied and told the Co-ordinating Committee for the Alligator Rivers Region that the plant operations during the March rainy period were good. Twice in May the Department of Mines and Energy inspectors inspected the site and again dismissed reports of the spill as rumours. Action finally took place on 8 July because the incident was reported by the Northern Land Council. Finally, the Supervising Scientist moved in to examine the situation. Then Queensland Mines admitted its transgression. The Northern Territory officials were either incredibly incompetent or were assisting in the cover-up.
The Nabarlek incident shows that the Northern Territory authorities are not competent to regulate uranium mining and that the Supervising Scientist is a toothless tiger relying on the Northern Territory authorities and the companies for information. If the Northern Territory authorities are unable to control the small Nabarlek operation how can they stop a disaster occurring at the much larger mines of Jabiluka and Ranger?

2594 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Nuclear Industry

We support the inclusion of that great national asset, the Kakadu National Park, in the World Heritage List. But the park will be violated by uranium mining. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation committee called for a buffer zone to surround parks as they were declared. Koongarra is an enclave inside the Kakadu National Park and Ranger and labiluka are uranium mines on its perimeter. Those two mines-labiluka and Koongarra-must not be allowed to proceed. We see that despite all of the proven inadequacy of the present hotchpotch of arrangements this Government is considering handing over control of uranium legislation and regulations to the Northern Territory and to the States to administer. Mr Speaker, there is great government confusion as to the adequacy of the current arrangements and what will transpire to devolute control to the States. The Government is determined to press ahead despite the worsening market for uranium. It is determined to decentralise regulations to control this dirty and dangerous industry to the detriment of future generations.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affaris and Environment) (4.12)-The debate this afternoon is on a matter of public importance that reads in the following terms:
The hazards involved in the uranium and nuclear industry resulting from Government moves to hand control of nuclear regulation to the States and the Northern Territory.
The first point I make is that the leading speaker for the Opposition, the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West), spent most of his time debating the merits or otherwise of the uranium industry, of uranium mining. He has not focussed very much attention on the mechanism whereby, given that we have a uranium industry in Australia, steps will be taken to ensure that there are adequate safeguards to protect the environment generally from the risks that are involved in such an industry.
Ever since the announcement of the decisions relating to the uranium and nuclear industries following the Government's Review of Commonwealth Functions there have been a series of misunderstandings and mistaken assumptions about the implications of those decisions. This has been particularly so in relation to the potential risks to the environment and to individual health and safety. Two things must be clearly understood at the outset. Firstly, the Commonwealth is not in

any way reducing its level of commitment to ensuring the most comprehensive and effective regulations and controls with respect to all matters regarding the uranium and nuclear industries. Secondly, the decisions of the Government to adopt these particular recommendations of the RCF committee in many instances confirm existing Commonwealth policy which has been consistently followed for quite some time.
I turn to deal in a little detail with some of the issues which relate to the matter of public importance before the House today. My responsibilities in relation to the assessment of environmental impact statements and the development of uniform nuclear codes of practice will not be reduced as a result of the RCF decisions. The decision, in fact, confirms the existing Commonwealth policy that implementation of the nuclear codes of practice should in general be the responsibility of the State and the Northern Territory governments. I shall provide the House with a little of the background to this issue. Under the Environment Protection (Nuclear Codes) Act 1978 codes of practice on nuclear safety and environmental matters are being developed in consultation with the States and the Northern Territory, with the intention that the States and the Northern Territory will legislate as appropriate to give the codes legal effect. Under the Act, the code of practice for radiation protection in mining and milling was tabled in Parliament in September 1980 and became a code formally adopted under the Environment Protection (Nuclear Codes) Act in March of this year.
Collaboration with the States and the Northern Territory on the development and implementation of nuclear codes of practice is achieved through liaison between me and the designated contact Ministers in each State and the Northern Territory. At an official level the Commonwealth State Consultative Committee on Nuclear Codes of Practice provides the mechanism for the development of the code. While the codes will be implemented by the States and the Northern Territory, the RCF decision made it clear that the Commonwealth will maintain a co-ordinating role, confirming the existing policy. Two further codes are currently being developed, through the consultative machinery, relating to the management of radioactive wastes from mining and milling and the transport of radioactive materials. The public comment stage of the Code of Practice on the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials has been completed and it has been provided to the relevant Ministers in the States and the Northern Territory. I am hopeful that the code

Nuclear Industry

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2595

under the Act will be approved at an earlyopportunity. The proposed Code of Practice on the Management of Radioactive Waste (Mining and Milling) is now in the final stages of formulation and will be released for public comment in the near future.
I turn now to some other specific issues which are often raised when these matters are under debate. Again it is unfortunate that in so many instances that debate is characterised by misunderstanding and mistaken assumptions. In commenting on these issues I draw the attention of honourable members to a reply given in another place by my colleague the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick) who sets the record straight on a number of important issues. An interdepartmental committee was established in 1980 to review the Atomic Energy Act and related matters. In announcing the Government's response to that IDC review, it was decided that a legal basis would be developed in consultation with the States and the Northern Territory for the development, regulation and control of nuclear activities in Australia. The IDC was reconvened in June this year to undertake that task. The task has not yet been completed but it should be understood that that in no way diminishes the Commonwealth's role and responsibility in these matters. On 19 August this year Senator Carrick said:
The broad significant mallers concerning nuclear non-proliferation of course are and will remain a Commonwealth maller . . . the movement and monitoring of radioactive materials from Australia to elsewhere in the world will always be a Commonwealth maller.
Senator Carrick also pointed out that the Australian Safeguards Office comes under his ministerial responsibilities. He also made it clear in the same reply that in many instances these matters are, and have long been, the responsibility of the States. For example, medical and industrial radioactive materials are now handled by the States. Those that normally have been treated as coming under health regulations no doubt will continue to be so treated. Senator Carrick also pointed out a salient fact which the Opposition so often seems wilfully to forget-that is, that we live in a federation with divided sovereignty between the spheres of government. In that environment it is essential to formulate co-operative approaches to these issues, to ensure that high and acceptable standards are implemented throughout the country. In that way, by recognising that we live in a federal system where there are three spheres of government, we will ensure that we have a much higher standard of control and regulation than otherwise would be the case. Senator Carrick has made the point that once the co-operative

rules are in place-to a large extent they already are-they will ensure that all kinds of fissile materials and radioactive materials throughout Australia will be subject to the highest possible standards of control and supervision that can be devised.
Some further points need to be clarified. Sales of uranium will be permitted only to countries that are subscribers to the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons and will undertake to effect all the necessary safeguards for its handling and movement. That quite clearly is a Commonwealth responsibility. It also needs to be clearly understood that where there are mining proposals, including uranium mining proposals, arrangements have been made for the Commonwealth and the States to be co-operatively involved in the environmental assessment of those proposals. Similar arrangements are being discussed with the Northern Territory. These arrangements build on the already significant degree of co-operation and consultation which exists between the States and the Territory in the formulation of nuclear codes of practice under the Environment Protection (Nuclear Codes) Act to which I have already referred.
I wish now to comment specifically on the situation as it affects the Northern Territory.-To begin with, I stress that the decisions flowing from the RCF committee's recommendations confirm policies that have been in effect since as far back as 1978. Previous reports from the Office of the Supervising Scientist have made it clear that it was agreed in July 1978 between the Commonwealth and the Northern Territory that uranium mining operations in the Northern Territory should be regulated to the maximum effect possible through the laws of the Northern Territory and that there should be close consultation between the Northern Territory supervising authorities and the Supervising Scientist, who maintains a co-ordinating role. The Northern Territory law is used to regulate mining operations in the Alligator Rivers region. The Supervising Scientist exercises supervisory, co-ordinating, research, standards development and reporting roles under Commonwealth law. In other words, the decision which seems to have upset the Opposition so much is consistent with the principles which the Government has been following for almost three years.
The recent incident at Nabarlek concerning an unauthorised release of water demonstrates how, in a co-operative way, steps can be taken to investigate and upgrade procedures. I want to make it quite clear that I do not condone the incident at

2596 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Nuclear Industry

Nabarlek; nor do I condone in any way the tardiness of the company in informing the relevant authorities of what had occurred. The Supervising Scientist in his report on that matter said firstly that no unequivocal conclusions can be made about the effect on the environment of the water which escaped the restricted release zone. He went on to say that from information gathered to date there is, however, no evidence or expectation of any significant environmental effects. But he also reported that the company was negligent in not reporting the incident immediately and in not operating the prop in accordance with the authorisation. As he also pointed out in his report, the inquiry sprang from information coming to my attention concerning that release and I immediately set in train the appropriate investigations. As a result of those investigations the procedures have been improved and are being improved. Details of the procedures now being adopted are set out in the report that I tabled recently.
Furthermore, the Supervising Scientist has pointed out that, as a result of an experience from which, fortunately, there was no serious environmental effect-nor is there likely to be arising from that incident-as from July 1981 he has established two senior engineers in the Northern Territory. One, based in Darwin, will liaise with the Northern Territory supervising authorities as
well as visit the mine sites; the other, in time to be stationed at Jabiru, will maintain continual supervision. Through these officers, with co-operative support and the working arrangements between the Supervising Scientist and the Northern Territory supervising authorities, as well as a recognition by the companies concerned that it is important that these incidents be reported and that proper measures be taken to ensure that all the authorisations given to them and the undertakings that they have given as a result of the impact assessments are fulfilled, if these incidents occur-it is to be hoped that they will not-there will be close monitoring to ensure that the highest standards are maintained. I have just outlined the general circumstances of the incident and they have been outlined on previous occasions. The report on the incident pointed out that where necessary the Commonwealth, through the Supervising Scientist, can work co-operatively to achieve agreed standards in the activities in the Northern Territory. In this case, with the full cooperation of the Northern Territory supervising authorities, the Supervising Scientist was able to investigate the incident fully and to report to me on the issues involved.
I have made it quite clear that I want everything possible done to ensure that such an incident

will not occur again. I am confident that the necessary measures wi\l be taken to ensure that it does not but that any such incident will be promptly reported and exhaustively investigated at the very earliest opportunity. I believe the ability to meet these objectives has been considerably enhanced by the incident and lam confident that the mechanisms will become even more efficient and effective. Honourable members will be able to read in the Supervising Scientist's report that measures have already been recommended to strengthen the regulatory, monitoring and reporting procedures applying to uranium
mining in the region.
I also point out to the House that environmental requirements which attach to the granting of mining leases require that all operations shall be carried out in accordance with the best practical technology. The requirement of what is known as BPT applies to all facilities and operations taken as whole and in their component parts. It is one of the objectives of the Office of the Supervising Scientist to make sure that up to date knowledge is maintained of the relevant practices and new developments in Australia and overseas to ensure that all assessments and recommendations are consistent wi th best practical technology. Honourable members should be aware that currently discussions are under way between the Commonwealth and the Northern Territory as to the form of an independent environmental regulation agency as referred to in the Review of Commonwealth Functions decision. The Supervising Scientist will continue to carry out his role as laid down in the Environment Protection (Alligator
Rivers Region) Act.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Order! The Minister's time has expired.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (4.27)-It is perhaps coincidental but not without significance that this afternoon we should be discussing, on the one hand, international safeguard agreements with the European Atomic Energy Agency raising all the possibilities of nuclear proliferation and, on the other hand, the devolution by the Commonwealth Government to the States and the Northern Territory of responsibility for the regulation of the nuclear industry in this country. As was suggested by the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West), who preceded me in this debate, that makes us unique in the world as the one country prepared to devolve nuclear regulation to provincial governments. On the one hand, we have all the issues involved in the potential for nuclear weapons and nuclear war. On the other hand, we have the sensitive question of the interrelationship between the mining of uranium

Nuclear Industry

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2597

at one end of the nuclear fuel cycle and the protection of people and the environment in some of the most sensitive areas of this country.
It is of some interest to consider the situation in a number of countries where uranium mining is taking place. For example, in Namibia the .R!otinto Zinc company, the parent of CRA Ltd, IS lfivolved in mining uranium. It is argued that that is one of the major reasons why South Africa is anxious to prevent independence for that territory. In North America uranium mining is taking place in the territories and Indian lands to the west of the country, involving very much the same issues that we are concerned about in the Northern Territory and in parts of northern Queensland. I think the Government has had a consistent policy line, as the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) suggested. I think one has to look at the decisions in the Review of Commonwealth Functions report to devolve regulation to the States within the context of a systematic attack that has been going on since 1975 on the implementation at least of environmental legislation. There has been a persistent pattern of moving from the Commonwealth bei?g directly involved in implementing its own legIslation to the achievement of so-called agreements with the various States, which in effect means that the Commonwealth ceases to playa role in determining whether particular projects that might go ahead in the States are or are not environmentally sound.
Of course, the regulation of the nuclear industry is rather special because, as the honourable member for Cunningham has pointed out, the dangers associated with this industry are perhaps greater than the dangers associated with any other industry in the world. That is the reason that central governments generally have believed that they alone ought to take the final responsibility to ensure that the industry, where it is established, is properly regulated. That is exactly what this Government does not want to do. I think it is interesting that the Government's own Uranium Advisory Council is taking a position which, in my view, is quite contrary to the position that the Minister has taken. In its recent report it says:
Any changes to the existing legislation must take account of States' rights and interests; however in the Council's view the Commonwealth Government should remain closely involved in the control or oversight of all nuclear activities . . . For example. as previously. advised. the Council is of the opinion that the Commonwealth sho~ld retain it.s interest in Mary Kathleen . . . the C.ouncll take~ thIS opportunity to reiterate its support for actIOn t? establish b~ stat~te an independent authority to be resp?~slbl.e for the l!censIn.g and regulation of all nuclear acllvllles In Australia. ThIS should be composed of experts and divorced from any promotional or operational interest, and should cover all aspects of

the nuclear fuel cycle. It would include. for example. uranium enrichment, spent fuel reprocessing and the disposal of radioactive wastes.
The Minister says that we can happily devolve a lot of this responsibility to the Northern Territory and Queensland governments. On the other hand, the Uranium Advisory Council says that what we really need is a stronger and independent authority responsible to the national government. I think that indicates the way in which this Government, again without any thought or any careful assessment, is moving this industry into a more and more dangerous position. The Minister attempted, I think, to introduce a note of complacency into the whole debate when he suggested that there was nothing really to worry about because the arrangements we have with the States and Northern Territory have been going very well and the regulations are in fact being implemented. Yet the Government's own advisory bodies-the Uranium Advisory Council, on the one hand, and the Supervising Scientists, on the other hand-are saying: 'When you look at particular situations things are not going well at all and you find that there are very serious problems'. The honourable member for Cunningham referred to the situation at Mary Kathleen. What did the Uranium Advisory Council have to say about that issue in a letter from the Chairman to the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) on 19 August 1980? It said:
. . . Council noted the existence of what may be termed 'operational problems' at Mary Kathleen. These include some seepage from setlling ponds and water storage areas and runoff from roadways and other areas which use mine water to control dust. Council also noted that cattle seem to wander freely over the tailing pond areas, due to inadequate fencing, and that the lock-up security in the yellowcake storage area could be improved. (This last point is given added relevance by the recent revelations in the press that some yellowcake has been stolen.) Some of these matters are probably related to the age of the Mary Kathleen operation . . .
The kind of security that operates at Mary Kathleen is such that yellowcake can be stolen and cattle can wander over the ponds. That sounds a totally unsatisfactory situation. When we consider the Nabarlek situation, to which again the honourable member for Cunningham referred, and look at the report from which the Minister quoted selectively, we find that the Supervising Scientist is extremely concerned about what has happened and what has nbt happened in terms of the Northern Territory Administration in relation to that situation. I quote from that report as follows:
The incident at Nabarlek underlined the Supervising Scientist's concerns and brought about further rounds of discussion with the NTSAs. As a result it has been agreed that unambiguous arrangements for reporting on operations and events are required.

2598 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Nuclear Industry

Reporting is now required after a spill has occurred which quite clearly represents considerable dangers. Again the Minister says: Yes, but really these dangers are not all that serious. These dangers that may be causing some people concern again can be dismissed. I ask the Minister to read again, very carefully the second report of the Fox Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry. I refer him to page 69 of the report, which talks about the fact that we simply do not have the information to assess the kinds of dangers that are involved with uranium mining. We do not really understand sufficiently the ecology of the area. The report states:
However, because of the uncertainties, we also adopt the view that. to protect the ecological value of the Region, the best practicable technology should be used in avoiding or minimising the release of contaminants.
I suggest that the Minister read on and look at page 123 of the report, which talks about the dangers of radioactive waste associated with the kind of overspilling of ponds that occurred in a flood situation at Nabarlek, the dangers that exist, the extreme difficulties in measuring the effects, and the relevance of standards. We are talking about what people have suggested was a massive amount of contaminated water that was released at NabarIek. If we look at the standards that are being applied within the Australian context and at how the kinds of wastes that were released in that situation measure up with international standards, we find that a particular group of people, primarily the Aboriginal people, are placed at risk. People are certainly not being placed at risk in Western Europe, despite the advanced nuclear industries that exist in that part of the world.
The Government, in moving towards this philosophy of deregulation, non-regulation and devolution on the States, is placing not only the Aboriginal people but also people generally in northern Australia in an extremely dangerous situation. I am not satisfied with the Minister's answer.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr GiIes)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (4.37)-The matter of public importance listed before us states:
The hazards involved in the uranium and nuclear industry . . .
I looked up the definition of 'hazards' in the Collins Dictionary and it refers to 'exposure or vulnerability to injury, loss or evil, or something that is at risk or in danger'. Let me assert that the only real hazard we have in Australia to uranium and the nuclear industry is the Australian Labor Party and its friends in the Waterside Workers Federation of Australia on the Darwin wharf. I

question seriously Labor's motives for bringing forward this debate today. In that respect I will quote from a speech given on 9 April by the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West). He said:
A Federal Labor Government will repudiate any commitments made by a non-Labor Government for mining, processing or export of uranium and we will demand a moratorium on uranium mining.
That policy is obstructionist, antagonistic and destructive. If we place it in historical perspective, the Commonwealth has the legislative base to control the uranium industry. The Atomic Energy Act arose from the atomic programs of other countries. It was designed for the Manhattan project and was specifically directed to the military use of uranium. Emphasis today, and let us come up to date, is on nuclear power for peaceful purposes. The modern use of uranium is very different from what it was 20 or 30 years ago. Australia, with its rich resources, has a paramount social obligation to supply energy-poor nations with a fair share of what it has.
Who controls uranium mining? I will split that into two questions. Firstly: Who controls uranium? Secondly: Who controls mining? The constitutional authority for defence and security, foreign affairs such as the non-proliferation treaties, export powers, physical protection, and classified information certainly rests with the Commonwealth. However, constitutional authority rests with the States for health, transportation, waste management, mining engineering, safety, and the environment. It is economic and practical madness to suggest that officials and bureaucrats, from both Commonwealth and State governments, should be engaged in duplication and in supervising each other. In the United States of America there are some five surveillance organisations from the Federal, state and local government arenas with areas of responsibility over the uranium industry. They are repetitive, wasteful and destructive to industry. Surely we do not want the same in Australia. The Northern Territory Government and its agencies already have nearly 150 people on the ground in the uranium province. Additionally, we have the Office of the Supervising Scientist, the Australian Atomic Energy Commission and, of course, Aboriginal interests are represented with the Northern Land Council. If we do not watch it we will all go blind watching each other. Our greatest weakness is not constitutional authority, it is not administrative procedures, it is not technical performance; it is the possibility of individual human error.
Mr Howe-Tell us about Nabarlek.

Nuclear Industry

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2599

Mr TAMBLING-I will tell the honourable member about Nabarlek. It is borne out by the Nabarlek incident. There is no better example. The company manager was guilty of a grave omission in that he did not report the incident. The Supervising Scientist and Northern Territory inspectors sought confirmation of an incident and both inspectors were told there was no incident. We do not eliminate that by placing responsibility with the Commonwealth any more than we do by passing authority to the States. The solution to the human problem is ensuring that we have the best calibre people on the ground where the action is. H is a people thing, not who owns the goods or who does the job. Let us be frank. The best calibre personnel to do the monitoring and control are the experienced, professional technicians who are already in the planning and scientific agencies of the States. The system is already in place through the mining and power utilities. The last thing we want, in this new expanding industry in Australia, is to give it the yoke of a second bureaucracy. The Review of Commonwealth Functions decision with respect to uranium matters stated:
Responsibility ror the regulation and control or nuclear activities in Australia to be implemented as rar as possible by the States and Northern Territory. with the Commonwealth maintaining a co-ordinating role.
It also decided with respect to the Northern Territory matters:
Responsibility ror the financing or Northern Territory environmental regulatory services be transrerred to the Territory Government (subject to the Territory establishing an independent environmental regulatory agency and continuing to have the Alligator Region Co-ordinating Committee and the Supervising Scientist consider the annual programs or the Northern Territory.
It also stated:
The essential Commonwealth interests in the Kakadu National Park would be maintained.
Consistent with the RCF decision, the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) and the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick) in a joint statement on 5 June 1981 announced that the Government would seek to establish a revised legal basis for the development, regulation and control of nuclear activities in Australia in place of the Atomic Energy Act. This revised legal basis will be established as far as possible by State and Territory legislation, taking into account the respective competencies of the State, Territory and Commonwealth governments in legislating such matters. The Governrnent has decided that high priority will be given to the development of nuclear non-proliferation

legislation. Responsibility for international obligations in relation to non-proliferation and safeguard matters lies ultimately with the Commonwealth. Nuclear non-proliferation legislation would cover the implementation of nuclear safeguards arising from international obligations. It would include such matters as physical protection of nuclear material and the protection of classified information and sensitive technology. The Commonwealth will also seek, in cooperation with the States, to develop a legal framework for licensing and regulation of health, safety and environmental aspects of nuclear activities. This legal framework would be developed under State and Territory legislation, using where appropriate complementary Commonwealth legislation.
The Commonwealth has already made arrangements to have initial discussions'in November this year with the States on these matters. This Commonwealth, State and Territory co-operative approach has already been successfully demonstrated in the arrangements to formulate and approve codes of practice under the Environment Protection (Nuclear, Codes) Act. Already, a Commonwealth, State and Northern Territory consultative committee has developed a code of practice on radiation protection in the mining and milling of radioactive ores which was approved under the Act and is available for incorporation into legislation by the States and the Northern Territory. A code of practice for the safe transport of radioactive materials is also approaching completion. The code is based on International Atomic Energy Agency regulations for the safe transport of radioactive materials. The code should shortly be approved and laid before the Parliament as provided for in the Act. The consultative committee is also in the course of finalising a code for the management of radioactive waste from the milling and mining of radioactive ores.
The new co-operative arrangements being developed with the States and the Northern Territory will avoid unnecessary duplication by the Commonwealth in areas which can be effectively handled by the States and, at the same time, establish a sound legal basis for nuclear control and regulation in Australia consistent with the respective competences of the Federal and State governments. It will be evident to honourable members that there can be no suggestion that there are hazards in the Government's cooperative federalist approach to the control and regulation of nuclear activities in Australia. There is no washing of hands of any matter or issue by the Commonwealth Government. Honourable

2600 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

CSIRO Marine Laboratories, Hobart

members should compare that with the state of the Australian Labor Party's platform which declares that the Labor Party will repudiate any commitment on this matter. The Commonwealth, States and the Northern Territory will complement each other in a sensible, co-operative manner and in a determined and well-defined framework for good arrangements.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-The discussion is concluded.
CONSTRUCTION OF CSIRO MARINE LABORATORIES, HOBART
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (4.47) - I move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament, namely: Construction of CSIRO. Marine Laboratories at Hobart, Tasmania.
This proposal is for a laboratory complex to accommodate the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Division of Fisheries and Oceanography at a site adjacent to Castray Esplanade at Battery Point in Hobart. The new complex will replace inadequate existing facilities at Cronulla, New South Wales, that site being unsuitable for redevelopment. When completed, the complex will enable CSIRO to meet commitments in marine science research. The facilities will comprise fisheries and oceanography research laboratories; offices, workshops and stores; conference rooms and a lecture theatre; staff amenities; and servicing facilities for research vessels.
In reporting favourably on the proposal the Committee made several recommendations and comments. The Committee recommended that further discussions be held between Commonwealth, State and local government authorities of the acceptability of a three-storey development because of the possibility of cost savings. Such discussions are proceeding and the Committee will be informed of the outcome. It was also recommended that the Commonwealth examine the future use of the Cronulla laboratories, including recognition of proposals submitted by universities in the Sydney area with interests in marine science teaching and research. This will be taken into account by the Department of Administrative Services when considering future use of the site.
The Committee expressed reservations about the extent of co-ordination of research activities between CSIRO and the Australian Institute of

Marine Science and drew attention to the need to rationalise or define responsibilities ill marine science as recommended by the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment. I am advised by my colleague the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thompson) that the Senate Committee's recommendations are currently being considered.
Attention was also drawn to the need for tests to determine the effect on the site of vibration from traffic and shipping and for more detailed master planning. Tests now completed confirm the site is suitable in respect of vibration and even though there are no present plans for further development of the site a future laboratory can be accommodated, if required, together with car parking facilities.
In addition, it was suggested there be further discussion between CSIRO, the Antarctic Division of the Department of Science and Technology and the University of Tasmania to determine the need for a joint large scale experimental tank or aquarium. Such discussions will be arranged.
The Committee also noted that the proposal has the general support of State and local authorities but a formal application for planning approval has not been made to the Hobart City Council. Such an application is not envisaged as it is not the practice for the Commonwealth to seek formal approval for its works from State or local authorities. The Commonwealth, however, makes every endeavour to co-operate with local authorities and to comply with State or local government statutes in a spirit of co-operation.
Finally, I can advise honourable members that acquisition of the site is proceeding on the basis of agreement reached between the Commonwealth and State governments. The estimated cost of the proposed work examined by the Committee was $1O.75m at February 1981 prices. The Committee recommended construction of the work in the reference. If the House agrees to support this motion, detailed planning can proceed in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (4.52)-Briefiy, but very sincerely, I wish to speak as the Federal member for Denison to support' the motion before the House and urge its unanimous passage. It will clear the way for proceeding with the construction of the magnificent $1O.75m National Marine Science Research Centre. It will bring to the city of Hobart the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Division of Fisheries

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.2)

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2601

and Oceanography in what will ultimately betaken by the Government to reduce the taxable

come the National Marine Science Research value of the right that certain employees have to

Centre and at which will be permanently based occupy free, or at low cost, residential accommo-

the proposed CSIRO research vessel.

dation provided by their employers. The Bill will

Mr Humphreys-Is it in your electorate?

also give effect to the proposal announced on 11 August 1981 that payments made to induce a per-

Mr HODGMAN-It is, as the honourable son to return to work be made subject to income

member is well aware, in my electorate. It gives tax and liable to pay-as-you-earn tax instalment

me the opportunity to thank the honourable deductions.

member and his colleagues on the Public Works

Committee, the Chairman of the Committee, the

Employees' Housing

honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey) and the Secretary of the Committee, Mr Dick Fenton, for the diligence with which they ap-
proached their task and for the expedition with which they completed the hearings. This is a mat-
ter upon which I could, but will not, speak at length. It has been very close to me and to my
electorate for some considerable time. It is an initiative of the Government of which we can be very proud. The bipartisan support for it reflects
very great credit on the original decision of the Government.

The first measure proposed by this Bill will implement the undertaking given by the Govern-
. ment in connection with the settlement of the Queensland coal miners' strike of last year. In securing settlement of the dispute it was agreed
that the income tax law would be amended to provide a more concessional basis for assessing the value to the miners of the residential accommodation provided to them by their employers. The benefit of this concession will extend to employees in other industries who also live and work in remote areas if it is customary in the industry con-

In conclusion, I thank particularly the Minister cerned for employers to provide free or subsidised

for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) for housing for their employees.

his tremendous personal support for this project, the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) and his hard working staff, both here in Canberra and in Hobart-I refer particularly to the Controller in Tasmania, Mr Allan McKenzie, and his staff for their excellent efforts-the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) and the Department of Administrative Services. Last, but not least, I refer to the co-operation which has been forthcoming from within Tasmania. It is my fervent wish that with what I hope will be the swift passage of this expediency motion the matter can proceed to construction at the earliest opportunity. It will be a centre of world

In addition, after giving careful consideration to representations that it received on behalf of employers and employees engaged in the sugar in. dustry, the Government has decided that the concession is also to be available for employees who meet certain additional criteria. These are persons who, while not living and working in remote areas, have no alternative to occupying accommo-
dation supplied by their employers either because there is not suitable accommodation available in close proximity to the work place, or because they
are required by their employers to live close to the work place and be on call for duty.

scientific significance and one of which all AusAgain, availability of the concession in this ex-

tralians, particularly Tasmanians and the people tended way will depend on it being customary in

fortunate enough to live in the Federal electorate the particular industry in which the taxpayer is

of Denison, will be very proud for many years to engaged for employers to provide free or sub-

come.

sidised housing for their employees. For persons

Question resolved in the affirmative.

who do not live and work in areas remote from major centres of population it will also be a re-

INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT

quirement that the employer provides accommo-

AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981

dation for at least five other employees engaged

Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first at, or in association with, the place at which the

time.

taxpayer is employed.

Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (4.55)- I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will amend the income tax law in two respects. Firstly, the Bill will give effect to decisions

In deciding to extend this concession to workers in the mining industry and to others similarly
placed in other industries, the Government has
recognised that large numbers of employees are required, in following their employment, to reside
and work in areas remote from large centres of population where they do not have access to

2602 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.2)

many of the amenities and conveniences of urban living.
In accepting that the concession should also extend in certain cases to housing provided in non-remote areas, the Government has recognised that in some instances employees have no . realistic alternative other than to occupy accommodation provided by their employers and that the conditions under which such accommodation is occupied are often onerous by reason of factors such as close proximity to the work place.
The concessional basis of valuation for income tax purposes proposed in the Bill will limit the amount to be included in the assessable income of an eligible employee, in respect of benefits granted by way of employer-provided housing, to 10 per cent of the market rental value of the accommodation, less the amount of any rent paid by the employee for use of the accommodation. The Bill also provides that, as a general rule, future changes in the market rental value of accommodation provided to an employee will be geared to annual movements in the rental component of the consumer price index as measured for the capital city of the State in which the accommodation is situated.
I turn now to the criteria set out in the Bill to establish whether employer-provided accommodation is to be regarded as being in an area remote from a major centre of population for these purposes. It is proposed that urban centres that had a population of 12,000 or more at the date of the 1976 census be classed as major population centres and that a location be classed as remote if it is not in, or adjacent to, such a major population centre.
Places of employment and locations of relevant accommodation that are within 100 kilometres by the shortest practicable surface route of the centre of a city shown at the time of the 1976 census to have had a population exceeding 130,000 people or that are within 40 kilometres of a town or city that had at that time a population of 12,000 or more people will be regarded as being adjacent to a major population centre and therefore not qualifying for concessional treatment on the basis of remoteness. Such accommodation may qualify, however, if the alternative tests to which I have referred are satisfied.
The Commissioner of Taxation is also to have power, where all the circumstances warrant it, to treat a person who lives or works in, or in an area adjacent to, a major population centre so defined as living or working outside that area if persons living or working near that person fall to be regarded as being in a remote area under these

rules. This is to obviate different tax results being applied to near neighbours.
The measures proposed by the Bill concerning employee housing benefits will operate from the commencement of the 1977-78 income year and the Commissioner of Taxation will have power to amend assessments made before the provisions come into operation so as to effect any reduction in the value of assessable housing benefits brought about by the new measures. Before I leave this measure, I would like to acknowledge the assistance and representations of a number of my collegues, in particular, the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite) and the honourable member for Herbert (Mr Dean), on what has proved to be an extremely difficult matter.
Industrial Dispute Settlement Payments
Honourable members will recall that when the industrial dispute on the Loy Yang power station project was settled late last year, payments made to dismissed employees who returned to work were described and paid, under the settlement agreement, in such a way that no tax was payable on the payments.
The payments which were based on the wages that the employees might have been expected to receive during the period of their dismissal if they had remained at work during that period were declared as being to compensate employees for hardship suffered during the dispute. But in the Government's view the payments were designed principally to induce the employees to return to work, and if they had been so described, or if they had been paid in respect of a period of employment rather than of a period ofdismissal, the payments would have been fully taxable.
At that time. I announced that the Government was examining the question of whether similar payments made in future, should be made subject to tax, and on 11 August 1981 I announced the Government's decision that any such payments made under arrangements entered into after that date would be fully subject to income tax.
In broad terms, the Bill will amend the income tax law to include in the assessable income of a taxpayer any amount paid to him or her under an agreement, arrangement or understanding entered into after 11 August 1981 for the purpose of achieving the result that the taxpayer would, or but for special circumstances would, resume performing work or rendering services. The Bill will also provide that payments made after the end of the month in which this legislation receives the royal assent are to be subject to pay-as-you-earn tax instalment deductions, at a rate to be

Social Services Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2603

prescribed in the income tax regulations. That nile will be equivalent to the standard rate of perso~al tax-32 per cent for 1981-82. Details of the Bil,l are contained in an explanatory memoran~um that is being circulated to honourable m~1llbers. I commend the Bill to the House.
6ebate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
SOCIAL SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 27 October, on motion by MrHunt:
Thallhe Bill be now read a second lime.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (5.4)-First of all, we in the Opposition wish to protest about the introduction of a fairly massive omnibus Bill in the dying days of the session. We were presented with this Bill yesterday, Tuesday, and are required to debate it today, Wednesday. It is not a simple or ashort Bill and, though it is true that most of the proposals in outline have been before us since the Budget, it is extremely difficult under these conditions for the Parliament to give it a proper and considered response. Moreover, it should be pointed out that though this Bill was introduced on 27 October one of the payments in the Billthat is, payments to unemployment beneficiaries 18 years and over without dependants~is to be operative from next Sunday, 1 November, some four to five days later. I want to make it quite clear to the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) that the Opposition will not submit to any legislative blackmail in this matter. We are not prepared to deny proper consideration of these measures in both Houses of this Parliament because of that payment which we note, of course, is a retrospective payment. We certainly will be taking action in the other chamber to ensure that we are not compelled to accept what can only be described as a form of legislative blackmail; that is, introducing a measure four or five days before one of its clauses, in relation to payments particularly, becomes operative.
It is also odd that with so belated a Bill-it has taken some time for the Government to prepare the Bill and it is introducing it at the tail end of the parliamentary session-the last nine paragraphs of the Minister's second reading speech is devoted to announcing that the Government still has not got its act together on the effectiveness of the income test for pensioners. Apart from the further evidence of the confusion that this provides in governmental preparation of legislation, I am afraid that those nine paragraphs will provide scant comfort for pensioners over Christmas.

Whatever the Minister's intentions may have been in delivering those paragraphs they still leave very large realms of uncertainty in the minds of many pensioners.
Let me recite the eight major changes and amendments in this Bill. First of all, the Bill changes the supplementary rent assistance system for pensioners and other beneficiaries. Secondly, it increases the related rate of incentive allowance payable to sheltered employment allowees. Thirdly, it provides for the granting of a wife's pension on conditions similar to those applying to the grant of age or invalid pensions. Fourthly, it increases child endowment payable for the third child and subsequent children. Fifthly, it provides for broadening the criteria under which the double orphans' pension is payable in respect to refugee children. Sixthly, it extends the vicious provisions of last year's Budget relating to the non-payment of unemployment benefits to persons involved in industrial action to the spouses of such persons. Seventhly, it prevents the payment of the unemployment benefit to spouses of persons who have failed the work test or are classified as voluntarily unemployed or unemployed due to their own misconduct. Finally, it increases the rate of the unemployment benefit payable to persons aged 18 or over without dependants; that is, those persons who do not receive indexed payments in relation to unemployment.
First of all, the Opposition supports three of these proposals without any immediate qualification. We support the increase in the incentive allowance payable to sheltered employment allowees, though we think the whole system of tying thar allowance to supplementary assistance may have some historical basis but now seems rather odd. Secondly, we support the broadening of the criteria under which double orphans' pensions are payable in respect to refugee children. We support the basic change in the Bill which is to permit parents of a refugee child to be deemed dead if they are living outside Australia or their whereabouts is unknown in order that the double orphans' pension can be paid to the persons responsible for those refugee children. I gather that there is some problem with the definition of a refugee child but I understand that the Government will be correcting it during the Committee stage of this Bill. Finally, we support the granting of wives' pensions under similar conditions to that applying to age or invalid pensions. We think this is an improvement. But there is one problem here to which we draw the Minister's attention. There still seems to be a problem about the status of a wife's pension if, when overseas, she becomes a widow and has the difficulty of securing a widow's

2604 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Social Services Amendment Bill

pension. There still seems to be a gap there. As we understand the legislation, it would require her to return to Australia in order to qualify for that widow's pension. If she is receiving a wife's pension and her husband suddenly dies she is left without support of any kind. That is a point that should be examined. We support those three proposals without any immediate qualification.
On the other hand, the Australian Labor Party is totally opposed to the barbaric principle of denying to spouses otherwise entitled to unemployment benefits such benefits if they are the spouses of persons involved in industrial action or have had unemployment or special benefits refused under the conditions set out in clauses 18 and 21. The Labor Party has always been opposed, and will remain opposed, to the policy of family destitution as a means of industrial discipline. This measure can simply and clearly be described as just that. These penalty provisions are designed to compel destitution on families in order to discipline the industrial work force. We believe it to be a totally improper use of social welfare provisions. As we will be opposing these clauses in Committee, I will leave further argument on that point until that stage.
The Opposition supports the remaining provisions of the Bill but with qualifications, which we have made clear in our second reading amendment. [ will move that amendment in a moment. Before doing so I wish to make clear our position on each of the remaining provisions of the Bill which we support but in regard to which we wish to make qualifications.
First of all I mention what is perhaps the major change in the Bill, the change to the supplementary rent assistance scheme. At the moment some 400,000 persons are receiving supplementary assistance. The Government has estimated that some 300,000 private renters will improve their situation under these provisions. Another 130,000, who are currently receiving supplementary assistance, will continue to receive that assistance under the protective clauses which have been designed in the Bill so that no one at present receiving supplementary assistance will be disadvantaged. That means that something likean additional 30,000 people will be benefiting as a result of this liberalisation. It is true that this estimate was described as simply a guesstimate: I think the phrase used VIas 'broad orders of magnitude', which suggests that there is considerable uncertainty about the actual figure.
The principle of supplementary assistance has been part of our social security system since 1958 when I understand it began with supplementary

rent assistance of $1 a week. It is to be noted th~t this is the first change in supplementary assistance made by the Fraser Government in six years. Nothing has been done in this area in the previol.Js six years although there has been a very strict means test. There was only that $1 free area ana a $1 for $[ withdrawal rate up to $5 a week which meant, of course, that it excluded all but the very poorest pensioners. The number changes in the guesstimates suggest that this will not be expanded very much. But certainly these people have received no help from the first five Fraser Budgets.
One of our worries is that, to our knowledge, there has never been any proper evaluation of the whole supplementary assistance scheme even though major reports have constantly drawn attention to the importance of the whole rent problem as an aspect of poverty in our society. But, as far as we know, no proper evaluation of supplementary assistance has been made. Certainly there is no indication that the changes now being introduced are based on any thorough evaluation of the working of the system.
Of course, we in the Labor Party welcome this liberalisation of the means test. It is a somewhat complicated formula. I know from my constituents that it is causing considerable bewilderment amongst pensioners. I suspect, from some of the comments that have been made around this House over the past 24 hours, that it is also causing some confusion amongst parliamentarians. I stress that it is particularly important that the Department of Social Security devote time, effort, energy and resources to careful and sympathetic explanation of the operations of the means test under the new supplementary assistance scheme.
The objection that the Labor Party has to the new scheme is that we believe it is illiberal to refuse to grant increases in supplementary assistance to tenants in State housing when those tenants are paying the same level of rent as people in private housing. At the moment all tenants in public housing now receiving supplementary assistance will keep that supplementary assistance under the same means test as in the past; that is with a $5 a week limit. But, of course, all new tenants of State housing authorities will receive no assistance at all. It seems to us to be a discrimination where a public tenant paying $20 a week receives no assistance, and a private tenant paying $20 a week under this new scheme receives $5 a week. We recognise that subsidies are built into the public housing system. But when the same amount is taken out of a person's income, whether it be for private or for public housing, we believe that those people should receive equal treatment

Social Services Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2605

under the schemes designed by the Commonwealth Government. One cannot help suspecting that these provisions are designed to place a squeeze on State housing tenants and, therefore, on the State housing authorities. They are another plITt of the effort to push financial burdens back on to individuals and, of course, often as a concomitant of that, on to the States. We are opposed to that aspect of the scheme which discriminates against and penalises public housing pensioner tenants. We simply evidence cases of people paying exactly the same amounts for public housing as for private housing; yet, in one case-the private one-they receive a supplementary grant and in the other case-the public one-they are deniedthe supplementary grant.
We support, of course, the increase in the unemployment benefit for those 18 years old and over who have no dependants. It is an increase from $53.45 to $58.10 a week. But we note that because of the Government's discrimination against these people-that is, denying them indexation as it is extended to other unemployment beneficiaries-they are now some $11.60 down on what they would receive had they been given fair and proper indexation as it is given to unemployed with dependants. Here I am talking about the base rate for unemployment beneficiaries 18 years of age and over; I am not talking about rates for children and dependants. That rate is now $11.60 a week down on what it would have been had these people been granted indexation. That means that they are something like $603.20 a year down. Given the growing length of unemployment for many of these people that is an important consideration.
Of course, when we talk about this issue we cannot neglect, as the Government neglects, to mention the fact that the unemployed 18 years of age and under still receive $36 a week. That rate has remained unchanged for the six years that this Government has been in office. One can do the basic calculation about how inflation has cut that away. That figure is $37 a week below the poverty line. That amount of$36 a week has remained unchanged ever since this Government came into power. There are something like 53,000 young people receiving that benefit. It is true that the majority of them live at home. But it is increasingly difficult for such people. Often their families themselves are under great financial pressure to make ends meet and the young can contribute little, with the dwindling value of their unemployment benefit.
Finally, I turn to the election promises in regard to the family allowance provisions of the Bill. I remember that, in Launceston, worried about how

the election was going, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) somewhat effusively promised that oil revenues would be directed to benefit families. It is clear now that the Prime Minister intended that it should benefit only large families. Of course, when he was electioneering he did not inform the people that his promise to transfer oil revenues to families meant they would be transferred to large families only. But we now see in the Budget that these provisions apply only to families with three or more children. No consideration whatsoever has been given to the income levels of families. Low income families get nothing if they have only one or two children. On the statistics, poverty has only a marginal relationship to size of families. I do not deny that there is some marginal relationship between the size of families and living in poverty but, on the whole, it is only a marginal relationship.
These so-called generous proposals-I must admit that the Prime Minister and most of his colleagues have, for years, been telling us that children's allowances are the greatest social benefit bestowed by his Government-will affect only one-quarter of all Australian families. The remaining three-quarters of Australian families with only one or two children have been utterly neglected in these proposals. Of the group which the Government is supposedly most concerned about-that is, the group at the lower end of the scale, the pensioner and unemployed familiesonly 21 per cent will benefit from these extra family allowances. Some 163,000 pensioner families or 79 per cent of pensioner and unemployed families have only one or two children. So this measure is, in fact, not getting to a very significant proportion of the families in society struggling with poverty. It seems that this is a very poor addition to what has been described by this Government constantly as the greatest of its social programs. In this case it has neglected over three-quarters of the families living below or about the poverty line. Therefore, I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give this Bill a second reading, the House is of the opinion that it should be re-drafted to provide for-
(I) the removal of the discrimination against tenants in government housing;
(2) the removal of the discrimination against the adult unemployed without dependants;
(3) an increase in the unemployment benefit for the under 18 unemployed;
(4) the inclusion of the first and second children in the provision of increased family allowances in line with those for third and later children;

2606 REPRESENTATI YES 28 October 1981

Social Services Amendment Bill

(5) the removal of the provision discriminating against the spouses of union members affected by industrial disputes, and
(6) the removal of discrimination against the spouses of unemployed persons who faU the work test.'
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)-Is the amendment seconded?
Dr Klugman-I second the amendment.
Mr HODGES (Petrie) (5.22)-1 reject the amendment that has been moved by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett), and quite predictably so. I intend to take up only the point that he raised in relation to the supplementary rent allowance. He claimed that there had been ~o increase in that allowance in five Budgets. , That IS correct. There has not been an increase in the supplementary allowance over five Budgets. But on the basis of an inflation rate of 10 per cent or thereabouts for the last four or five years, the increase will almost restore, the allowance to its former value. Over the last five years two considerable benefits have been experienced by all people in this country: The rate of inflation has been brought down from the 17 or 18 per cent to which it soared under the Labor Government from 1972 to 1975; and pensioners have received twice yearly indexation, which has been a great boon to them.
Essentially this Bill provides for amendments to the Social Services Act in accordance with announcements in the 19 August Budget. It is not my intention to repeat all of those changes for, apart from being mentioned in the Budget, they ,are outlined in the second reading speech of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt). However, there are one or two aspects of the supplementary a,lIowance increase from $5 to $8 a week for rec!pients of age, invalid, wife's and widow's penstOns and supporting parent's and sickness benefits that I'would like to comment upon. The honourable member for Bonython, of course, mentioned some of these issues as well. The supplementary rent allowance will be paid only to beneficiaries on the full rate of benefit and will be tested by the level of rent paid and other income received. A beneficiary will have to be paying more than $10 a week or $520 per annum before some supplementary allowance is payable and will not receive the full $8 weekly or $416 annually until an amount of $26 a week or more is paid in rent. On the other hand, if other income received exceeds $14 weekly, the beneficiary will not be eligible for supplementary rent allowance. In effect, this means that the benefit for supplementary rent allowance has been directed to those most in need by taking into account, on a sliding scale, both the level of rent being paid and

the other income of the beneficiary. Pensioners and beneficiaries who will not be eligible for the supplementary rent allowance are those persons who occupy accommodation owned by the Commonwealth or a State housing authority and who already receive substantial rent subsidies.
Section 18 of the principal Act will be amended by including a definition of government rent. Those persons paying the lower government rent will be excluded under the definition of 'rent' from receiving the rent allowance. I believe this to be a sensible and fair approach. It would seem less than reasonable for pensioners and beneficiaries already paying lower rent in housing authority accommodation to receive a further allowance, while persons on a similar social security pension or benefit and paying rent in private accommodation receive only the supplementary allowance. Sometimes pensioners in private rental accommodation are paying up to $40 or $45 weekly while those in housing authority units pay in the vicinity of $20 weekly. The double benefit of low housing authority rental and a supplementary rent allowance will no longer apply. However, one anomaly will exist for some time. Pensioners who currently receive the supplementary rent allowance and currently occupy low cost pensioner housing will not have the allowance withdrawn. I think that is the point made by the honourable member for Bonython. This could mean that a pensioner who is ineligible for the rental allowance could move into government pensioner housing and find the person next door receiving the rental allowance. Only with the effluxion of time will this anomaly be eliminated.
I point out to honourable members that the age pension pamphlet will become a little more complex with the addition of a further scale of eligi-
bility for the supplementary allowance. At present there is one scale for pensioner entitlement taking into account other income and a further scale for those over the age of 70. Of course, eligibility for the pensioner health benefit card is determined by other income not exceeding $40 for a single pensioner and $68 for a married couple. While the addition of a further scale may prove a little daunting for some, it is the only way to ensure benefits are directed to the needy and, by the introduction of sliding scales, to provide some benefit to the slightly less needy. Of course, failure to have sliding scales will mean abrupt cut-off points and this, I believe, introduces a de-
gree of inequality.
I turn next to the provision of services for the aged. In particular, I refer to domiciliary services which, although not exclusively for aged persons, are nevertheless utilised mainly by them. In this

Social Services Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2607

current 1981-82 Budget domiciliary services are provided for in the following ways. The sum of $20.6m will be spent on the domiciliary nursing care benefit, $16m on home nursing services and $24.4m on home care services. This makes a total Commonwealth expenditure of $61m. The home care services include home help, senior citizens' centres, paramedical services and delivered meals. State and local government subsidies will amount to approximately $33m. Therefore, the total annual expenditure on these services is about $94m. Extra funds are raised and provided by religious and charitable organisations but, in my estimation, this figure would not exceed $4m or $5m. Home care services, which should be looked upon as a means of keeping elderly people in their home environment and out of more expensive, less attractive and less desirable nursing homes, are funded from all sources to the extent of only approximately $1 OOm annually.
I am not suggesting that hostel and nursing home beds are not required; indeed they are essential. What I am saying is that there is an urgent need to direct more funds to domiciliary services. More emphasis should be placed on providing support services for the elderly in their homes and less emphasis on the provision of institutionalised care. It is my firm view that the great majority of aged persons want to remain independent in their home or home unit environment. Commonwealth

Government subsidies over more than 20 years to religious, charitable and local government bodies have encouraged the establishment of 80,000 beds in the form of self-contained units, hostel and nursing home beds. We have wrongly encouraged too many elderly people to live out their latter days in institutionalised care. We have made dependent many people who would otherwise be independent. At present about 8 per cent of the elderly population are absorbing approximately 90 per cent of expenditure. Whilst it is conceded that many of the remaining 92 per cent do not require assistance, there are large numbers of people in the community who are struggling to support themselves, and with a little in the way of home care services many of them will not need hostel or nursing home beds.
I now turn to institutionalised care of the elderly. Since the inception of the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act in 1954 and the Aged Persons Hostels Act in 1972, almost 80,000 beds have been subsidised by the Commonwealth Government. Up to June of this year approximately $538m has been expended on these programs. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard two tables showing beds constructed and grants provided under these Acts.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

AGED PERSONS HMS ACT-GRANTS APPROVED: 1954-55 TO 30 JUNE 1981

Aged persons accommodated and type of accommodation

No.of grants

Self contained

Hostel

Nursing

Amount of

Total

grants

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory

$

980

9,253

5,605

4,883

19,741 108,495,906

919

7,118

5,515

3,392

16,025 86,447,505

513

2,148

4,351

2,558

9,057 49,052,369

677

6,622

3,297

1,817

11,736 58,418,232

361

4,463

2,123

1,370

7,956 42,931,410

225

1,093

832

534

2,459 12,480,098

17

81

34

24

139

720,813

19

172

107

279

1,523,768

Australia

3,711

30,950

21,864

14,578

67,392 360,070, 101

State
NSW Vic. Qld SA WA Tas. NT

AGED PERSONS HOSTELS ACT-GRANTS APPROVED: STATES-1972 TO 30 JUNE 1981

Persons accommodated

Amount of grants

No.of grants

Hostel beds

Staff beds

Total beds

Capital Furnishing

grants

grants

Total grants

126

5,060

86

2,592

59

2,367

31

933

30

632

4

100

2

41

139

5,199 70,347,604

1,284,915 71,632,519

121

2,713 41,033,713

673,450 41,707,163

49

2,416 35,265,257

599,197 35,864,454

15

948 14,599,350

186,000 14,785,350

32

664 11,210,433

169,000 11,379,433

5

105

1,570,224

24,750

1,595,974

1

42

696,046

10,500

706,546

2608 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Social Services Amendment Bill

State ACT Australia

Persons accommodated

No.of grants

Hostel beds

2

95

340

11,820

Staff beds
2
364

Amount of grants

Total beds

Capital Furnishing

grants

grants

Total grants

97

1,211,543

24,250

1,235,793

12,184 175,934,170 2,973,062 178,907,232

Mr HODGES-i thank the House. It will be noted that hostel beds form a substantial part of the accommodation and account for about 34,000 beds. i seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a further table illustrating aged persons hostel accommodation as beds per 1,000 population aged 65 years and over.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
AGED PERSONS HOSTEL ACCOMMODATION AS BEDS PER 1,000 POPULATION AGED 65 AND OVER
Aged and Disabled Persons Homes Act and Aged Persons Hostels Act 1954-55 to June 1981

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia

22.560
24.182 32.485 31.968

Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory Australia . . . . . .

27.540
23.430 37.500 24.337 25.966

Mr HODGES-I thank the House. The number of beds varies slightly from State to State and averages out at almost 26 beds. I turn nowto nursing home beds. In this country nursing homes are categorised as deficit financed which are those operated by religious and charitable organisations, as government, and as private which are those operated by entrepreneurs for profit. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a further table showing the categories of nursing homes State by State and for Australia.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

Deficit financed Government
Private

Aust.
22.4 22.65
54.9

NSW
21.1 12.77 66.1

Vic.
15.62 35.26 49.11

Qld
26.76 25.76 47.47

SA
37.1 18.1 44.79

WA
17.7 29.2 28.76

Tas.
35.76 35.47
53.0

NT

ACT

100
79.4 20.5

Mr HODGES-Although there is considerable variation between the States,in total private enterprise accounts for 55 per cent of nursing homes, and government and deficit financed about 22.5 per cent each. Some years ago an arbitrary figure of 50 nursing home beds per 1,000 persons aged 65 years and over was set as a guideline for Australia. Because certain difficulties were experienced and the granting of ap-
provals was causing a maldistribution of beds, Commonwealth-State co-ordinating committees were established. Regions were determined and the goal to be achieved was to provide in each region 50 beds per 1,000 persons. In my view these committees have been reasonably successful. Their charter to provide 50 beds per 1,000 persons has resulted in the building up of beds in those regions where the number of beds was under the 50 per 1,000 persons. When the number of beds per 1,000 in those regions is added to the bed numbers in regions where the figure is well in excess of the 50, the result is a figure which well exceeds the average of 50. To illustrate my point, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a further table.

Leave granted. The table read as follows-

As at 30.6.1981

Existing and approved in
prinCiple as at 30.6.1981

New South Wales Victoria
Queensland South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory Australia . . . . . .

54.5 43.9 51.96
48.6 63.9 51.03
31.5 38.43 50.61

62.0
49.7 60.91 57.3 67.1
61.52 74.5 49.88
57.67

Mr HODGES-This table clearly shows that existing beds, with approvals in principle, brings all States, with the exception of Victoria where the number of beds per 1,000 persons stands at 49.7, well over that magic figure of 50. I seek leave to incorporate a final table which shows provision of accommodation for the aged in some European countries.
Leave granted.

Social Services Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2609

The table read as follows-
PROVISION FOR AGED CARE IN SOME EUROPEAN COUNTRIES

Country

Population 65and over Bed provision

Beds per 1,000 aged

Belgium

.'

German Democratic Republic (East)

German Federal Republic (West)

Italy Net herlands
Norway
Portugal Sweden

United Kingdom

Yugoslavia

1,295,708 3,300,000 8,800,000
1,459,441 564,921 972,000
1,250,000
7,825,000
1,707,000

'Old people's home' (65,789)
'Geriatric Hospitals' (7,479) . 'Old people's homes' (104,965) (total)
Includes Nursing Homes 'Old people's homes' (350,000) Plan for 'old people's homes' and Nursing Homes
Nursing homes 'Old people's homes' (138,277) Nursing homes (40,310)
'Special Hats' (13,543) Nursing homes (17,968) 'Homes for elderly' (16,706)
'Homes for the aged' (60,000) Nursing homes (25,200)
'Long term hospital beds': Planning for 'Geriatric beds' (56,000) 'Residential homes' (113,000)
Northern Ireland, elderly confused 'Old people's homes' (17,262)

50.8
31.6 18.8 39.8
25 15 .22.1 94.7 27.6 24.0 31.8 17.2 48.0 20.2 65-70 7.2 14.4
3 10.1

From: P. M. Last, 'Clinical Rationing' paper delivered at First National Congress of Australian Nursing Homes, Sydney, August 1981.

Mr HODGES-While nursing home beds for some countries are distinctly shown, others are combined with hostel beds. However, a clear picture emerges: Australia is far more generous than similar Western countries. Additionally, it must be remembered that our popUlation, although aging, is younger than most of those countries. In providing nursing home beds, expenditure is not the only consideration. The needs of the aged must be taken into account and those needs may be financial, physical or emotional. However, under our system of recurrent Commonwealth benefit for nursing home beds, expenditure has to be closely watched and value obtained for the taxpayers' dollar spent. Each nursing home bed costs the Commonwealth on average $10,500 annually. For every extra 1,000 beds built the annual bill increases by $10.5m. I believe there ought to be a moratorium on the construction of new nursing home beds and a complete assessment made of the situation. The alternative is to allow only a very limited number to be constructed while the whole position is being assessed. There is a strong case for an increase in domiciliary services to keep aged persons in their home environment. I advocate a substantial increase in services such as home help, home nursing, delivered meals, et cetera. I suggest that a thorough investigation be made of ways to provide more services to the aged at home and also, where possible, to involve iii the delivery of these services the service clubs and the well aged in our community. Careful assessment

for entry to nursing homes and for domiciliary services is absolutely essential. At present the system of assessment is too loose and lacks a degree of uniformity. Some religious and charitable organisations and medicos are careful and apply stringent rules for entry to aged accommodation and for assessment of eligibility for domiciliary services; others are not.
I refer briefly to the State by State variation in nursing home nursing standards. I see no reason why a patient in a nursing home bed in Victoria should be different in any way from one in Queensland or Western Australia or, for that matter, anywhere else in this nation. The Commonwealth benefit, of course, varies from State to State. I believe that this situation should not exist. If States want to impose nursing standards over and above the normal standards set by the Commonwealth I believe they should pay the extra cost. I recognise that operating costs for a given level of nursing will vary from State to State, and indeed within States. Surely major differences in standards is no reason why the Commonwealth should continue to pick up the tab at the whim of a State. There is evidence to suggest that up to 25 per cent of nursing home patients should not be in nursing homes. If this is the case-I believe it isthere is a 25 per cent capacity available right now without providing more beds.
Social security expenditure this financial year will be $11.3 billion. Apart from $4.5 billion of

261 0 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Social Services Amendment Bill

that being provided for pensions for the aged, approximately $600m is being expended on programs for the care of the aged. My point is: There must be careful analysis of these programs. Are they desirable? Are we placing too much emphasis in some directions and insufficient in others? I trust that the Government will take note of some of the suggestions I have made.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (5.37)-As the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) indicated, the Australian Labor Party has moved a second reading amendment dealing with a number of the points on which we disagree with the proposed legislation. I shall try to concentrate mainly on family allowances. I was interested to hear the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) discussing at great length the issue of nursing homes. Whilst in some ways I agree with him I do not think what he said was in any way relevant to the contents of the Social Services Amendment Bill.
I shall deal with family allowances. I make this point: In this country family allowances were preceded by child endowment benefits and by taxation benefits to the income earner who took responsibility for children. This applied before family allowances were introduced in 1976. To put
their values in perspective, it is interesting to note-ignoring the taxation benefit-that in 1941 the child endowment payments for two children represented 6 per cent of the basic wage and 4 per cent of male average weekly earnings. The figures rose to 9 per cent of the basic wage and 5 per cent of male average weekly earnings in 1948 and reached a peak value in 1950 when child endowment for 2 children represented 11 per cent of the basic wage and 7 per cent of male average weekly earnings. The value of child endowment payments was then allowed to erode quite significantly. At some stage there were also tax allowances for dependent children. I think they came in in 1950. They were abolished in 1975 and replaced by rebates. Tax allowances, of course, significantly benefited higher income earners.
I think the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) when Treasurer changed the system from tax allowances to tax rebates. We all know that these benefit, at least relatively, the lower income earner compared with the higher income earner. Let us look at the position as it was in 1950. For a family with two children child endowment represented 7 per cent of male average weekly earnings. The introduction of family allowances by this Government in 1976 and the abolition of tax rebates which we had introduced earlier was heralded as benefiting in particular 800,000 children in 300,000 families who had

been disadvantaged under previous child support schemes. This was a step in the right direction. It was noted by the Government then that in other households men would lose some take home pay but women would gain some of that money through the system of cash transfers; that is, a redistribution of income in the family from men to women would take place. In the accounting system expenditure on the increased value of cash transfers would be offset by the savings on revenue previously foregone through the operation
of tax rebates.
It must be noted that this apparently beneficent family policy was accompanied by substantial cuts in public expenditure in the areas of housing, Aboriginal affairs and health and the decision to make unemployment and sickness benefits and widows and supporting mothers benefits subject to tax. In addition, the introduction of family allowances was used to vindicate a decision in the national wage case in August 1976 not to implement full wage indexation. At the same time the position of pensioners and welfare beneficiaries with children declined in relation to average weekly earnings because of the failure to raise or index children's allowances. Therefore, in a period in which the value of most pensions and benefits rose in relation to average weekly earnings, pensions and benefits for families with children declined in value.
We can look at the actual figures. Since the introduction of family allowances in 1976 their real value has been' eroded by about 50 per cent, as no
decision was made to index or raise the allowance until this partial indexation now. In 1976 the allowance for two children was equal to 5 per cent of male average weekly earnings. For four children the allowance was equal to 11 per cent of male average weekly earnings. At present the value of the allowance for two children is equal to 3.2 per cent or 3.3 per cent of male average weekly earnings. For four children it is equal to between 7.5 per cent and 8 per cent of male average weekly earnings. The value of the allowance has dropped from 11 per cent to below 8 per cent in the case of four children and from 5 per cent to just above 3 per cent in the case of the two-child family.
By not indexing family allowances the Government ensured that the redistributive effects which accompanied their introduction were removed with the passage of time and the rise in the cost of living. If the child tax rebates had remained and had been raised in a similar fashion to the way in which the dependent spouse rebate has been raised in value since 1976 then the Government would have saved about $600m by not indexing

Social Services Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2611

cash transfers for the support of dependent children. It is not unreasonable to make that sort of calculation since personal tax indexation was introduced at the same time as tax rebates were abolished. I am not suggesting that the tax rebate system represented a more equitable and just means of redistributing income to families with dependent children. On the contrary, for reasons which I mentioned earlier, a cash transfer scheme is manifestly preferable since it does not disadvantage non-taxable low income earners and since some income redistribution can be made to women. What I am suggesting by these calculations is that what appeared initially to be a reasonably generous scheme for child support and a potentially redistributive policy to alleviate some aspects of sex inequality has, in fact, been allowed to wither. It did not become a corner-stone of government policy on priority as it was indicated it would be in 1976.
It must be stressed also that government expenditure for families with dependent children does not end with direct expenditure on family allowances. Certain social services, in particular in the areas of health, housing and education, provide components of what is called the 'social wage' which supplements the direct wage earned in the work place and which constitutes a greater component of the income of low income earners than that of higher income earners. Cuts in expenditure in the areas of health, schooling, housing and community amenities and the accompanying emphasis on the private sector for the provision of services are seen as a significant retreat from the collective funding of social services which previously benefited disadvantaged groups. It has been noted that the measures taken in the thrust towards encouraging health insurance through the private sector-the cutting back of the community health program, the redirection of funding from the public to the private school system and the cutting back of funding for public authority housing-are all erosions of benefits under a variety of programs which served to redistribute benefits to those disadvantaged groups which were named as the main, beneficiaries of the family allowance scheme. The recent devolution to the States of responsibility for funding women's servicesrefuges, health centres, rape crisis centres, et cetera-represents a further erosion of the social wage which explicitly benefited women.
I think we should look at what happens in some other countries, for example, some countries in Europe. Let me give the House some figures showing the value of family allowances in member countries of the European Economic

Community. The figures, which have been calculated by Bradshaw and Piachaud, compare the relative values of child benefits, child tax allowances, et cetera, and the value of family allowances as a proportion of gross average male earnings. The figures show that in 1980 the value of the family allowance as a percentage of gross male average earnings for the two-child family in Australia was 3.7 per cent. In fact it is down to 3.3 per cent now, but it was 3.7 per cent at that time. In Belgium it was 14.1, per cent; in Germany, 6 per cent; in France, 8.4 per cent; in Italy, 3.1 per cent; in Luxembourg, 7.0 per cent; in the Netherlands, 9.1 per cent; and in the United Kingdom, 8.7 per cent. We can see that Australia was lagging behind quite significantly.
The comparative situation of a four-child family in Australia is even worse. The family allowance as a percentage of gross average male earnings in Australia is now below 8 per cent. In Belgium it is 35.5 per cent; in Germany, 22 per cent; in France, 42 per cent; in Italy, 6.2 per cent; in the Netherlands, 21.5 per cent; and in the United Kingdom, 17.3 per cent. The allowance is paid to the mother not only in Australia but also in the United Kingdom, Germany, Denmark and Belgium. I think it is important to note that those countries-I think we normally compare Australia with them as far as social security benefits are concerned-give much greater benefits to families, particularly the low income families, than does (Australia, both in absolute terms and in relative terms. The new French Government, of course, since these figures were compiled, has gone out of its way much further to increase the benefits for families with children.
One of the prominent members of the Social Welfare Research Centre at the University of New South Wales is Mrs Bettina Casso She has produced interesting papers on this question and I have 'used her material. Carol Keens and Gerry Moller also do excellent work at the Centre to try to provide intelligent figures relating to the benefits which are available at present in Australia and the benefits which ought to be available, and for what can be done in Australia and what is done in other countries.
Obviously, I agree with the Government's proposal to increase by approximately 50 per cent the family allowances for the third and subsequent children. This provision is long overdue. Each year when I have spoken in this debate I have asked the Government to bring about such an increase. I am pleased that it has done it in this Budget. It is a great pity that it has not extended this provision further than just to the third and fourth children especially for low income families.

2612 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Social Services Amendment Bill

Many arguments can be used that it is the first child which is the most expensive one for the family because of the way in which it interferes with the ability of the mother to continue earning and the extra cost that is incurred by the family when that first child is born.
I emphasise again that the Opposition feels very strongly that the Bills should be redrafted to provide for the removal of the discrimination against tenants in government housing; the removal of the discrimination against the adult unemployed without dependants; an increase in the unemployment benefit for the unemployed who are under 18 years of age-there has not been such 3n increase since 1975 and prices since then have almost doubled-the inclusion of the first and second children in the provision of increased family allowances in line with those for third and later children, to which I have just referred; the removal of the provision discriminating against the spouses of union members affected by industrial disputes; and the removal of discrimination against the spouses of unemployed persons who fail the work test. I commend to the House the amendment moved by the Opposition.
Dr CASS (Maribyrnong) (5.52)-Before I get around to discussing some of the specific objections that the Opposition has to this legislation I wish to make some comments about the way in which we deal with these problems. I refer firstly to the time at which the legislation has been brought into the House-in literally the dying days of the Parliament. The legislation was presented yesterday. Given its complexity, it is hardly reasonable to claim that we have all had a satisfactory amount of time and opportunity fully and adequately to analyse it. Of course we can make comments on the inadequacies of payments and the failure to keep up with inflation, which I will no doubt do later, as my colleagues who spoke before me have already done.
By approaching the problems of social welfare in this fashion-we tend to do it all the time-we as a parliament never get around to looking at the overall problem which confronts the community in considering social welfare supports. We still look upon them as sorts of privileges, things that we provide for those who are incapable of looking after themselves. It is as if they deserve to be where they are because they are not good enough, but given that it is a little too inhumane to totally ignore them, we will hand them out something by way of charity. I do not think that is appropriate for this day and age. I think society has become far too complex. The pressures are far too great from so many directions. I think the time has come for us to recognise that whether we are rich or poor,

working or not working, healthy or unhealthy, pensioner or handicapped, we are all an integral part of this society. That being the case, I think our approach to social welfare should be quite different. We see it now as a sort of net to catch someone who falls off the tight-rope and cannot save himself. Our approach ought to be to ensure that all, whatever their age, are able to contribute of their maximum to society's needs to benefit society. I put even school children, at their tender age, into the category of those contributing ultimately to society because their education is vital to society's future. I do not see education as a privilege that we give children. It is a need for all of us that they should be educated.
For these reasons my view is that the emphasis of the whole web of the social security system. should be changed from the sort of propping-up approach to the provision of a broad basis for living, whatever our status may be, so that we can provide as best we can for the benefit of society, gain from society and enjoy life. After all, what is the point and purpose of society if it is not to enable people to survive and to live to some purpose as they perceive it? It should not be se.en as some sort of torture one goes through from birth until death. I can see that what I have suggested requires a totally different approach to social welfare from that which we adopt at the moment. At the moment it is seen in terms of party politics. The conservatives have a particular view which tends, to my mind, to be rather inhuman. They see social welfare more as a charity which is provided out of the generosity of those who are working and who, therefore, are able to pay the taxes to provide it, whereas we on this side see it more as a right simply by virtue of a person being a human being and we do not see it as a fault that a person does not contribute as much as others.
How do we overcome the difficulty, given that we have this polarisation and the party political approach? If I recall correctly, a few days ago the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) was proposing the use of the committee system to overcome some sort of problem. The Parliament ought to try to grapple with the problems of this very critical area by putting, say, the question of a social security system to a committee of the Parliament-not after all of us in this place have determined our attitudes and policies and have campaigned in election campaigns on what we will or will not do, but in recognition of the fact that we need a new approach. Let us put the problem to a committee of the Parliament before we have stated what we think.-Let that committee inquire from the whole community about what the approach of most citizens in the community today

Social Services Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES2613

might be to this whole complex question. Let the committee then report back on the sorts of problems I am talking about. We never get round to considering those problems because we are too preoccupied with trying to buy votes, whether it be by cutting back on public expenditure because we think that is the in thing at the moment and that somehow public expenditure is the cause of all our problems or whether it be because, when the tragedies loom too large, the pendulum of the conscience of the community, particularly of the middle class who are comfortable enough, swings round so that society says: 'We should do more for the underprivileged'. Of course, then a party such as the Labor Party gains more political support because that is the sort of line that it tends to propose and people come to doubt the words of a Liberal Party when it tries to do the same sort of thing. We have to get out of that avenue of party political bickering and try to analyse what society should be providing for people, whatever their station, to ensure that they do riot become a burden, are best able to live, can enjoy life and can make some contribution to society.
In the closing moment or two before the sitting is suspended for the meal break, I will start to deal with some of these questions. The very first one, of course, is the proposal in our amendment to redraft the Bill to provide for the removal of discrimination against tenants in government housing. I am not quite sure how many people really will benefit from the Government's proposal because I cannot quite understand the figures provided in the second reading speech of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt), but the estimate given by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett), our spokesman in this area, is that a mere 30,000 people may in fact gain from the liberalisation proposed by the Government.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Dr CASS-Before the dinner break I had commenced to discuss some of the details of the Opposition's amendment to this legislation and was about to discuss the question of removal of discrimination against tenants in government housing. Of course, this again illustrates the idiocy of this piecemeal approach to the problem. Quite clearly, the extra money that will be provided will go straight into the pockets of the people who provide the rented housing. The Minister says:
Rents in this range are still well below market rates. In addition, because a subsidy rate of $1 for each $ I of rent paid may encourage landlords to increase rents in line with any increase in supplementary assistance, the rate of subsidy has been changed to one-half of rent above $ 10 a week. This is intended to reduce incentives to increase rent while increasing assistance to pensioners paying higher rents.

Who is kidding who? What will happen is that the money will go directly into the pockets of the owners of the accommodation, who will simply raise their rents sufficiently to soak it all up automatically. Pensioners and people dependent on this sort of support will be no better off. Providing these funds for the private sector and not providing any support for people in government housing, just aggravates the problem. The real solution to these problems is to build more public housing so that more and more of these unfortunate individuals can avail themselves of subsidised State and local government housing and not be dependent upon private housing.
I come now to the question of our suggested amendment to have the Bill redrafted to permit an increase in unemployment benefit for unemployed under-18-year-olds. Again we see the cynicism of this Government. The level of unemployment benefit for young people who are leaving school from about 15 to 18 years of age has not changed since 1975. It is at the level at which the last Labor Government pegged it, despite all the increases that have taken place since then in the cost of living. Of course it can be argued that these people are not much more than children and their parents ought to take responsibility for them. In real terms, for most of the young people-who are in this situation that is an unreal prospect. Most of those affected by this problem of being unable to get employment are ill-equipped to find jobs. They have left school early. Perhaps they come from homes where the breadwinner has difficulty in finding employment or is even unemployed. The Government automatically assumes that parents can look after their children. In many socio-economic groups the reality is that young people of this age need to get out and find jobs and work not just to help themselves but in many cases to help their families. We are going to punish them for being born poor. With this legislation we are going to leave such young people below the poverty line and dependent still upon parents who have far too little with which to care adequately for them.
I wish to deal next with the inclusion of the first and second children in the provision of increased family allowances, in line with those for third and subsequent children. Of course, we do not object to the increase in allowances for the children. However, the point is that over 70 per cent of Australian families have fewer than three children, so over 70 per cent of families are excluded. We are excluding them at the time when the family is just beginning, when the young people are just setting up house. Presumably they still are not secure or advanced in their jobs, so they have the

2614 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Social Services Amendment Bill

least resource backing of any time in their lives with which to settle themselves, and establish their homes and families. Yet this so-called generous Liberal Government is excluding them and, for all practical purposes, will forever eyclude them because, as I say, the vast majority of Australian families have fewer than three children.
Mr Sainsbury-They don't need it so much.
Dr CASS-The honourable member opposite said that they do not need to suffer. I presume all they have to do is breed like rabbits. The fact is that, given their situation, they are in a position where they are less secure than at any other time in their lives. Yet we are being niggardly and not giving them any support at all. Finally the provision which discriminates against the spouses of union members affected by industrial disputes is again another measure of the inhumanity of the Liberal Government. It is exerting pressure on union members who do not go on strike irresponsibly. We hear a lot of talk about unionists who go on strike for any reason, but that is not the real situation. We are talking about working people who never have very much in the way of resources. Their wages are not bountiful. They go on strike because they feel they have a very real grievance. We need only to look at the record of industrial disputation in this country and the final resolution of most of those disputes. Often they get to the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission only because the unions have taken industrial action. They have put in their claims and waited weeks and months and sometimes even years. Finally they have gone on strike and only then does the case get to arbitration. Most of the time, after a case has been to arbitration, after the painful exercise of industrial power in the form of strike, after abuse is heaped upon the trade unionists, the court finds in favour of the trade unions. They get most of what they have been seeking.
So the reality is that this is another move by the Government to exert pressure on the trade union movement, to muzzle the trade unions, to try to stop them from seeking their rights. In my view, that is all the trade unions ever try to do. No one in his right mind who has a family will go on strike just for fun, when he has little or no savings in the bank. People go on strike because they feel desperately that they need to, and now we are putting the screws on them. At least the Labor Government acknowledged that the family should not be made to suffer, and so we provided

a hardly bountiful provision in the form of unemployment benefit or special benefit. The legislation is being amended so that the wife of a person on strike can claim only the single benefit, not the married benefit. The Minister has stated:
The present legislation permits a situation in which trade unions can choose to strike knowing that through the operation of the social security system their members will be largely insulated from the effect of their actions.
The insulation, the miserable single benefit, is hardly compensation for the effort put in by the trade unionists who go on strike for what they consider to be their rights. The Minister also stated:
There have been numerous cases where wives of strikers who have appeared to have no genuine intention of joining the work force have registered for work in places such as mining and construction towns where there is no real possibility of employment for them.
For goodness sake, what a cynical comment that is! What are the wives supposed to do? Lie down and die? Of course that is one of the difficulties which face wives who live in construction towns. That is the reason why there are so many social problems. There is nothing for the wives of the workers in those towns to do. That is a real problem.
On top of that, when men in those areas feel that they have to go on strike, to come up with that sort of observation is the height of cynicism, in my view. The fact is that if work were available those wives would go to work. It is not their fault that they live in a situation where there is no prospect of work. 1 deplore the miserable attitude of this Liberal Government, and for those reasons endorse the amendments moved by the Labor Opposition.
(Quorum formed).
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (8.12)-1 will reply briefly to a couple of points that were raised by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett). Firstly, he felt that there was discrimination against pensioners living in government houses who would not benefit from the supplementary allowance. The issue he raised was that supplementary assistance will be paid if a private landlord imposes a rent of $20 but not in the case of a house that is the property of a public authority. Generally, public housing authorities already provide a subsidy of $16 per week. Thus, a house rented for $20 in the public sector would have a rental of at least $36 in the private sector and, therefore, could be expected to be of a much higher standard.
The other point the honourable member raised related to a wife's pension. He referred to the case of a couple residing oversrqs where the husband is

Social Services Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2615

an aged or invalid pensioner. The Department of Social Security has legal advice from the AUorney-Genera\'s Department that it is not possible to grant a widow's pension in those circumstances. A widow's pension may be granted if a woman returns to Australia with the intention of residing here and is able to meet the residence qualifications. It is my understanding that the circumstances referred to are relatively rare. The Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) is aware of the situation and is currently having the position examined.
The honourable member for Maribyrnong (Dr Cass) referred to the spouses of those who are involved in a strike. The present legislation permits a situation in which trade unions can choose to strike knowing that through the operation of the social security system their members will be largely insulated from the effects of their action. The Australian public, for its part, is attacked on both fronts-the inconvenience of the strike on the one hand and, on the other hand, having to pay through taxes and through the system for spouses who may choose to use a loophole in the system. There is not the slightest doubt that very few countries provide for this situation. I do not think there is another country which does so. I will stand corrected if there is.
Mr Scholes-The United Kingdom does.
Mr HUNT-It does not. There is no good reason why the community should automatically and immediately be expected to assume the normal financial responsibilities of those who are not willing to work and who voluntarily, without good reason, give up their jobs or are dismissed because of their conduct. This is happening at present. The spouses of such persons register for employment in their own right. If they are unable to obtain it they attract unemployment benefit for themselves and their dependent spouses. I think it is important to impose a sense of responsibility on people in the community. Australia has undoubtedly one of the worst industrial records in the whole world. The Opposition is asking the Government to continue to preside over a situation in which social welfare, which comes out of the pockets of the taxpayers, is able to be channelled through to the households of those who are engaged in industrial action. If people are really sincere in trying to achieve their industrial' objectives they should not expect the taxpayers of Australia to bear the cost.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
In Committee
Clauses 1 to 2-by leave-taken together, and
agreed to.
Clause 3 (Interpretation).
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (8.18)-We oppose clause 3, which imposes a specific definition of government rent, therefore providing a means test in relation to private rent but not in relation to government rent. The arguments against this provision I developed in my speech in the second reading debate. Let me take up the one point made in reply by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt). He suggested-this, of course, is open for debate-that a pensioner paying $20 in a public rental area and one paying $20 in a private rental area might not be comparable because of the subsidies underwriting the public area. The significant issue is not whether the pensioners are renting in a public or private area but that they are both paying the same amounts of their limited incomes for rental accommodation. One may have been more fortunate in some ways in securing government accommodation, though that itself is debatable, but they are paying the same amounts of their limited incomes. In that situation both should be entitled to similar treatment in relation to the means test provisions. Therefore, we are opposed to clause 3 which defines a special type of rent, that is rent paid to certain governmental authorities, as not being subject to a means test or to any of the benefits in future under the supplementary assistance provisions.
Another problem has been caused-the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) alluded to it-because the Government, in an effort to wriggle its way through the problems it is creating by having a division of the means test, by applying it to private rent and not to public rent, has had to make the concession that all those people at present paying public rent will retain the rights they now possess. Of course we agree with that but it means that in public rental, cheek to jowl, there will be quite marked contrasts in the way in which people are treated. We think that those sorts of inconsistencies and anomalies are the product of a most unsatisfactory way of tackling this problem; that is, to try to say: 'Well, we are going to provide support for those who pay private rent but those who pay rent to a public authority, even if it be exactly the same amount of rent or, in some cases, even more rent, will receive no Commonwealth support through the supplementary assistance scheme'. Therefore, we are opposed to this particular clause.

2616 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Social Services Amendment Bill

Mrs CHILD (Henty) (8.22)-The Government pointed out in the second reading speech of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) that it does recognise that low income pensioners paying unsubsidised rents are among the most needy in the community, and I would certainly agree with that. However, along with my colleagues, I am opposed to just one more instance of discrimination by this Government between low income groups. Under clause 3, supplementary assistance will not be paid to those renting government flats and houses. It means that we now set up two types of people, perhaps living in the same block of flats and possibly on the same floor. They could be next door to each other. The one who moves in to government housing before I February 1982 will get the lower rent plus the subsidy and the one who moves in after I February will not receive any subsidy. I think this is blatantly unfair.
This is the Government that has singled out the housing industry to bear the full brunt of its regressive policies. Not content with cutting the grants to the States for the provision of welfare housing, this Government has now introduced a sales tax on all components of the building industry, which is on its knees anyway. Over 80,000 people throughout Australia are waiting for subsidised housing, although we cannot be really sure of the figures because of the Government's failure to provide regular detailed information.
Until such time as we are able to provide adequate low rent housing for the thousands who are desperate for it, this Government should not act to set up two sets of people-two sets of low income people, two sets of pensioners, two sets of people living in the same block of flats. One group gets the subsidy and the other is deprived of it. The principle involved is wrong. Furthermore, every time we raise the subsidy for those renting private flats and houses the landlords put up the rent. At leasLwe have some cOhtrol over government flats and houses and we know that the subsidy goes to the right person. This Government must concentrate on a housing policy, a planned housing policy, to meet the needs of the thousands of desperate families and put aside its ad hoc, band-aid attitude to housing. It is unfair, it is discriminatory and it will not solve any of the problems.
Clause agreed to.
Clauses 4 to 17-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 18 (Unemployment benefits).
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (8.25)- We are opposed to clause 18. We are opposed to the provisions

within this Bill which preclude the payment of unemployment benefits to the spouse of a person involved in industrial action or whose union is involved in industrial action. As my colleague the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) pointed out, to use the Social Services Act to penalise strikers is highly improper. This Government seems dedicated to punitive action and lacks flexibility when assessing the unemployed.
I do not quite know what the Government is trying to do. How does it expect people to live? It is strange to hear the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) prating in this chamber about the need for a free trade union movement in Poland while every action taken, every word spoken in this chamber, attacks the trade union movement and its freedom to operate. We still have the right to strike in this country and the Department of Social Security should not be used as a weapon to counter strike action. The Department of Social Security should not be used to threaten and punish individual strikers. Unionists and their spouses are taxpayers too. The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) said in his second readingspeech:
The present legislation permits a situation in which trade unions can choose to strike knowing that through the operation of the social security system their members will be largely insulated from the effect of their actions. The Australian public for its part is attacked from two directions. First, it has to hear the personal disruptions, inconveniences and associated cost brought about by the strike. In addition, it is then called upon to meet the cost of providing income support for the families of those involved in that industrial action.
I would like to point out to the Committee that unionists and their spouses are also members of the Australian public. They are also taxpayers. They subscribe to the unemployment benefits paid to others and they should not be denied the right to apply successfully for unemployment benefits, each in his own right, not with one being precluded because the other is on strike. The children of unionists and the children of strikers have to eat, the same as everybody else. I teU this Government: Fight your industrial battles in the correct arena and get yourself a better Minister to help you fight them. Leave the Department of Social Security to provide the support to which all Australians should have access.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (8.27)-This piece of legislation, I suppose, is the ultimate in hypocrisy. Some time ago the Government legislated to deal with the situation of persons who were unemployed as a result of industrial action within their own organisation. It did not, at that stage, deal with the position of spouses. I want to bring to the attention of the Committee a specific case which currently exists whereby, under this legislation,

Social Services Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2617

unemployment benefits will be denied to spouses and also will not be available to persons who are disadvantaged because of a lack of income through being stood down as a result of an industrial dispute.
The Government keeps saying that if people choose to take industrial action there is then a case whereby the Government should refuse to provide financial support for that action. That is arguable, and we argued against such legislation some time ago. There is currently a dispute in Victoria involving the Geelong and Broadmeadows plants of the Ford Motor Co. In the case of Broadmeadows, the employees continued an industrial dispute contrary to the directions of their union; and I make that point to start with-contrary to the directions of their union. Under legislation passed by this Parliament some time ago, if the union took any action to discipline the employees acting contrary to the directions of their union, it would be subject to punitive action under Commonwealth law in the industrial court. So the union's position is, under laws established by this Government, that whilst it can recommend that members comply with its executive decisions, it cannot compel them to do so. So the dispute continues and the Government prohibits the union from having any authority over those who are currently involved in an industrial dispute within that union.
The employees at the Gee\ong plant of the Ford Motor Co. voted not to strike. They refused to participate in the strike. That was an action they took, of their own volition, in what they considered to be their own best interests. They are, under the legislation passed by this Parliament earlier, denied unemployment benefits because their union is involved in an industrial dispute, despite the union's recommending a return to work-a recommendation for a return to work which the union is unable to enforce because of laws which this Government has passed to prevent the union executive exerting any authority over its members. This Government has put into the laws punitive measures to prevent that action. We now have a situation where not only are those people who voted not to go on strike and, therefore, acted in a way in. which I would have thought that even this Minister and this Government would have approved, to be punished, but also their families are to be denied unemployment benefits under an Act of this Parliament.

Government has passed legislation which prevents unions from directing their members to go on strike. When the union acts in the opposite way the consequence is still the same. The Government is now passing legislation to deny the unemployment benefit not only to members of a union but also to the spouses of members of a union who do not wish to go on strike, members of a union which may suggest that a strike should not continue and who may wish to work. The Government has taken power of control from the unions. I hope it is not suggesting that members should resign from a union for three or four days in order to meet some criteria. Whatever the reasons the Government may be putting forward for this legislation or the reasons it put forward for existing industrial legislation, it is totally inconsistent. If in fact the Government is pursuing any form of policy it is incompetent.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (8.32)-This clause embodies the latest Liberal Party principle-family destitution as a system of industrial discipline. We oppose this clause because it makes use of social welfare provisions to impose penalties on the families of unionists involved in, or affected by, industrial disputes. In addition, of course, this clause provides a penalty on families whose breadwinner fails the work test. The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt), who is seated at the table, argued during his second reading speech, and again when he spoke tonight, that the operation of the social security system as it now stands largely insulated union members from the effects of their actions when there was a strike. Of course, it is quite understandable that Ministers of this Government would not understand the problems that are caused for the families of strikers despite all of the social security provisions that exist in this country.
It is simply not true that under the provisions at the moment strikers' families are in any sense effectively insulated from the effects of a strike on their family incomes even if they get some social service provision. There is no doubt that for nearly every family in such a situation the living standards drop each day the strike is prolonged. Of course, very few strikers in our society choose that course of industrial action in a light-hearted or thoughtless manner. The Government's social welfare sanctions are already quite severe, even though some social welfare benefits are available to families involved in strike action.

I ask honourable members opposite: Exactly Honourable members opposite should take as what sorts of criteria are being laid down? The an example the present provision about which

2618 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Social Services Amendment Bill

they boast. The present provision is that the spouse of a person who is affected by a strike or the striker himself may take the single unemployment benefit. If honourable members opposite want to get up in this House and say that that support in any way successfully insulates most families against the loss of regular wages then I suggest that they look at the kinds of family budgets that most working people have to face, In fact, the decision to rely on that limited social security sup-
port usually means that there are real problems in paying mortgages and in meeting all of those commitments which were made when there was an assurance of a sustained wage. Moreover, since the 1979 amendments to this legislation this Government has already extended the punitive provisions by including unionists in another industry or even in another State affected by a particular strike. However distant the original dispute, unionists who belong to the union involved and are stood down as a result of that strike, whether it be an entirely different industry or in an entirely different State, are brought within these punitive sanctions. Under the legislation that this Government is trying to pass tonight it intends to bring the spouses of those unionists also within that sanction.
Until this measure was introduced a spouse, generally a wife of a striking or stood down unionist, was able to claim the unemployment or special benefit at a single rate if she cOlild not find work to help the family. In that situation she was able
to get the benefit at the single rate. As I have suggested, even in that situation there were inevitable difficulties with commitments presupposed on regular weekly incomes.
That reliance on the single rate of the unemployment benefit for the spouse was no solution to the financial difficulties of working class families. But even that inadequate solution is now to be ended. Wives will not be able to apply for the unemployment benefit and the family will be left without support. Thus the generosity of this splendid, humane government! For the last six months the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has been talking about his Government having a human face. I suppose that there is one provision in this measure which is designed to sustain that image. In clause 21 there is a provision for starving unionists: 'In case of extreme hardship and where there are no other means of support something will be done for the family'. When the Department of Social Security is given a provision like that it means a pretty bleak prospect for these families except in cases of extreme hardship where there is no other means of support. I believe that my description of this Government's

policy as being a policy of family destitution in order to achieve industrial discipline is fairly and correctly taken. In many ways, its policy is simply a declaration of war on the families of those who are involved in any way in a strike.
But, of course, the clause does not finish there. In addition, there are similar provisions introduced to punish families of those who are either voluntarily unemployed or are unemployed due to their own misconduct, or who have failed the work test. Basically, all of those are work test provisions. In all of those cases people have failed the work test.
I no longer think it worthwhile appealing to the morality of the Liberal Party. But perhaps it is possible to appeal to the Government's pragmatism. First of all, it is a minuscule problem upon which this Government is using this great hammer. If honourable members look at the number of people who have failed the work test, only 1.6 per cent of all terminations of unemployment benefit were due to failures of the work test; that is, an average of 1,000 postponements a month under the work test. As something like 70 per cent of the unemployed have no dependants, these draconian measures do not affect them. This measure is being introduced in part to deal with 300 families a month. Three hundred families a month have to be punished for some failure in the case of their breadwinner. That first point is simply a pragmatic point and not a moral one. It is a minuscule problem.
Secondly, in something like half of the cases of people who have failed the work test it is found that that is due to error by the Department of Social Security. In 1979-80 halfof all the appeals against social security decisions were finalised iri favour of the appellants. The great majority of these appeals was in the unemployment area. In many cases these quite harsh sanctions will be taken against families although the original cause of these sanctions will frequently be a departmental error. I hope that there are sufficient people on the Government benches, even if not concerned with morality, who will look at the minuscule size of the problem and the way in which this Government is treating it. Secondly, they should look at the degree of error that has been made in these assessments and the kinds of real family costs that are imposed as a result of social security errors.
Question put:
That clause 18 be agreed to,
The Committee divided.

Social Services Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2619

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes

60

Noes

43

Majority

17

Adermann. A. E. Anthony. J. D. , BaiJmc. M. E. Birney. R. J.
Brudlidd.J. M. 8railhw'liLe. R. A. Bungey. M. H.
Burr. M. A. Cadman. A. G.' CUlleTOn, Donald COimeron. Ewell Cameron.llIn Caritoll.J.J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman. W. P. Connolly. D. M. Cowan. D. B.
Dcul1.A.G. Dohie. J. D. M. Drummond. P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer. P. D.
Fife. W.e. Fisher. P. S. Groom. R.J.
Hull. Steele Harris. G. McD. Hicks. N.J.
Hodges. J. e. Hlldgmun. W. M.

AYES

Howurd.J. W. Hunt. R. J. D. Hyde.J. M. Jull. D. F. Kuller. R. e. Lloyd. B. MucKellur.M.J.R. MucKenzie. A. J. (Teller) McLean. R. M. McMahon. Sir William McVeigh. D. T. Millur. P. C. Nixon. P. J. O-Keefe. F. L.
Pei.H.:ock, A. S. Porler,]. R. Robinson. Ian Rocher. A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Suinsbury. M. E. (Teller) Shuck. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinch.lir,l. McC. StreeL. A. A. Tambling. G. E. J. Thomson. D. S. Tuckey. e. W. Viner, R.t. White. P. N. D. Wilson. I. B. e.

Armilage.J. L. Beazley. K, C. Bkwctl. N. Bowt:ll. Lionel Brown, John Brown. Roberl Cu",pholl.G. ('ass.M.H.
Charles. D. E.
Child.J. Cohen. B. Cro'\s. M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling. E. E. Dawkins. J. S.
DuiTy. M. J. EVl!ringham. D. N.
Frl!c. R. V. Fry.K.L Hawke. R. J. L Holding. A. C. Howe. B. L..

NOES

Humphreys. B. e. (Teller)
Hurford.e.J. Innes. U. E. Jenkins. H. A. Jones, Barry Jones. Charles Kent. L. Klugmun. R. E. Mcle<lY. Leo Mildren. J. B. Millon,P. Morris. P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford.'!. G. (Teller) Scholes. G. G. D. SCOII. J. L. Uren, T. Wallis. L.G.
West.S.J. Wiliis.R. Young. M. J.

PAIRS

Bourchil!r.J. W. I.usher. S. A.

Johnson, Les Kelly. R.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Clause agreed to.

Clauses 19 and 20-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.

Clause 21 (Special benefits).

Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (8.46)-The objections of the Australian Labor Party to clause

21 are identical to those it had to clause 18. In order to facidatate debate I simply put on record our opposition to clause 21. Because it embodies the same principles as underlie clause 18 our arguments developed against clause 18 apply fully to clause 21.
Clause agreed to.
Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole, and agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt)~by leave-read a third time.
REPATRIATION ACTS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 27 October, on motion by Mr Thomson:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (8.50)-The first thing I would like to say about the Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill 1981 is similar to what I said about the Social Services Amendment Bill 1981. It is extremely disappointing tliat, in the last stages of this session of the Parliament, and at very short notice, we are presented with an omnibus Bill which involves considerable changes and that we are given something like a day in which to prepare our response. I believe that the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson), who is at the table, is one of the few honourable Ministers on the Government side and I am quite sure that he is equally disappointed with the way in which the Government chooses to deal with measures of this nature. This Bill makes changes which, in a sense, have been awaited by many people for over a quarter of a century. I would have thought that changes of that significance would deserve somewhat more than the cursory treatment which the Government is giving them. Indeed, it has taken over a generation for Parliament to take this action in relation to merchant marines and the decisions relating to disability provisions for those who supported Australia in New Guinea. The kind of contempt which the Government has for this quite serious legislation is demonstrated by the fact that the Government hurriedly introduced it last night and expects it to be debated tonight. It is extremely difficult to respond effectively under those circumstances.
The Bill, which is an omnibus Bill, contains two sets of provisions-those which give effect to a

2620 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill

number of Budget decisions and those which contain operational and machinery amendments which I think the Minister described as designed to modernise the repatriation legislation in this country. I will give the general response of the Opposition to the changes. There is a total of six major Budget implementation changes. Firstly, there is the decision to provide service pensions to cover Australian mariners who served in the 1939-45 war. Of course, they have had to wait something like 40 years to receive this response. Secondly, repatriation benefits are to be given to those who served in peace observation and monitoring forces under the auspices of the United Nations or a recognised international body. These benefits will apply to those involved in such services from the end of this year.
Thirdly, disability pensions are to be provided to former members of the Royal Papuan Constabulary and the New Guinea Police Force involved in service with our allies in New Guinea during the war. Fourthly, the Bill raises the limits on disability pensions insofar as these are used in determining service pensions and fringe benefit eligibility. Fifthly, the Bill raises pensions for those who have suffered amputations and loss of vision, and it increases many other similar repatriation benefits. Finally, under Budget implementation, the Bill increases the supplementary rent allowance along similar lines to those contained in the Social Services Amendment Bill 1981. The second section of the Bill, the operational machinery part, is designed to correct, clarify and modernise-the phrase used in the Minister's speech-the drafting of the Act.
I want to deal very briefly with the Opposition's response to each of these proposed changes. First of all, we support unequivocally the provision of disability pensions to former members of the Royal Papuan Constabulary and New Guinea Police Force involved in the Second World War. All J can say is that I am not sure that many people are left to receive those benefits after something like 40 years. But at least it is a belated recognition by this Government and this country of the rights of, and the responsibilities and the obligations we have to, those people who served Australian soldiers so very well in the New Guinea campaigns. We on this side of the House thoroughly endorse the decision that has been made, however belatedly. Secondly, we support the raising from 50 per cent to 60 per cent of the limit on the disability pension with regard to the determination of service pension and fringe benefit eligibility. It is a change about which we have no qualifications. Thirdly, we endorse witho'ut qualification the raising of pension provisions

for a whole series of disabilities suffered through war.
However, we do wish to make some comments upon the other three changes. Indeed, our second reading amendment will relate to these other three Budget implementation provisions. The first relates to the increase in the supplementary rent allowance along lines similar to that contained in the Social Services Amendment Bill. We are opposed to these changes for exactly the same reason as we opposed the similar changes in the Social Services Amendment Bill. We believe that it is improper and inappropriate to make distinctions between those pensioners who pay rents in private accommodation and those pensioners who pay rent in government subsidised accommodation when the same amount of rent is involved. Equally we believe it is unfair and discriminatory for ex-servicemen who pay rent in private accommodation to be treated differently from ex-servicemen who pay rent in government accommodation. Our objections to that section of the implementation provisions are the same.
Secondly, we are concerned with the provisions relating to the participation of Australians in peacekeeping and observation monitoring forces of the United Nations and other recognised international bodies. Our concern is with the extremely limited nature of the coverage of that provision in the sense that it operates only from this year. I would like the Minister to give some explanation of why Australians who in the relatively immediate past served in Kashmir, in Cyprus or the Middle East are not entitled to these benefits. Why is there no retrospective element for those who served in similar forces in the immediate past? I realise that there is always a problem of defining exactly when that past period should be. Australians have contributed significantly in the immediate past to a number of peacekeeping forces. I would welcome an explanation from the Minister as to why a date in advance is being used and no effort is being made to make these provisions retrospective.
It is also rather ironic that, according to the Minister's statement, the contemplated Sinai peacekeeping force cannot be encompassed within the generous terminology of the Bill. I presume that even this Government is forced to recognise that the Sinai peacekeeping force is neither a force under the auspices of the UN or of any other recognised international body. It does seem rather ironic that, after this week of posturing by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) about the international nature of the Sinai peacekeeping force, he cannot even include that force within the ambit of this legislation. That

Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2621

says perhaps as much about the Minister preparing this legislation as it does about the posturing of the Prime Minister.
The final Budget implementation provision which we are concerned about is the limitation relating to the provision of service pensions to Australian merchant mariners from the Second World War. We certainly support, and have supported for some time, the coverage of Australian mariners involved in merchant seamen activities during the Second World War. There is no doubt that Australian merchant seamen have been grossly discriminated against in the 35 years since the end of the war. Many of them joined the merchant marine at the age of 15 or 16 because they were too young for any other service at that time. But, once they were signed on, they were in for the duration of the war because many of them were simply refused permission to join any other service. Because of the essential nature of their jobs,
merchant seamen took the brunt of the unglamourous and hazardous task of ferrying troops and transporting essential fuel, food and ammunition supplies throughout the war. One in eight of Australian merchant seamen serving in Australian ships between 1939 and 1945 was killed or lost at sea while one in three serving in British and allied merchant ships worldwide was torpedoed, bombed or mined. For their pains, the survivors could wear war service medals but were not entitled to any service pension.
I think those merchant seamen who played such a vital role in the Second World War in theatres of war should have the same rights as others who served in similar conditions but who happened to be members of the military forces. I do not think there is any division between the political parties on this. I readily recognise that there have been members on both sides of the House who have actively fought for a number of years to ensure that these men have the same rights, if rather belatedly. I suspect that after the war has been past for over a generation the numbers who will benefit from this will be somewhat limited. We certainly support these provisions. We believe that all Allied servicemen should be included. We believe that all Allied merchant men should be included; that is, all of our allies who also served on
merchant ships on the Allied side during the war and were in theatres of war. Fundamentally we argue this simply on the grounds of the logic already established under the Repatriation Act. Last year it was decided, again after 40 years, that Allied servicemen would be entitled to repatriation benefits similar to those of Australian servicemen. One would have thought that when the Government came to face this particular issue,

which is a relatively small issue compared with provisions for Allied servicemen in general, generosity might have struck even this Government. I know that is a high expectation but one might have thought that, given that there are very few Allied merchant men in this country, it would have been quite possible for the Governrnent to incorporate a provision to cover Allied merchant men in exactly the same way as last year it was able to cover Allied servicemen. I know that I was deeply disillusioned when at an Estimates committee I dared to suggest this provision for the few thousand men involved and it was suggested that they might have to wait 40 years as the Allied servicemen had to wait 40 years for their benefits. If that is so I should imagine there will be none there to secure them.
I am disappointed also because I find that an enormous number of members on the other side have been publicly active and vocal in support of this provision. I wish to mention here a few quotes from Government members enthusing for this support but apparently unable to persuade the Cabinet of the wisdom of this minor generosity. The honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly) is reported to have written:
I support your request and have already made representations to the M in is t e r . -
The marginal member for Canning (Mr Bungey), who delights in getting publicity because of his Western Australian problems, said:
I acknowledge that those who served in the British Merchant Service should also be eligible.
The honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter), who is always very exuberant outside the House but who kowtows to the ministerial line inside the House, said:
Be assured of my enthusiastic support For the further move you are making to secure the same consideration For the British and Allied Merchant Navy men as we were able to gel for the Australian mariners.
I ask the honourable member for Kennedy: What sort of activity did he take to persuade this miserable, penny-pinching Government that Allied merchant seamen should be included under the Bill? Of course, we have .another National Country Party man, the honourable member for Indi (Mr Ewen Cameron)-
Mr Sainsbury-He is a Liberal.
Dr BLEWETT-He is a Liberal. I acknowledge the honourable member for Eden-Monaro. One hears the honourable member for Indi so rarely that one is never quite sure what party he belongs to. I stand corrected. He said:
You can certainly rely on my support to your endeavours to have British and Allied Merchant Navy men included along with Australian Mariners . . . For war service benefits.

2622 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill

He is not very articulate in the House; I wonder whether he was a bit more articulate from the back bench trying to persuade the Cabinet to make this decision. Of course we have a definite National Country Party member, the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite), who wrote:
Your leller . . . presents a case with which I am familiar and with which I do agree . . .
He did agree. Did he push that any further? Then we have the active member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) who is often an espouser of unpopular causes within the Liberal Party. He said:
I have already made representations to the Minister for Social Security-
He got the Ministers mixed up. But he is a new member; one cannot expect much more-
. . . in support of the matter . . .
Then, of course, we have the mouth from the south, the honourable member for Denison and Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman), who said:
. . . I am not unsympathetic to the views you espouse in your leller and only trust the Government-
Of which he is a member-
is able to extend the benefits to include all ex-Merchant Navymen who served in a theatre of war.
Of course, we have many examples from the sentors as well.
Mr Scott-Where are they?
Dr BLEWETT-None of those members are in this House tonight. They are all active in writing these letters pretending their enthusiastic support for the cause. It is a little cause. It is not a cause demanding enormous expenditure from this Government. It concerns a minor amendment for which all government members expressed enormous enthusiasm. But we have no evidence that they have displayed much real enthusiasm other than the writing of letters. Not one of those people is here to participate in this debate. Certainly, they seem to have very little effect on this Government.
Mr Ruddock-We are waiting for lessons from your fellows to cross the floor now.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! Interjections are out of order. I ask the honourable member to remain silent.
Dr BLEWETT-It is so irrelevant, Mr Deputy Speaker, that I need not deal with it. We urge honourable members-indeed they will be given opportunities by what will happen to this Bill in the Senate-to consider taking seriously the words they have written and to bring pressure to make this minor amendment which will make this

provision totally congruent with the provision for servicemen generally. I conclude by moving our second reading amendment. As I said, we support the major provisions of the Bill. I move:
That all words after That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give this Bill a second reading, the House is of the opinion that it should be re-drafted to-
(I) remove the discrimination in the provision of supplementary assistance against those in government housing;
(2) provide repatriation benefits for those who served in peacekeeping forces before I November 1981, and
(3) provide eligibility for service pensions for all Allied ex-merchant mariners as is provided for Allied ex-servicemen! .
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is the amendment seconded?
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.7)-1 second the amendment. There are a number of aspects to the Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill which are of concern. There are some general aspects of the whole area of repatriation which I think it is time this House faced up to. Some years ago we had a review of the Repatriation Acts. In fact we had two. One review was by a Senate committee. It took six months to bring down substantially the same recommendations as a committee of inquiry headed by a judge which took six years. So I am not suggesting that we appoint another judge.
There is some doubt whether the Repatriation Act in its present form covers the likely modern consequences of any armed conflict and the types of injuries which could occur. I briefly mention in passing the debate which has been going on fo~ some time about exposure to agent orange, and what I see as the real deficiency in the Act; that is, that subsequent injuries to second or subsequent generations cannot in any way be covered by compensation where those injuries can be reasonably established as having been caused by the service of one of the parents, or the presence of one of the parents, in an area of war. I do not want to proceed with that but I believe that it is time the Repatriation Act was extended to cover consequences where a person bears a deficiency or a deformity or some other disability because of an injury of a parent or the exposure of a parent to some form of warfare which could have genetic or generation jump effects.
This Bill extends service pensions. I think, unfortunately, it follows a long pattern of legislation which has been coming before the Parliament. On each occasion where a change is made legislation has increased rather than reduced the anomalies which exist in the legislation. There is and has

Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2623

been-I think all members are aware-a considerable campaign by those people who were in the British occupation forces in Japan, and numbers of other members of the Services who served in various areas during the Second World War, who, because of the designations of 'ex-service' or 'service' for service pensions, are currently denied access to such pensions. The definitions of ex-servicemen in the Defence 'Service Homes Act are different from those which apply in this Bill and in other Acts of this Parliament relative to service in war zones and war service. Persons who were in areas where military activities took place are denied access to repatriation or war service home benefits because of certain aspects of the various Acts.
I believe that there is a strong case for a complete examination of the rationale. It is now a long time since the end of the Second World War. The persons who participated would not have realised the type of Acts which existed. I think it is also true to say that there is a motivation towards early retirement in the community, firstly because people are realising that leisure is not evil and, secondly, because pressure on the employment market is bringing about an attitude whereby people are prepared to retire at the age of 60 years. I think there is a good case for extending service pension benefits to those people who were available for service in war zones and who volunteered to take part in such service during the Second World War at least.
I wish to deal briefly with the anomaly as I see it in the peacekeeping operation situation. Firstly, the Bill, as I understand it, is to apply only to future operations and not to the Sinai operation unless an amendment is subsequently made to the Act. This Bill provides for international forces or United Nations forces and the Sinai force would not meet either of those criteria, as I understand the situation. Australia has taken part in a number of these types of operations. I have already mentioned the occupation forces in Japan. At least some members of the forces there would have been at some risk, probably a risk not dissimilar to that which occurred in certain aspects of military activities. There are very vulnerable areas of military activities-even in war zones-and some very safe activities. I do not distinguish between those, but there are some places where the level of injury is more likely to be of a non-military nature than of a military nature.

from 1950 to 1953 but there were Australian combat elements in Korea until 1957. We had observer groups in the India-Pakistan-Kashmir area and at least some injuries occurred to servicemen during that period. We were part of observer teams in the Middle East. We have had Australian observers in the Middle East at various times since 1956. I refer to the United States disengagement observer force at the Golan Heights in 1974 and the United Nations emergency force for disengagement in the Sinai in 1973. We provided helicopter crews, ground crews and other sections of the Australian forces in Ismalia in 1976. Since 1964 the Australian Government has been providing civilian police forces in the Cyprus area. I think it would be unreasonable not to consider extending the Bill to cover the activities of these persons, who are volunteers and who are acting as a peacekeeping force in the same way as military personnel. Even though it is by nature a civilain force its members are still performing the functions of a peacekeeping force. Australians participated in the Malaysia-Borneo operation. Service in Vietnam is not uniformly accepted for service pension eligibility. Australian servicemen have been deployed in Papua New Guinea and Vanuatu in circumstances where some forms of military action took place or could have taken place.
In all of those cases forces were at risk. In some of those cases service pension eligibility may well have been established. Certainly, no additional establishment of service pension eligibility will derive from this Bill to persons in that situation. It again breaks up the designation of service to one's country in military forces in areas where some forms of combat may take place. Other Australian activities are not generally covered by this designation. For instance, Australian forces served in limited numbers with the Americans in Cambodia. The former members of those forces currently have great difficulty in establishing any form of criteria as ex-service personnel because they do not come within the right dates and other criteria. Australian nurses who served in the Second World War have had great difficulty in qualifying for service pensions in a number of circumstances even though they were probably at as great a risk as many of the servicemen and women-mainly servicemen-who did qualify. The anomaly with regard to service in the merchant area is being exaggerated further. Again, that is a matter which could be cleared up.

The first of Australia's post-war peacekeeping The piecemeal approach, to the service pension operations took place in Indonesia from 1948 to especially, is becoming almost a serial. I do not 195 I. Australia participated in the Korean war want to deal with the other aspects of the Bill. I

2624 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill

think that if this Government believes that Australian servicemen perform a function which is above and beyond the normal requirements of the community and face risks, whether it be in noncombat or combat situations, or are prepared to face risks, it has an obligation to make sure that they gain the maximum benefit from the applications of this legislation. Unfortunately, this piece of legislation adds to the anomalies. Every time we move in a sideways or lateral direction without taking into account the consequences of the new anomalies which we create we add to the problems rather than reduce them. Every member of this House, when the terms of this Bill become known, will be confronted with more requests from people who believe they are being unjustly denied. This creates a situation of dissatisfaction. In this case the legislation does not add at all to the list of people who are eligible or qualified to receive service pensions. It merely says that in future, and subject to the alterations in relation to the Sinai, anyone who serves in the manner described will be qualified but that those who served in exactly the same manner in the past and who would currently be eligible for a pension will be denied that pension.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (9.18)-1 wish only briefly to address myself to the Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill. I think that the thrust of this Bill is too little too late. As previous speakers have said, the Government should have proposed many of these amendments many years ago. The Australian merchant mariners have waited since the Second World War for their rightful due for the very dangerous service that they provided to our country during that War. Most of them now are no longer entitled to many of the benefits that they would have received if this legislation had been provided to them when it should have been. People in the merchant marine, for instance, who were involved in the resupply organisations in the Islands, probably were in even more dangerous circumstances than people in the regular Australian Navy or allied navies. They had more ships sunk from under them than were sunk in the regular navies. However they have not been entitled to this benefit until now. I think that is a most disgraceful set of circumstances.
The Government has perpetrated those disgraceful circumstances in the Bill before the House. The proposal to entitle people who are serving in peacekeeping forces to the provisions of this Bill after 1 November 1981 is disgraceful. I was recently in Cyprus, where a number of Australian Federal policemen are involved in a peacekeeping mission. Australian policemen have

been there for nearly 10 years now and have suffered some casualties and a great deal of discomfort in representing their Government and their country. None of the people serving in Cyprus now are entitled to receive benefits until this Bill is passed, when they will have an entitlement from 1 November 1981. Indeed, Superintendent Beck of the New South Wales Police, who has received some significant publicity in recent weeks for his activities as a policeman in New South Wales, served in that force and will not be entitled to the benefits provided by this Bill -because he will not be serving in it on 1 November 1981. All those people who have served in the Cyprus contingent, the Kashmir contingent, the Golan Heights contingent and the Indonesia contingent will not be entitled to benefits although the government of the day said that they should serve on behalf of their country. Unfortunately this Government has decided that it will conveniently forget those people. I think that is disgraceful.
I think people who represent their country overseas, whether or not the general population of the country agrees with what they are doing, should be entitled to all the benefits that other people who have done that sort of work are entitled to. I think in many ways the Returned Services League was rather tardy in its support of the merchant marine. It was only in recent years, when it became suitable for the RSL, that it took the side of the merchant mariners of this country in their quest for justice. Once again in this Bill the Government has relegated to nothing the effort of a number of people during the war. Indeed, it is questionable whether those people who served in British merchant marine contingents will receive benefits under this Bill. Prior to the Second World War most of the ships plying the Australian coast and the international routes to Australia were British registered ships. People who served on those ships and who tried to enlist in the Australian Imperial Force but were turned back because they were in the merchant marine will not be entitled t6 benefits under this legislation. Although it is very late, they should be entitled to those benefits. I think it is nothing short of scandalous that the Government, even at this late date, has not been willing to accept its responsibility to the people who did their best at the time. I think to do what it has done to the people involved in peacekeeping forces since the war is rather reprehensible.
The Government has provided in this Bill no repatriation benefits for the people who will be involved in the Government's latest foreign policy escapade in the Sinai. The Minister for Transport

Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2625

(Mr Hunt) said in his second reading speech that supplementary legislation will be introduced into the Parliament. The question that crosses my mind is why the Government, ifit is as committed to this proposal as it says it is, has not provided in this Bill for the people who will be involved in that force. Does the Government intend to sell those people down the drain after it commits them to an overseas escapade? I think this Government's record on repatriation benefits to Australian ex-servicemen and to people who were involved in what one would term the areas of responsibility of the department responsible for repatriation has not been consistent with what all Australians would expect their government to be doing.
It is very interesting to consider the costs of the programs that we are looking at. On 10 September the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) asked the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson), who represents the Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner), a question upon notice about the cost of providing extensions of Service pensions for British and Allied merchant seamen who served in theatres of war. That encompasses the whole range of British and Allied servicemen who served in theatres of war. In this Bill the Government has seen fit to exclude some of those people. It is very interesting to consider the magnificent cost of providing that range of benefits to that population of people! The additional cost is a paltry $1.5m per annum. I think it is terrible that the Australian Government is not willing to expend a measly $1.5m per annum on people who risked their lives to see that Australia had war materiel and other materials provided during the war. I refer in particular to those servicemen and Allied seamen who provided resupply missions in the islands.
In recent amendments to the Repatriation Act we quite properly widened the criteria for Allied servicemen who may receive benefits, but the Government was too miserly to widen the criteria for those people who served in a non-combatant role. I have no doubt that the heart of the Minister for Science and Technology, who is at the table, who served his country well in the Services and who unfortunately has carriage of this Bill in the House tonight, would go out to those people who risked their lives to supply the Australian servicemen whom he commanded in many areas. I must say that I have a small axe to grind this evening in that my father was in the Australian merchant marine and received nothing. Most of the merchant marine did not expect to receive anything, but I think the too little too late that the Government is offering them is not even a

little-it is absolutely nothing. It is an insult to those people who did their best for their country at a time of great crisis.
Mr Milton-They were the forgotten people.
Mr LEO McLEAY-They were; that is right. As my colleague has said, the Government's proposals are iniquitous. The proposition put forward by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) to redraft this legislation is the only proper approach that this Parliament should take. We should remove the supplementary assistance provisions that discriminate against those in government housing. The legislation should provide repatriation benefits for all those people who served in peacekeeping forces before 1 November 1981 as well as for those who will serve after 1 November 1981. We should provide for all Allied ex-merchant mariners the same eligibility for Service pensions as isprovided for Allied ex-servicemen. That is the only proper thing this Parliament should do. The discrimination against ex-servicemen and Allied ex-merchant mariners who now live in government housing should be opposed by all members of this Parliament.
When one considers the rhetoric put forward in this country after the Second World War and the rhetoric that was directed to those people who served in the Australian Army in Vietnam, for instance, one should consider the approach taken by the Government tonight as nothing short of hypocrisy. Indeed, all those people who took the Government in good faith should really start to question what they were led into. I believe, and my colleagues on this side of the House believe, that an injustice will be done by the carriage of this Bill this evening. I only hope that Government members have a little morality and support the Opposition's amendment. I am sure that the Minister at the table believes in his own heart that the Bill provides for the best things that can be done. Unfortunately the party political system in this Parliament does not allow justice to be done to those people who did their best in most trying times and who unfortunately have found that politicians and governments have not lived up to the high ideals that they hoped they would live up to.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chilley) (9.30)-1 will speak very briefly in support of the amendment and refer to certain matters which are of very great moment at the present time to all returned servicemen. In particular I refer to the Nancy Law case. I have studied this case and the other case which is holding up all applications involving vascular diseases, thus causing very great stress to returned servicemen, some of whom are quite

2626 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill

aged. The delays have been brought about partly by the Nancy Law case which has been before the courts for a long, long while and has now been upheld by the High Court of Australia. The question of the onus of proof has been very decisively determined, and it lies basically on the Government, not on the servicemen. Of course, that case relates to men who first started smoking whilst in the Services and who subsequently contracted lung cancer.
Quite apart from the Nancy Law case there is. another case, the name ofwhich does not come to me at the moment, which is also before the courts..
The appeal has been upheld by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, and the case is holding up all applications for increases in pensions or for pensions generally in respect of vascular diseases. It also touches on the two issues of 'an occurrence' and onus of proof. I recollect issuing a Press statement well back into last year-unfortunately it was not printed-because I had had word that the Government, if it lost these cases, intended to
amend the Act to overcome any decisions in favour of ex-service men and women, as in the case of Nancy Law and the other case, after they had gone right through the courts-through the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, the Federal Court of Australia, the High Court. Ultimately, it means that ex-servicemen will lose out because the Government will simply amend the Act to get around the decisions of the courts.
I make an appeal tonight to the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) to make sure that the interests of servicemen are looked after in this respect. I am very sincere in making this request. I have had representations from a number of constituents. As I am a returned serviceman, naturally a lot of people come to me. When it comes to the question of whether or not a pension or an increase in pension is to be approved, if it is in the balance, the onus of proof finally rests upon the Department, upon the Repatriation Commission to give the benefit of the doubt to the returned service man or woman. I am deeply concerned when I hear that as a result of the recent High Court case alone there will be an amendment to the Act to overcome the decision of the court, against the interests of ex-service men and
women-
I am also deeply concerned--:-I have spoken to the Minister for Veterans' Affairs on this issue and 1 have written a number of letters to him-about the long delays that are occurring, particularly with vascular cases. I know that the system ties up these cases. I realise that the Minister is quite sincere when he makes the point that the system ties them up, and undoubtedly it needs amendment.

In particular, the cases are all being tied up pending the court hearings. As a result, men and women who are very ill indeed ate being subjected to much deep concern about their future. I make an appeal on the second issue that something be done urgently to speed up these cases, to make sure they are resolved in the interests of those people. I know of instances where, because of the way things are going, the poor people will be de~d before an answer is obtained in respect of their applications.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (9.35)-Our repatriation system in Australia is really the envy of the world. One would not think so, listening to the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay). We have an excellent system and we are making some amendments to it to improve it. The honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) said that they are significant changes with which the Opposition generally agrees. As the honourable member for Grayndler said, I spent more than 30 years of my life in the Services-from the Second World War to a year or so after the Vietnam war ended-so I have been involved in most of the areas which were mentioned in the very thoughtful speech by the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes). I will deal very briefly with the amendment moved by the honourable member for Bonython. The first point concerns the supplementary rental assistance. My colleague the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) dealt with this matter at some length when the Social Services Amendment Bill was before the House, prior to the discussion on this Bill. To save taking up the time of the House I will not repeat those arguments because exactly the same arguments apply in thas case.
The second amendment suggests that repatri~ ation benefits for peacekeeping forces should be made retrospective. I have some sympathy for this one. It is a very difficult question. I have served in a number of those areas~Japan and a number of others-where repatriation benefits are not available. I got them, of course, in other ways.
Mr Leo McLeay-You were lucky.
Mr THOMSON-Lucky or unlucky, it can be taken either way. There is a problem here. How do we define the areas? How retrospective do we make it? However, I take the point, and the honourable member for Corio made an excellent and thoughtful speech on this matter. I will take it to the Government and suggest that it look at this matter to see what can be done about past peacekeeping forces.

Indemnity ofReporter and Printer

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2627

The third point deals with the eligibility for service pensions for all Allied ex-merchant seamen. This again is a problem. We have extended eligibility to Australian merchant seamen, and I know it has been very well received by them. The Government does not want to extend this benefit at the present time. I will not commit myself on this. It is something which obviously will have to be considered, perhaps later. The Repatriation Act Amendment Bill is a good Bill. There are one or two points with which the Opposition does not agree, but there is no doubt that the major points in the Bill are supported by all members of the House.
Mr Armitage~What about the delays in the Nancy Law case?
Mr THOMSON~I understand those delays are being dealt with now. I believe 850 cases were held up waiting for the decision of the High Court of Australia. They are being dealt with now. The hearing of these cases is commencing.
Mr Armitage~Are you going to amend the Act to get around the decisions of the courts?
Mr THOMSON~I have no information on that matter at all. The 850 outstanding cases are being dealt with at the moment by the Repatriation Commission. I am glad that the Opposition supports the very significant changes to this Act. The first and third amendments are not accepted by the Government. The Government will look at the second amendment and see what can be done. I am sure all honourable members will agree that making decisions on retrospectivity on a wide range of areas is a complex issue. We have to decide geographic limits and all sorts of other problems. I am personally aware of some of them, but I will take up the matter with the Minister for Veterans' Affairs.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading
. Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third time.

INDEMNITY OF PRINCIPAL PARLIAMENTARY REPORTER AND COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT
PRINTER
Mr SPEAKER~The honourable member for Prospect has indicated to me that he wishes my indulgence to raise an issue. I invite the honourable gentleman to do so.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect)~Today for the first time, when I received my 'greens'~the transcript of the speech I made in this House~two pieces of paper were attached to them. The first is signed James W. Roberts, Principal Parliamentary Reporter. Amongst other things it states:
IF printed copies of the speech are required, please complete the lower portion of this form and return to the Hansard office.
The lower part of the form which is headed 'Application for Copies of Speeches', inter alia, states:
In consideration of the supply of these copies of the reprint I agree to keep the Principal Parliamentary Reporter and his staff and the Commonwealth Government Printer and his staff indemnified against all actions proceedings claims or demands made against them by reason of any defamatory matter contained in the said reprint, and against all costs damages or expenses in respect of such action proceedings claim or demand.
We are supposed to sign this form. I signed my copy of the form as I had spoken on the Social Services Amendment Bill and my speech was not likely to lead to any actions. Mr Speaker, what is the reason for the change? If there is a good reason for it should the whole question be referred to the Privileges Committee of the Parliament if there is some legal doubt?
Mr SPEAKER~The honourable gentleman is quite right to raise the matter. So far as I am aware today is the first day on which the forms have been distributed. It is done under my instructions. Let me dispose of the last point first. I think it would be a misuse of the Privileges Committee to ask it for a legal opinion about the matter 'so I put that point aside. However, I indicate to the honourable gentleman that for some time the question of the scope of privilege has been a matter of concern to me. It has also been a matter of concern to the Principal Parliamentary Reporter and the Government Printer. The Principal Parliamentary Reporter who reports and arranges for the printing and the Government Printer who actually prints are capable of being sued personally. If a libel action arose out of a libellous statement it may be alleged that the Government Printer and the Principal Parliamentary Reporter were liable for damages.
The honourable gentleman has asked me to answer him on this matter and I must say that I

2628 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Indemnity ofReporter and Printer

am inhibited in giving a full and frank reply. The reason I am inhibited in giving a full and frank reply is that I do not want to instigate a course of action which may be to our disadvantage or to the disadvantage of certain honourable members. It would not be proper for me, representing all members, to encourage that course of action. Therefore, I am being very circumscribed in what I have to say. I have had the opportunity to explain to the honourable member for Prospect the sorts of things that are in my mind. I am rather hesitant, unless pressed, to go further than I have. I am anxious to ensure protection for the Principal Parliamentary Reporter and the Government Printer. The paper the honourable gentleman is asked to sign relates to the provision, without charge to honourable members, of a certain number of copies. I think it is 35.

Dr KlugmanIt is 100.

Mr SPEAKER-It has gone up since I first became a member. As the honourable member will know it is open to any honourable member to order as many copies as he chooses and pay for them. Of course, the distribution of 100 or 100,000 copies may raise the same issues. I feel I am in a position in which I am basically asking the indulgence of the honourable member for Prospect to allow me not to go any further than I need to go on the matter. I think perhaps I have said enough.

Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect)-Mr Speaker,

with your indulgence, I ask whether the Senate is

doing the same thing. Have you discussed the mat-

ter with Mr President?

.

Mr SPEAKER-Yes. I am not sure whether the Senate has actually included that particular requirement but it will be done because the protection which is being sought is for the Principal Parliamentary Reporter and the Government Printer. It applies in both chambers.

Dr KLUGMAN-Mr Speaker, secondly, how would the distribution of an extract from
Hansard differ from the distribution of the daily Hansard itself? I could order 100 copies of today's Hansard. I assume that the Principal Parliamentary Reporter would not be protected then.

Mr SPEAKER-I must say to the honourable gentleman that I do not think that he could feel absolutely certain about that.

Dr KLUGMAN-Would the Principal Parliamentary Reporter?

Mr SPEAKER-He would be very unhappy if you took 100 copies and distributed them.

Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler)-Mr Speaker, may I have your indulgence to speak on

this matter. I am concerned about the matter that the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) has raised. I understand and have understood for some time that opinions have been sought from the Attorney-General on this matter. I am concerned that the response to those opinions and the fact that we are now as individual members being required to iIidemnify others against what we say could tend to reduce the rights of parliamentarians to say what they believe is necessary to right injustices.
Mr SPEAKER-No. I interrupt the honourable gentleman. I think he misunderstands the proposition.
Mr LEO McLEAY-Mr Speaker, perhaps you will allow me to continue. I do not misunderstand my right to stand here and say what I believe should be said. I think that part of the right we have to right injustices is also that we can allow others to see and hear what we have said. The opinions that the Attorney has given, in some instances in private, if tested could bring into question the rights of honourable members. I ask you, Mr Speaker, whether in the recess you will go into this matter extensively and ensure that rights that we have enjoyed until now are protected when we are asked to indemnify others against what we say and circulate.
We are now approaching the situation in which if we allow a privilege we have had in the past to be circumscribed we could be allowing other privileges we now enjoy also to be circumscribed. If we do that there is not much point in our saying anything we believe to be true, without having the protection we have enjoyed for many years in the Parliament and which other parliaments in the world enjoy. I think that what is being done at present, and what is being suggested by the Attorney should be looked at by you as our guardian here and, if necessary, changes should be suggested to the Executive. I am pleased that the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) is in the chamber at present to hear what the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) and you and I have raised. If our rights need to be protected, any necessary legislation could be brought in in the next session of the Parliament to ensure that is
done.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh)-Mr Speaker, I am somewhat concerned at the comments by you to the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) in asking that he not press the matter. I can understand the possibilities; nevertheless, I cannot sit here and not raise the point that being in the dark creates more problems for me and, I am sure, for all members of both sides of the House. I do

Indemnity ofReporter and Printer

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2629

not know what avenues are available to you to advise us of what is in the unknown box but, without pressing you, I would have to know what you have confided to the honourable member for Prospect because I feel that with the points that have been raised it can and possibly will affect all of us. Without pressing you here, I must insist on knowing just how far the matter goes. I would suggest to you that you find an avenue to convey that information to us in the appropriate way.
Mr SPEAKER-I will deal immediately with the point raised by the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott). I would be very happy to say to the honourable member for Hindmarsh that which I have said to the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman). I assure the honourable member that, in my reluctance to pursue the matter to its full point, I have in mind the interests of members. I suggest to the honourable member for Hindmarsh that he see me if he wishes and I will say to him or, for that matter, any other honourable member what I have said to the honourable member for Prospect. But I reiterate
that r do not want to be pressed further.
The honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) has raised a few matters. He was speaking by indulgence and I interrupted him because it was apparent that he has misunderstood the situation. The fact is that there is no restriction at all. on the freedom of speech of every member of this House. As members of parliament it is the duty of members to speak the truth and to demand the truth. Every member can do that with absolute privilege and every member must be able to do it. That is the historic meaning of privilege; for the reasons that no member should be afraid to say anything, nor should he seek any favour from saying anything. There is no restriction on a member in any sense. The honourable member for Grayndler spoke in terms of my ascertaining that our rights as members must be protected. Our rights as members are protected. There is no suggestion that rights that have been enjoyed are being restricted. I will go only so far as to say that there is some question as to whether or not some honourable members have assumed that their rights are broader than they in fact are.
Mr GROOM (Braddon)-Mr Speaker, may I just make a point concerning the same matter? I am sorry to be so late in raising it. May I ask you, Mr Speaker, what indemnity the Principal Parliamentary Reporter is seeking for the ordinary daily Hansards which are issued in their thousands and thousands around Australia.
Mr SPEAKER-None.

Mr GROOM-As I understand it, the extracts that we obtain as our speeches are from the daily Hansard and presumably they are the same as the speech contained in the daily Hansard. Therefore, if there is any libellous statement, it has been published already in a multitude of copies around Australia.
Mr SPEAKER-There is a difference.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)- Mr Speaker, with your indulgence-I do not wish to delay the House-I want to make a few comments. I appreciate what you have said and I think that what you have said is perfectly right. I was under the impression that an earlier Privileges Committee had made a recommendation that might protect the situation you are about in terms of members having copies of their speeches ordered and then circulated.
Mr SPEAKER-The Privileges Committee is not capable of determining this matter. It is a matter for the courts.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-No, but there was a suggestion that we might try to bring in some statute to try to give an additional width to the privilege.
Mr SPEAKER-I have looked at that matter very closely and I do not believe it is a course which the Parliament would be willing to pursue. I must say that I had not intended to raise this matter. The honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) raised it immediately before I came into the House so I did not get an opportunity to alert the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) or the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) that the matter was coming up. What I would suggest is that honourable members read this portion of the Hansard and if there is any matter which they wish to raise with me arising out of it I would be very happy to discuss the matter with them.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, I think that the last course you have suggested would be the best way of dealing with the matter. Perhaps we can look at this debate and the earlier report of the Privileges Committee to see whether some other action needs to be taken and whether there is a capacity for any other action to be taken.
NEW BUSINESS AFfER 11 P.M.: ADJOURNMENT OF THE HOUSE
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (9.58)-by leave-I move:

2630 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

That Standing Order 48A (Adjournment of House), as amended by sessional order, and Standing Order 103 (II o'clock rule) be suspended for the remainder of this year.
I do this not because it is intended that we should sit inordinately late; I frankly think that this House has operated much better since we began adjourning a little earlier than was the wont in the earlier years of the Manager of Opposition Business and my earlier years in this place. There are a number of matters which the Government believes need to be concluded before the House rises and in an effort to do so it will possibly be necessary for us to introduce matters after 11 o'clock. However, I can assure honourable members that to the maximum it is our intention that we rise before too late both tonight and tomorrow night, and any other night that the House might be sitting. Consequently, I would urge honourable members to support this motion, recognising that it is being moved only for the purpose of ensuring that legislation can be passed before the House adjourns.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (9.59)-1 have discussed this matter with my colleague who has responsibility for the next matter for debate and would want to have it concluded. I am well aware of the other matters which possibly will be returned from the Senate tomorrow. I would not want it thought though that we would be anxious to extend the sittings just because the Government has asked us to on this occasion. It is because there are matters which are pressing and which concern the nation and which involve legislation coming back from the Senate that we are of the opinion that the Government should receive our co-operation to this extent. I might say though that there are many other matters we would be anxious to debate if the House continued to sit. I understand that may well happen. If that is so, then of course we might be suggesting a different course of action as and when we return at an early time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
NATIONAL HEALTH AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 27 October, on motion by Mr MacKellar:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (IO.O)-Unlike the other two Bills introduced by tlie Government yesterday, which it has compelled this House to debate today because of the chaotic state of its legislative preparation, l:lt least the National Health Amendment Bill is a small Bill and, therefore, has an advantage over those two omnibus

Bills with which we have had to deal at very short notice. It contains two quite distinct amendments in the pharmaceutical field. The first change is what I would call a confessional change; it is to correct an error in the hastily drafted legislation of May 1981. The second change is a further extension of the user pay principle; that is, it raises the patient contribution for items under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme from the present $2.75 per prescription to $3.20 per prescription.
I wish to deal with each of the two parts of the Bill. First of all I deal with what I call the confessional part of the Bill. Although there is very little sign of any confessional element in the second reading speech of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar)-1 did not expect it-if we examine clauses 4, 5, 6 and 7 in this Bill they are simply the result of a ministerial boo-boo. That error was the result of the hasty and hurried way in which major health legislation was rushed through the House in May and June of this year. Of CO).lrse, the Government recognised that its rather shabby health legislation would not survive critical scrutiny in a Senate which it did not control. The result was rushed, hasty legislation, full of holes and anomalies which are now beginning to surface.
The anomaly which this Bill seeks to correct is the first of the fruits of that rushed legislation. I can certainly promise the House that it assuredly will not be the last. The anomaly which this Bill seeks to correct arose in the following way: The Government abolished the hospital cost-sharing agreements with all States except South Australia and Tasmania. Having abandoned those cost sharing agreements it paid to the States a grant which included an amount towards the cost to the hospitals in the States of supplying pharmaceuticals to all patients. So the cost-sharing agreements were ended but the States were paid for pharmaceutical provisions in public hospitals. In its hurry the Government overlooked-simply forgot, or made some other error-the fact that the ending of cost sharing reactivated section 99 of the Health Insurance Act under which State public hospitals could claim reimbursement from the Commonwealth for their expenditure on pharmaceutical benefits.
So here we have this idiotic Government, out to save money with its new health scheme, faced with the problem of having to pay money twice over. Having already paid the money to the States for pharmaceuticals under the arrangements it had made with the States in May and June, it was faced with a possibility of duplicated claims for those same moneys from State public hospitals. I do not quite know when the error was discovered.

National Health Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2631

Presumably it was some time in early September. Certainly an announcement was made by the Acting Minister for Health (Senator Peter Baume) in mid-September a fortnight after the scheme was in operation. As I have said before in this House, the Acting Minister for Health, unlike the existing Minister for Health, has a certain frankness and honesty about his statements. I wish to quote the confession of error because I think it makes it much clearer than the Minister's second reading speech. The Acting Minister for Health said this:
In States where those agreements are no longer in force it is now open to those hospitals which have been approved to again claim reimbursement. . . . if taken advantage of would, in the Government's view, represent a duplication of funding as regards pharmaceutical benefits.
When the Act was originally drafted no provision was made for such an eventuality and approvals of hospitals to dispense pharmaceutical benefits cannot be revoked in such circumstances.
In order to avoid any excess payment by the Commonwealth, the Government intends to amend the National Health Act at the earliest opportunity to empower the Minister to revoke the approvals.
The Bill we have before us tonight is the result of this discovery. The amendments are designed to empower the Minister to revoke approvals to hospital authorities for the purpose of supplying pharmaceutical benefits. The Opposition will not oppose these amendments.
As we will have more of these amendments, I wish to make the Opposition's position perfectly clear. The Opposition remains implacably opposed to the health scheme introduced on 1 September. In the months remaining to this Government we will support the correction of the worst anomalies and absurdities in the scheme for two reasons; firstly, because such anomalies simply compound the present mess and impose even greater hardships on the Australian people and, secondly, as in this case because they would impose unjustified burdens on the Australian taxpayer. As I have said, this is the first fruit of illprepared legislation and there certainly will be more anomalies to follow.
In the time which is available to me tonight I wish to take up one of the next anomalies that I think the Government will have to do something about soon; that is, the predicament of overseas students studying in Australia. Private overseas students require, as a condition of entry, a financiaI guarantee which in most cases is provided by a parent or patron residing overseas. Because of this guarantee the private overseas student is regarded as wholly or substantially dependent on a resident of a country other than Australia. Therefore, he is not eligible for the health care card. Of course, the difficulty for such students is

that, unlike the similarly dependent Australian student, his parents or guarantors do not have the splendid opportunity to participate in our new health scheme and, therefore, provide cover for them in the way in which many parents provide cover for their children undertaking tertiary education. But, of course, most of these people are overseas and, therefore, do not get an opportunity to participate directly in the Australian private health insurance system. Thus such private foreign students are required to take out private health insurance in a way in which their similarly dependent Australian contemporaries do not have to. It is simply part of the family cover that
the parent takes out.
But perhaps more seriously placed, because their financial resources are often less, are foreign students sponsored by the Commonwealth, State or local government authorities in Australia. In this context of local government authorities are included universities and colleges of advanced education. So it refers to students sponsored in terms of scholarships in universities and colleges of advanced education. By the very fact of that sponsorship such students are exluded from the health care card. Whatever their income situation, which is often directly comparable with Australian students possessing the health care card, they will be refused a health care card on the grounds of that legal sponsorship.
I have many examples but I think the classic example is that of a young Malaysian student, married with two children, receiving a payment of $135 a week, partly as a result of scholarship and partly as a result of teaching. This man received through the post four health care cards. There was enormous eagerness to present him with health care cards and he presented all four cards that he received through the post. This was followed by a letter informing him that because of his sponsorship he was not entitled to a health care card. His comment on the system I think is one that we should preserve and one which we will certainly keep. He said: 'I came to Australia to study higher mathematics, not the complexities of your health insurance system'.
Finally, I mention one other problem. Even those foreign students who might evade all of these legal requirements and are entitled to a health care card cannot receive it until they have been resident in Australia for six months. I want to know from the Minister what happens to them in the first six months of their studies. Are they treated as immigrants? Is an adjustment made and are these students treated as immigrants for those first six months? That is a third problem in relation to overseas students. Thus today many

2632 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

hundreds of overseas students in this country are fully entitled to a health care card on grounds of low income and residence but they are being denied those cards because of the legal interpretations of sponsorship and guaranteeship. So we have the rather ironic situation that while the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) postured at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting many overseas students from those very Commonwealth countries were battling to secure access to health facilities in one of the wealthiest of the Commonwealth countries represented at CHOGM.
I turn now to the second element of the Bill, leaving behind the correction of anomalies. No doubt we will have much more time to deal with those anomalies in this Parliament. The second element of the Bill which we oppose in this House, which I believe will be opposed in the other House also, is the proposal to increase the patient contribution for prescriptions under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme from $2.75 to $3.20. The Opposition opposes this increase and will oppose clause 3 in the Committee stage of the Bill. This is a strange interpretation clause but, nevertheless, that is the way in which this provision has been made effective. I wish briefly to state to the House our reasons for opposing this increase. First of all, in the six years of this Government the patient contribution has more than doubled, rising from $1.50 in 1976 to the proposed $3.20 in 1981. That is a rise of 113 per cent. In that time the consumer price index has risen by 65 per cent, so that, under this Government, the increase in the patient contribution has been almost twice the rate of the CPI rise In that period.
As with every other aspect of health, the Government has shifted the burden of the cost of pharmaceuticals from government to individuals. In 1975 the patient contribution represented 54 per cent of the average cost of items under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. Today it represents 70 per cent of the average cost of items under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. The second set of reasons why we oppose this legislation concerns the difficulties which are already flowing from the $2.75 contribution and which will be simply compounded by this increase. Firstly, persons with multiple prescriptions for a single incident-often a single medical incident requires a number of prescriptions for each of which the patient contribution has to be made-or families with a number of prescriptions for the children of the family are in particular difficulties. Every pharmacist in this country can give examples of patients coming to the pharmacy

with a number of scripts and asking the pharmacist which is the most necessary as they can afford only one; Certainly, in the contacts I have had with pharmacists I think practically every pharmacist I have spoken to has given me examples of that problem. Of course, that difficulty will be increased particularly forpoorer families with multiple prescriptions for a single incident or a number of prescriptions because of the numbers in the family.
Secondly, the increase will add to the difficulties and problems of the chronically ill. The Government has often pretended in its rhetoric to be concerned with the problems of the chronically ill. But it does not, in practice, seem to have given any particular attention to this form of social disadvantage. The problems of these people will be simply compounded by this increase. There has been no effort, for instance, by the Government-I thought it would be possible-to moderate the impact of the increase on the chronically ill.
Thirdly, the increase in patient contribution charges highlights another anomaly in the health scheme which I presume we may also get some action on in the next 12 months. That anomaly is that the holders of pensioner health cards are entitled to free pharmaceuticals but the holders of health care cards are not entitled to free pharmaceuticals. What is the reason for this discrimination? I see that the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) is nodding his head. Perhaps we will get an explanation from him. First of all, the income levels for health care cards are approximately the same as those for pensioner health benefit cards. I am prepared to agree that there are some differences. But the income levels for pensioner health benefit cards closely overlap the income levels for the health care cards. So, roughly similar income levels are the subject of different policies and different values are accorded the cards in the pharmaceutical field. It seems to be very difficult, even for this Minister, to argue that many of the unemployed, many of those on special benefits and many of the low income earners are not as badly off and are not as socially disadvantaged as those with pensioner health benefit cards; yet they do not receive the same entitlements under health care card as the pensioner health benefit card people receive. Health care card holders secure no pharmaceutical benefits. This is an anomaly which needs explanation. We, on this side of the House, look forward to the various efforts to explain this anomaly or this discrepancy.
Of course, the philosophy behind clause 3 is, once again, the user-pays philosophy. Like all

National Health Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2633

examples of health changes at the point of delivery, it is fairly clear what its impact will be. It will have very little impact on the overall demand for pharmaceuticals. But it will add greater burdens for those least able to bear them, many of whom, in this case, have been specifically designated by the Government in its latest health plan as disadvantaged in the health area. That will almost certainly be the result. There will be very little effect-perhaps a marginal effect-on the demand for pharmaceuticals, but certainly quite severe burdens on those least able to bear them, particularly people identified by this Government as socially disadvantaged.
In conclusion, the whole issue of pharmaceutical provision in this country needs to be fully debated, instead of bits of pharmaceutical legislation being trundled into the Parliament in this manner at the end of the session. This is not untypical of the handling of pharmaceutical issues by this Government. They tend to get put at the tail end of health legislation. That usually means that they get trundled in at the last moment in bits and pieces. For instance, we have yet to hear of the Government's final decision on the Ralph report, although the pharmaceutical industry assumes that the report is dead-consigned to that limbo especially reserved by this Government for troublesome reports. As usual, it is a pretty expensive dead letter, but it shares that in common with many other expensive reports commissioned and then ignored by this Government. It is another example of the gross discourtesy shown to able and dedicated people who agree to work on these inquiries and then have their wo.rk relegated and forgotten. I think the Minister's problems are mounting in the pharmaceutical field but perhaps he will ensure, in the new year, that the whole issue of pharmaceutical provisions iri this society is debated in a general way. We do not oppose the motion for the second reading of this Bill because we recognise the need to correct the anomaly which it is the major task of this Bill to correct. But we will oppose clause 3 in the Committee stage as it imposes higher patient contributions for pharmaceutical benefits.
Mr HODGES (Petrie) (1O.16)-The honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) during the earlier part of his speech made some rather uncharitable comments. I do not wish to make particular reference to those. Indeed, they were quite contrary to his nature. But one matter about which I amin agreement with him is his claim that health care card holders should be entitled to some concession when they take prescriptions to

chemists to have them dispensed and have to pay in full what will now be $3.20 per item. In previous debates in this House I have advocated some form of subsidised or concessional pharmaceutical benefits scheme for disadvantaged persons-low income earners. In this instance, the Government has instituted a system whereby health care card holders-that is, the lower income earners other than the pensioners-can obtain treatment from their local doctor at no cost, provided the doctor bulk bills and is satisfied with 85 per cent of the common fee. Yet, those people may well be faced with a number of charges at the rate of $3.20 a prescription when they leave the doctor and make their way to the pharmacist.
It is not uncommon for families to have two or more members with chronic illnesses. It is not uncommon also for a doctor to prescribe three and four items for a patient. At $3.20 an item it is easy to see how, with two or three chronically ill patients in a family, the health care card holderwho, of course, is the lower income earner-can go to the doctor at no cost at all and yet find himself up for $20, $30 or $40 when he takes the prescriptions to his local chemist. Some form of concessional or subsidised pharmaceutical benefits scheme has been advocated by the Pharmacy Guild of Australia. I support the honourable member for Bonython in his request to have some such scheme implemented.
I do not want to take up much time of the House but I want to make reference, as did the honourable member for Bonython, to the changes in patient contributions over many years and also make comparisons with movements in the consumer price index. I want to go back a little further than did the honourable member for Bonython. I draw the attention of the House to the fact that the patient contribution in March 1960 was 50c and it has risen to $1, $1.50, $2, $2.50, $2.75 and, from December this year, to $3.20. As a percentage of the prescription cost, the patient contribution has risen from 28 per cent in March 1960 to 65 per cent in December this year. If we take the index at 100 in March 1960, there has been a 540 per cent increase in the patient contribution up to December of this year. The consumer price index has risen by 283.1 per cent and the patient contribution as a percentage of the prescription cost has risen by 175.3 per cent. They are considerable increases. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the table setting out those figures.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

2634 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

CHANGES IN PATIENT CONTRIBUTION AND MOV!'MENTS IN c.P.I. ($)

March

Nov.

Sept.

March

July

Sept.

Dec.

1960

1971

1975

1976

1978

1979

1981

Patient contribution
c.P.!' Average cost per prescription (All Prescriptions excl. Discounts)
Patient contribution as percentage of prescription cost
index: March 1960 = 100.0-
Patient contribution
c.P.!' Prescription cost
Index: November 1971 = 100.0-
Patient contribution c.P.!,
Prescription cost

0.50 89.00
1.78
28%
100.00 100.00 100.00

1.00 121.00
2.50
40%
200.00 136.00 140.40
100.00 100.00 100.00

1.50 181.60
3.10
48%
300.00 204.00 174.20
150.00 150.10 124.00

2.00 197.40
3.30
61%
400.00 221.80 185.40
200.00 163.10 132.00

2.50 247.70
3.90
64%
500.00 278.30 219.10
250.00 204.70 156.00

2.75

3.20

275.80341.00 (Est.)

4.28 4.90 (Est.)

64%
550.00 309.90 240.40
275.00 227.90 171.20

65%
640.00 383.10 275.30
320.00 281.80 196.00

Mr HODGES-I thank the House. The other point I wish to raise concerns the new pensioner health benefit card, which indeed is very similar to the previous pensioner health benefit card which had been in existence for a number of years, and also the new health care card. I want to raise some of the difficulties that can arise with both of these cards. About three million Australians are eligible to have the pensioner health benefit card and the health care card. When aperson carrying one of these cards visits the doctor no immediate check is made by the doctor as to when the patient last saw a doctor. There is no charge to the pensioner patient for a visit to the doctor. The doctor bulk bills in most cases; if he does not the pensioner patient may register with a registered health insurance fund. Therefore, it costs the pensioner patient nothing when he visits a doctor. Also, there is no' charge for the pensioner patient when he visits the pharmacist. But because of the present design of the pensioner health benefit card there is absolutely nothing to prevent a pensioner patient who holds such a card from visiting a doctor a dozen times in a matter of days, or indeed a dozen different doctors in one day. Such a person can obtain prescriptions for considerable supplies of drugs and, having obtained those prescriptions, it is a simple matter for the patient to visit a number of different pharmacists to have the prescriptions filled. I suggest that in those circumstances nobody would be suspicious.
If the pensioner health benefit card which existed in 1972 were still in vogue-it went out some time in the early 1970s; I am not sure of the exact date-at least the doctor concerned at the time of presentation of the card would immediately notice the dates of a patient's previous visits to doctors and thus the frequency of visits. The old card recorded the medical attendances of the pensioner patient at a doctor's surgery. There

was space on the card to record the date and the doctor's initials. There was a.certain safeguard. At present the system is wide open to abuse. The current PHB card records optometrical consultations which of course would not occur very frequently-certainly not as frequently as visits to the doctor.
What baffles me is why the card does not have visits to doctors recorded on it. If the date of visit and doctor's initials were recorded it would be a deterrent to the patient to overvisit the doctor and overindulge in the taking of drugs. Additionally, it would serve to alert the doctor if the patient were abusing the system. It would also act as a deterrent to doctors not to see patients too frequently or unnecessarily. Without a date or doctor's initials there is no immediate record of visits for patients who are trekking around to different doctors. Fortunately, of course, the vast majority of pensioner patients would not be involved in excesses but, with more than one million holders of PHB cards, the system cannot afford to be loose or open to abuse.
In the case of health care card holders, the sam:e position exists with regard to free visits to the doctor. There is nothing to prevent a health care card holder from visiting one dozen or more doctors on the one day. If obtaining supplies of drugs is the motive the health care card holder will have to pay for his supplies at the pharmacist at the rate today of $2.75 or after 1 December of $3.20 for each item. If he is successful in obtaining the drugs for which he has a market, it might well be worth his while to pay the $3.20 contribution to the chemist.
The PHB card and health care card have been made large enough to include columns for date and doctor's initials. I see no good reason why this information should not be included on them. As I

National Health Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2635

pointed out, their inclusion would reduce abuse of the system. I ask the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) to examine this matter because I believe that a number of people in our community who are out to abuse the system will be able to do so. It may be questioned whether this sort of thing ought to be highlighted here or indeed anywhere. The fact is that people will find ways to abuse the system. I can see no reason, given the size of the cards and the previous design of the PHB card, why we cannot institute for both PHB cards and health care cards the system which existed in the early 1970s.
Dr CASS (Maribyrnong) (10.27)-The contribution of the honourable member fOI Petrie .(Mr Hodges) highlights some comments I made earlier on the Social Services Amendment Bill which we were discussing before dinner. It is a very good example of how much the Government loses when it presents legislation in this fashion. It loses the wisdom of even its own back bench, let alone the contributions that we might make. I do not happen to agree with the reasons given by the honourable member for Petrie for overutilisation. The point I make is that he has quite clearly indicated an area of concern which should have been considered. I do not expect the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) to be a genius or God and therefore to be able to encompass all these possibilities; no one can. That is all the more reason why we ought to take a more rational approach to problems such as this. The honourable member could have said that the Government has a problem because the cost of pharmaceutical benefits is enormous, which it is, or because we as a community are consuming far too many drugs. That is true; we are all drug addicts. We should therefore look into the problem.
The Government approached .it specifically from the financial point of view and has tried to stop the excesses by imposing a higher charge. I
cannot accuse it of that without at the same time conceding that when we were in government we took somewhat the same approach. Our remedy was not as extreme but we also raised the contribution paid by the patient in order to try to cut down the cost to the community of drugs. I happen to think that that is a totally wrong approach. We cannot consider the question properly in the House. My speech in response to the honourable member will not register in the way that my points could be registered if we were in a small committee discussing the issue with the Minister and calling upon people, such as pharmacists, to shed light on the problem. I simply make the observation on a seemingly trifling point, which draws only four people into the House-that

shows how insignificant it is-but which illustrates a very fundamental weakness in the way in which we approach legislation.
I am sorry that my colleague the honourable member for Petrie and I are not able to be-on a parliamentary committee discussing this issue with the Minister and trying to solve the problem, which I see as being excessive consumption of drugs. I take issue with the honourable member in trying to analyse what the causes of this excessive consumption of drugs might be. He suggests that, because we do not have these, I think quite sensible, requirements for entering on to a card when patients visit doctors and so on, some patients will make it a habit of visiting three or four doctors and getting batches of prescriptions. Of course, if they are pensioners they do not have to pay for them. They can get the drugs. I, personally, do not believe that that is how people, except for a very small minority who may be drug addicts, behave. Registering them in that way does not necessarily solve the problem.
The patients who are getting special benefit cards because they are underprivileged but are not pensioners, still have to pay for their drugs. Again, I do not believe that they will bother to go to a doctor for nothing to get a whole range of prescriptions and then trot off to pay for the drugs. I do not think that happens very often at all. However, the statistics certainly show that we are enormous pill poppers in this country. Compared with any other country, barring perhaps America, we are way up in front. I think this relates to the whole way in which medicine is practised. I had better be careful beca~se I do not want to blame doctors. Let me change the words. This all relates to the system under which doctors practise their medicine in this country and the incentives built into the system which in a way encourage doctors, in my view, to-overtreat and overpreScribe. I do not expect the Minister to agree with me. Some of us have been saying this for a while. This includes not just people on this side of the House; academics have been saying it. It is interesting to note that in recent weeks even the Australian Medical Association has been stirred to institute two inquiries into the utilisation of services~one relates, I think, to hysterectomies and the other to tonsillectomies-to try to prove or disprove--
Mr MacKellar-And appendectomies too, I think.
Dr CASS-It does not matter. A couple of surveys have been made of a range of hospitals to try to ascertain whether the claim that there is overutilisation of these sorts of services is true. Of course, the medical profession officially believes

2636 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

that this is not happening. There are other members of the medical profession-Professor Lou Opit for one-who agree. Some may say: 'Well, he is a bit of a nut because he says those sorts of things over and over'. He is basing his .findings on statistics that are published. For example, some were provided by Marlene Lugg who was at the time. I do not know whether she still is-a statistician in Western Australia. Some were published, I think, by Dr McEwin-I am not sure; it is somebody to do with the health services in New South Wales who has published data from the Medibank computer showing the rates of operations even in country towns varying enormously for simple things such as tonsillectomy.
The drug problem relates to the same sort of thing; it is no different. For this reason I think this approach is doomed to fail. It will not succeed. True, the Government is going to charge patients more. Sadly, in cases where the drugs are really necessary people unable to afford to pay for them will suffer. My own view is-I give it not as the policy of the Australian Labor Party but one which I think we should try to work towards-we need some system of medical practice whereby drugs are prescribed only when they are really necessary. That involves analysing the system under which medicine is practised. I think there is evidence to show that in certain situations, for instance under salaried medical services, there is less inclination to prescribe drugs so freely. There is no suggestion that therefore many patients die because they do not get drugs. I think the evidence suggests that there is a lower consumption of drugs and services and, on analysing the results, that the quality of the health care provided is better. The Minister may dismiss that as my prejudiced view.
I opened up these remarks with a comment that we ought to have a committee of the House or the Parliament to look into these sorts of problems. The situati.on is getting beyond a joke. It is getting beyond party politics. It is reaching a stage where all advanced countries like ours are finding that the problem of the cost of health care seems to be never-ending in its capacity to expand and to gobble up more and more of our resources. We could work out a better system. In my view, drugs that are necessary should be free. They are as vital a part of the management of illness as is visiting a doctor. Of course, in our view visits to doctors ought to be free also. For these reasons, among the many others that have been mentioned by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett), I certainly will support our move to oppose this clause when it (;omes up in the Committee stage.

Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (10.34)-in reply-In replying to the honourable members who have spoken in this debate on the National Health Amendment Bill I do not want to say too much about the contribution of the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett). He has been in the chamber for a long time tonight so I can excuse him for substituting some personal remarks for substance in his speech. I take up the point that the honourable member for Bonython, the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) and the honourable member for Maribyrnong (Dr Cass) have men-
tioned; that is, the cost of pharmaceutical prescriptions to holders of health care cards, the fact that they have been required, if they wish those prescriptions to be dispensed by a pharmacist, to pay the patient contribution.
There are two facts about this which have to be kept in mind. I hate to introduce the question of money but I am encouraged in this by the contribution of the honourable member for Maribyrnong because he frankly acknowledged that modern health care is a very expensive proposition. That is why I enjoy the contributions of the honourable member for Maribyrnong. I do not always agree with what he says; in fact, I seldom agree with what he says. He is a thoughtful member of the House who puts forward his views in a way which I think should be taken notice of by members on both sides of the House. I thank him for the way he presents these thoughts. Modern health care is a very expensive proposition. Of course, the cost of modern pharmaceuticals is a very expensive proposition. The fact remains that if all those who hold health care cards, or their dependants, were to be provided with the same sort of facilities' as pensioner health benefit card holders then the cost to the community would be considerable. Obviously, this is a factor which has to be taken into account.
The other fact of the matter which has not been
mentioned tonight is that holders of health care cards can receive free treatment at public hospitals. That, of course, includes the supply of pharmaceuticals at public hospitals. Rather than there being no opportunity for holders of health care cards to avail themselves of pharmaceuticals at a lower cost, in fact, that source of supply is available to them. I acknowledge the very real concern that has been shown by all members speaking here tonight about the cost of pharmaceuticals, particularly to people with chronic complaints and people with children who may all at the same time come down with some medical problem which requires a number of pharmaceutical prescriptions to be made for them. I acknowledge that. The

National Health Amendment Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2637

Government, as I have mentioned in this House before, is seeking to look into this question in great depth. I hope that we will be able to come up with something in the future. I say that I hope we will be able to come up with something in the future because, as the honourable member for Maribyrnong has suggested, there is no modern country which has solved the questions of how to bring about a proper reward, if you like, for the manufacturers of pharmaceutical products and how to maintain the supply of pharmaceutical products to the general community at a cost that the individual and the community can afford.
I agree with the honourable member for Maribyrnong that people in Australia have a tendency to consume excessive amounts of drugs. In recent times a campaign was mounted in doctors' surgeries and in hospitals which put very clearly the fact that if one were not prescribed some drugs by the doctor this was not necessarily a bad thing but a good thing. Unfortunately some people feel that if they go to a doctor and he does not give them something to take they have somehow been cheated. We have to overcome that problem. I am not convinced, as is the honourable member for Maribyrnong, that salaried doctors are any better or worse prescribers of drugs than are fee-for-service doctors. I do not happen to have the same beliefs in this area as the honourable member for Maribyrnong has. Certainly, all of us who are connected with the application of health care policies-that includes everybody within the medical profession and the allied health professions-have a very real duty to educate the public to the fact that a reduction in the prescribing of drugs, rather than being a bad thing, is a very good thing. I think it is a sad reflection that so many people in hospitals these days are there as a result of misprescribing by the medical fraternity as a whole. That is not confined to Australia by any means; it is a common feature of medical practice in societies around the world.
Two other questions were raised, both of which are really outside the ambit of this Bill. Certainly, the one raised by the honourable member for Bonython in relation to students within Australia is outside the ambit of the Bill. I take on board what he said and will reply to it at the appropriate time. The matter of the design of pensioner health cards, which was raised by the honourable member for Petrie, comes within the responsibility of my colleague the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney); I will make sure that the honourable member's remarks are drawn to his attention. I have no doubt that he will be speaking to the honourable member for Petrie and availing

himself of that large reservoir of experience that is represented by the honourable member.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
Clauses 1 and 2---'--by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 3 (Interpretation).
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (10.43)-ln dealing with clause 3, I welcome first of all the sympathy of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar). He explained the superficialities of my speech as being due to the severe strain under which I have been suffering in the last several hours. In response, I say that I simply hope that in future the Government of which he is a member will get its legislative act together so that members of the Opposition will not be submitted to the kinds of strains and demands that we have had to put up with in the last 24 hours. At this hour of the evening I do not wish to deal in detail with the grounds for our opposition to clause 3. I expressed them quite clearly in my speech during the second reading debate. All I will do is summarise them briefly.
There are four reasons for our opposing this clause. First of all, the increase in the patient contribution has run very well ahead of inflation in the six years of this Government. I gave figures to establish that fact. Secondly, the result of this Government's policy has been that the patient contribution as a proportion of the average cost of pharmaceutical benefit items has again risen quite dramatically as a result of the user-pay policies of this Government in the pharmaceutical benefit field. Thirdly, I point out that the difficulties for families with multiple prescriptions, either as a result of a single medical incident or because there are numerous prescriptions for different members of a family, are compounded by this increase of 45c per prescription. The same compounding occurs for those who are chronically ill and who have to pay for prescriptions regularly. Finally, as I have pointed out, we object to this .clause because it simply underwrites and highlights the anomaly in relation to the health care card in that people with pensioner health benefitst cards are entitled to free pharmaceuticals but those with health care cards, which are based on much the same economic criteria, are not entitled to free pharmaceuticals. This increase of 45c will simply underwrite, exaggerate and stress that anomaly. For these reasons we are opposed to clause 3.
Question put:
That clause 3 be agreed to.

2638 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Hon. Charles Jones)

Ayes

63

Noes

42

Majority
AYES
Adermann. A. E. Anlhony. J. D. Boume.M. E. Birney. R. J. Bradfield. J. M. Brdithwaite. R. A. Brown. N.A. Bungey. M. H. Burr. M. A. Cadman.A.G. Cameron. Donald Cameron. Ewe" Cameron. Ian CarHon. J. J. Coleman. W. P. Connolly. D: M. Cowan. D. B. Dean.A.G. Dobie. J. D. M. Drummond. P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fire. W.e. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles.G.O-H. Groom. R.J. Hall.Sleele Harris. G. McD. Hicks. N.J. Hodges.J. e. Hodgman. W. M. Howard. J. W.

21
Hunl. R. J. D. Hyde.J.M. Jull,D.F. Kaller. R.e. Lloyd. B. Lynch. Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.e. Moore,J.C. Nhlon,P.J. O'Keere, F. L. Peacock. A. S. Porler, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shiplon, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Slreel, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I. While, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

Armilage. J. L. Beazley. K. e. Blewell.N. Bowen. lionel
Brown, John
Brown. Robert Campbell.G. Cass.M.H. Charles. D. E. Child.J. Cohen. B. Cross. M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling. E. E. Dawkins. J. S. Duffy.M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free. R. V. Fry. K. L. Hawke. R. J. L. Howe.B. L.

NOES

Humphreys. B. C. (Teller) Hurrord, C. J.
Jenkins, H. A.
Jones, Barry Kealing, P. J.
Kenl, L. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo Mildren, J. B. MiHon,P.
Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L.
Mounlrord, J. G. (Teller) Scholes, G. G. D. SCOll, J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Uren,T. Wallis,L.G. Wesl,S.J.
Willis.R. Young, M.J.

PAIRS

Bourchier, J. W. Lusher. S. A.

Johnson. Les Kelly, R.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Clause agreed to.

Remainder of the Bill-by leave-taken as a whole, and agreed to.

Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr MacKellar)-by leave-read a third time.
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS COMMISSION AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 27 October, on motion by MrMoore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (10.54)-The purpose of the Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Bill, which was introduced only last night, is to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act so as to increase the number of members of the Grants Commission. In 1977 the Grants Commission Act was amended so as to reduce the number of commissioners from between four and seven to between two and four. It was amended again in 1978 to allow the appointment of associate members, of whom three were to be appointed on the nomination of fhe State Premiers. The appointment of those associate members lapsed on 30 June this year. Now the Government want, to change the composition of the Commission yet again, this time by removing the upper limit on the number of commissioners so that the Commission can be composed of a chairman plus two or more permanent commissioners.
The background to this matter, which was not in any way explained by the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) in the whole of his three paragraph'second reading speech, is important if one is to understand what this Bill is about. As members of the House would be aware, the States have varying capacities to raise revenue, and the cost of providing services also varies widely between the States. Therefore, the Commonwealth allocates its tax sharing payments to the States in a way which takes account of these differences. The Grants Commission in the past has been given the task of determining these State tax sharing relativities. In 1978 the Commission was asked to determine whether any change was desirable in the State factors which are used to adjust State population as the first step in the process of calculating the percentage distribution among the States of the total tax-sharing entitlements. The Commission was asked to carry out the review on the basis of the principle that the respective payments to which the States are entitled should enable each State to provide government services at standards not appreciably different from the standard of the government

Commonwealth Grants Commission Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2639

services provided by the other States without imposing taxes and charges at levels appreciably different from the levels of the taxes and charges imposed by the other States.
The Grants Commission, after careful analysis, submitted a comprehensive report to the Government on 9 June this year, just before the June Premiers Conference. The effect of the changes in the tax sharing relativities proposed by the Commission would have been to increase the proportions received by New South Wales, Victoria
and Queensfand and to reduce the proportions received by South Australia, Western Australia, and Tasmania. These increases and reductions were substantial. For the record I note that for New South Wales there was an increase of $116m, for Victoria an increase of $SSm, for Queensland an increase of $128m, for South Australia there was $77m less, for West Australia $160m less and for Tasmania $64m less. The States which would have lost as a result of the implementation of this recommendation protested strongly against acceptance of this report. The Commonwealth agreed not to implement the report immediately but to pay additional grants to New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland in the current financial year to compensate for the additional grants which they would not receive because of delay in the implementation of the Grants Commission recommendation and to resubmit the issue for further consideration by the Grants Commission; that is, the Commission was being asked to review its own report. It is principally for this purpose that the Bill now before the House has been introduced; that is, to give the Commission the number of members needed to conduct this important review.
However, the Government, in so doing, has adopted a different approach from that which it adopted in extending the membership of the Commission to enable the previous inquiry into relativities to be held. At that time it extended the membership of the Commission by providing for the States to nominate three so-called associate members on the basis of New South Wales and Victoria jointly nominating one member and the other four States jointly nominating two members. This ensured that the States would have on the inquiry people who they could be reasonably sure would represent their interests. However, their appointments expired on 30 June under the existing legislation. In the Bill now before the House, instead of retaining that basis of appointment by which the States nominate their members to the Commission, the legislation that provided for that form of appointment is being repealed and the Government is simply moving to

extend the number of permanent members of the Commission without any legislative guarantee that the States will have their representatives on the Commission for this crucial review.
The Minister, in his second reading speech, said
that it was the wish of the States that the Commission should have the same composition when conducting this review as it had for the initial report. He also claimed that the legislation would enable this to occur. This is so, in that it allows the Commonwealth to appoint to the Commission for this review the same additional personnel as were previously there for the initial report. However, they are no longer associate members. Furthermore, the legislation does not make it mandatory that the same persons be appointed or that persons who are nominated by the States be appointed. All we have is the Minister's word for this in the second reading speech.
There is no guarantee in the legislation that the States will get the same people for this review as they had for the initial report. The Government should have made clear in this debate what it intends to do. I guess it is not going to, given the way it operates in this House. It did not do so in the
second reading speech, but it should have made its intentions absolutely clear. Does it intend to ensure that the States will have the exactly the same personnel on the Commission for the purposes of the review as were on it for the initial report, or is that not the intention? The I\1inister certainly has not made it clear in his second readingspeech.
As I mentioned earlier, the speech the Minister made in introducing this Bill was an absolute contempt of Parliament. A three-paragraph speech does not describe the background to this Bill ina way which is intelligible to members or to the public at large. On 22 October the Minister issued a Press statement announcing the reference to the Grants Commission which was a far more extensive review of the situation than the one he gave to this House in his second reading speech. I think that shows an absolute contempt of this Parliament. By neglecting to describe the background to the Bill the Minister also managed to sloth over the fact that the Bill is long overdue. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) announced on 21 June, that is, over four months ago, that the Grants Commission would be asked to produce a further report on its assessment of State relativities and to present this further report early in 1982. However, the matter has only now been referred to the Grants Commission, four months after the Treasurer's announcement. This totally unexplained delay in making the reference will now make it impossible for the Commission to report

2640 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Commonwealth Grants Commission Bill

early in 1982, as agreed between the Commonwealth and the States. The Commission is now being asked to report by 31 May 1982. The Commission will need every day of the seven months until that date adequately to prepare its report.
The States and the Commonwealth will have too little time, after receiving the report, to evaluate it carefully before it has to be discussed at the June 1982 Premiers Conference. As a result, conflict between the States and the Commonwealth is likely to occur. The States which are adversely affected by the report which eventually, will be brought down by the Commission are bound to argue that it has been a rush job and therefore has been inadequately done, and that they have been hardly done by in the report. This conflict will have been caused by the Commonwealth's totally unexplained failure to expedite the reference to the Commission.
Why has there been this delay? We have been told absolutely nothing by the Government. Let me make some assessment as to why I think there has been a delay. I believe the delay has been brought about because of the Government's absolute inability to resolve a number of factors. As I have said, those factors, are, firstly, that some States-that is, those States which had been well treated by the initial report-did not want a review. If there was to be a review they wanted the terms of reference to be restricted to issues that could be determined quickly. For instance, New South Wales argued that the .review should be confined to four elements. The first element was any new evidence or new material provided by any State or the Commonwealth. The second was the calculation errors reported by any State or the Commonwealth. The third referred to comments by any State or the Commonwealth on the methodology adopted by the Commission in its initial report, and the fourth to any revised assessment method not previously proposed by the Commission.
The New South Wales Government considered that such terms of reference would enable the review to be relatively short. That is, it would not require the volume of submissions of the orginall report nor would it take the time of that report. That those submissions have been rejected means that the review will take much longer to conduct than would otherwise have been the case.
The second reason for delay in establishing the terms of reference is possibly that some States did not want reference to be made to the data for 1980-81. The previous inquiry into relativities was based on data for the three-year period from 1977-78 to 1979-80. If the Commission were now

to be required to look at data, so far as it is available, for 1980-81 then clearly the length of the review would be considerably extended because it would have to go over a whole lot of new material which had not been available to it for the previous report. However, the Commonwealth has seen fit to require that the Commission have regard to 1980-81 data. In the reference that has been sent to the Grants Commission it has been required particularly to have regard to such data. That means that the Government has acted against the wishes of at least some of the States in this regard and the Grants Commission will have to prepare a more extensive report than would otherwise have
been the case.
The third reason (or delay, and probably the most important, is the decision of the Commonwealth at the Premiers Conference in May this year to revise the form of health payments to the States. As honourable members are well aware, up until this financial year payments to the States in repect of hospital cost-sharing agreements, the school dental program and the community health program had been by way of specific payment to the States. However, at the Premiers Conference in the middle of this year the Government decided to put all those payments into general revenue payments but have them specially itemised within that category. The question then arose in relation to this review by the Grants Commission of the report on State relativities as to whether relative health needs in the various States should also be assessed by the Commission in conducting the review. I understand that this question has been the subject of intensive discussion within the Government and between the Commonwealth and the States. Finally, it has been decided to include this item in the terms of reference for the Grants Commission in conducting its review.
Thus, because of the Government's failure to deal expeditiously with these three factors-thilt is, the desire of some States for a limited review, the question of whether to include 1980-81 data, and whether to take into account relative health needs-not only has there been an inordinate delay in the Government getting around to establishing the terms of reference and conveying that reference to the Grants Commission, but almost certainly there will be great difficulty in the Grants Commission meeting the timetable established for it by the Government, that is, to conclude the review by 31 May next year.
The Government has wasted four whole months since it decided to have the Grants Commission conduct its review. It has taken that long to get the reference to the Commission and to provide it with the personnel needed to establish the

Commonwealth Grants Commission Bill

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2641

review. Of course, the provision of personnel is only now occurring, with the legislation before the House. As I indicated earlier, this is likely to mean that not only will the Grants Commission not have sufficient time to do its job properly, but also that the States adversely affected by its final report will seize on this point as a basis to challenge the results. It also means that with the report not being available until the end of May there will be little time for the States and the Commonwealth to discuss it adequately before decisions have to be made at the Premiers Conference in the middle of the year on the relative payments to the States for 1982-83. The four months delay in making this reference to the Grants Commission is utterly unforgiveable and is indicative of a Government which is quite incapable of efficient management of the affairs of government.
Another purpose of the Bill in enlarging the personnel of the Commission is to enable it to undertake another inquiry into the finances of the Australian Capital Territory. The Opposition welcomes the enlargement of the Commission for this purpose. Such an inquiry is a necessary precondition for the preparation of proposals for self government in the Australian Capital Territory. However, this is another inquiry which has been extraordinarily delayed by the Government. I understand that the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) has been talking about this reference for a whole year, yet up until now we have had no reference to the Grants Commission for such an inquiry. I understand no reference has yet been made, but at least the personnel of the Grants Commission will be expanded so that such an inquiry can be undertaken. Obviously, this again is something which should have been done a long time ago if we were to have a proper inquiry into the Australian Capital Territory and if the proposals for a move towards self-governmentwhich the Minister for the Capital Territory says he is in favour of-were to be expedited. The Opposition, despite its regret ai the Government's delay in bringing this Bill before the House and taking other decisions in relation to it, does not oppose the legislation.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Wilson) read a third time.

House adjourned at 11.11 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the production of dried sultanas, and for other purposes.
Mr Street to present a Bill for an Act to amend the International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Act 1963.
Mr Viner to present a Bill for an Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Mr McVeigh to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following elements of the work known as the construction of new air traffic services centre and control tower, Perth Airport, WA. which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament, namely: air traffic services operations building, technical maintenance centre, radio equipment building, and services building.
Mr MeVeigh to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament, namely: Upgrading of airport facilities for the introduction of domestic wide-body aircraft.
Mr MeVeigh to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the committee has duly reported to Parliament, namely: Construction of working, living and area facilities for Army and Navy personnel at Watsonia, Vic.
Mr MeVeigh to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament, namely: Redevelopment of Brisbane International Airport~Further dredging and reclamation.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 28 October 1981, pursuant to statute:
Defence ActDeterminations-I 98 1No. 45-Married Trainee's Allowance. No. 47-Emergency Evacuation Overseas-Allowances
and Compensation. Lands Acquisition Act-Statement of lands acquired by agreement authorised under sub-section 7 (I).
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library
Mr Morris to ask Mr Speaker:

2642 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Request/or information

(I) Who initiated the current User Needs Survey of Members and Senators which is being conducted on a random
basis by the Parliamentary Library.

(2) Was there any consultation with client-services staff in
the preparation of this survey; if so, what are the details; if not, what is the reason.

(3) How many Members and Senators will be surveyed, who are they, and how were they chosen.

(4) What is the purpose of this survey and will it be a reg-

ular occurrence.

.

(5) Does the Survey specifically relate to current services offered by the Library.

(6) Will the expansion or contraction of existing client services, or the introduction of new services, depend on the resu Its of this survey.
(7) What cognisance was taken of both the debate on the library's appropriation in Senate Estimates Committee A, and the report of that Committee, in the preparation and conduct of this survey.
(8)Was the joint Library Committee consulted in the preparation of this Survey.
(9) Which Library staff members are responsible for (a) the conduct of the survey and (b) the analysis of its results.
(10) Will the results of this survey be made known; if so, in what form and to whom.

Answers to Questions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2643 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Government-owned Housing
(Question No. 2485)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, Ilpon notice, on 5 June 1981:
. (I) What proportion of total housing stock was made up by Government-owned housing stock in each State in each year since 1970-71.
(2) How many (a) pensioner dwellings, (b) Hats, (c) attached dwellings (other than Hats), (d) detached dwellings and (e) dwellings of all types were held as public rental stock by State housing authorities as at 30 June in each year since 1969.
(3) What additions were made to the total public rental dwellings provided by the State housing authorities by means

of (a) construction, (b) purchase, (c) leasings and (d) acquisition by transfer in each year since 1970-71.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Information on total housing stock is available only from data gathered by the 1976 census. The proportion of housing authority dwellings (as provided in the 1976 census) to total housing stock in each State at that date is provided below:
New South Wales-4.83 per cent; Victoria-3.27 per cent; Queensland-2.81 per cent; South Australia-9.28 per cent; Western Australia-7.00 per cent; Tasmania-5.18 per cent; Total-4.72 per cent.
(2) Tables 2(A) to 2(E) show the number of State housing authority public rental dwellings as at 30 June of each year since 1969 by categories as follow:

TABLE 2 (A)-PENSIONER DWELLINGS

Total

(six

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas. states)

NT

1969

4.550

n.a.

n.a.

995

1,575

316

n.a.

n.a.

1970

4,920

4,088

n.a.

1,003

1,645

320

n.a.

24

1971

5,378

4,472

n.a.

1,144

1,758

356

n.a.

24

1972

6,184

5,099

n.a.

1,357

1,857

455

n.a.

24

1973

6,724

5,666

n.a.

1,492

1,975

525

n.a.

24

1974

7,471

5,937

337

1,549

2,173

568 18,035

24

1975

7,959

6,326

699

1,657

2,243

643 19,527

12

1976

9,143

6,682

813

1,713

2,351

696 21,398

12

1977

9,431

6,954

904

1,848

2,570

770 22,477

24

1978

9,683

7,305

1,017

2,047

2,731

891 23,674

36

1979

10,075

7,610

1,112

2,117

2,871

1,062 24,847

36

1980

10,386

7,915

1,196

2,382

3,029

1,238 26,146

n.a.

n.a. not available.

TABLE 2 (B)-FLATS

Total

(six

NSW(a) Vic.(a)

Qld

SA WA(b)

Tas; states)

NT

1969

11,249

n.a.

n.a.

1,466

226

n.a.

n.a.

1970

11,759

8,969

n.a.

1,511

272

n.a.

480

1971

12,128

9,505

n.a.

1,744

296

n.a.

579

1972

12,806 10,106

n.a.

1,813

296

n.a.

679

1973

13,048 10,720

n.a.

1,949

296

n.a.

701

1974

13,732 10,996

353

2,093

296

n.a.

701

1975

14,252 11,148

353

2,172

316

n.a.

233

1976

14,864 11,150

353

2,2'51

316

n.a.

601

1977

15,338 11,150

353

2,268

316

n.a.

672

1978

15,453 11,150

353

2,359

2,855

316 32,486

691

1979

14,709 10,867

377

2,410

2,851

359 31,573

915

1980

14,923 10,995

400

2,456

2,851

361 31,986

n.a.

(a) Prior to 1979, includes non-welfare dwellings, (e.g. Teacher Housing, decentralisation dwellings, etc). (b) Prior to 1978,Hats are included with detached dwellings in Table 2 (D). n.a. not available.

2644 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Answers to Questions

1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979
1980

TABLE 2 (C)-ATTACHED DWELLINGS (OTHER THAN FLATS)

Total

(six

NSW(a) Vic.(b)

Qld

SA WA(c)

Tas. states)

NT

n.a. 23,974

32

n.a.

n.a.

n.a. 24,275

32

n.a.

n.a. 24,695

32

n.a.

n.a. 25,193

92

n.a.

n.a. 25,610

152

n.a.

663

25,889

152

n.a.

767

26,152

206

n.a.

1,758

26,787

236

n.a.

2,666

27,306

270

n.a.

24

3,638

27,673

4,511

430

n.a.

24

5,248

21 28,109

4,716

577 38,671

24

6,538

791

112 28,367

4,914

775 41,497

n.a.

(a) For years 1969 to 1973, attached dwellings are included with detached dwellings in Table 2 (D). (b) Priofto 1980, attached dwellings in Victoria are included with detached dwellings in Table 2 (D). (c) Prior to 1978, attached dwellings are included with detached dwellings in Table 2 (D). n.a. not available.
TABLE 2 (D)-DETACHED DWELLINGS

Year

NSW(a) Vic.(a)(b)

Qld

SA WA(c)

Total (six
Tas. States)

1969

44,137

n.a.

n.a.

4,869 20,036

3,153

n.a.

1970

45,614

24,205

n.a.

5,193 21,275

3,219

n.a.

1971

46,860

24,260

n.a.

5,839 21,892

3,359

n.a.

1972

48,129

14,085

n.a.

6,024 20,799

3,433

n.a.

1973

49,406

23,529

n.a.

6,066 20,918

3,571

n.a.

1974

49,016

22,542 12,740

5,982 20,810

3,789 114,879

1975

50,412

22,965 13,010

6,705 22,068

4,134 119,294

1976

52,560

22,643 13,692

7,096 23,146

4,731 123,868

1977

53,075

21,949 13,864

7,591 23,987

5,403 125,869

1978

54,119

21,748 14,225

8,050 14,372

6,039 118,553

1979

47,179

17,986 14,987

8,412 13,869

6,519 108,952

1980

48,272

16,730 14,985

8,910 14,166

6,884 109,947

(a) Prior to 1979, includes non-welfare dwellings (e.g. Teacher Housing, decentralisation dwellings, etc.). (b) Includes attached dwellings in Victoria. (c) Prior to 1978, includes flats and attached dwellings and prior to 1979 includes Armed Services dwellings. n.a. not available.
TABLE 2 (E)-TOTAL

Year

NSW(a)

Vic.(a)

Qld

SA WA(b)

Total (six
Tas. States)

1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

59,936 62,293 64,366 67,119 69,178 70,882 73,390 78,325 80,510 82,893 77,211 80,119

n.a. 37,362 38,237 39,290 39,915 39,475 40,439 40,475 40,053 40,203 36,463 36,431

n.a.
n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 13,430 14,062 14,858 15,121 15,595 16,497 16,693

31,304 31,982 33,422 34,387 35,117 35,513 36,686
37,847 39,013 40,129 41,048 42,115

21,611 22,920 23,650 22,656 22,893 22,983 24,311 25,497 26,557 24,469 24,307 24,960

3,727 3,843 4,043 4,276 4,544 4,805 5,299 5,979 6,759 7,676 8,517 9,258

n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 187,088 194,187 202,981 208,013 210,965 204,043 209,576

(a) Prior to 1979, figures include non-welfare dwellings. (e.g. Teacher Housing, decentralization dwellings etc.). (b) Prior to 1979, includes Armed Services dwellings. n.a. not available.

NT
n.a. 1,386 1,511 1,760 1,955 2,063
776 1,794 . 2,124 2,372 2,872
n.a.
NT
n.a. 1,890 2,114 2,463 2,680 2,788 1,021 2,407 2,844 3,123 3,847 4,011

Answers to Questions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2645

(3) Tables 3 (A) to 3 (D) show additions to total public rental dwellings provided by State housing authorities in each year since 1970-71 by categories of construction, purchase, leasings and acquasition by transfer.
Table 3E shows the total additions to public rental dwellings provided by the State housing authorities.
TABLE 3 (A)-CONSTRUCTION

Year

NSW(a)

Vic. Qld(a)

Total

(six

SA

WA

Tas. States)

NT

1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

2,922 2,983

n.a.

1,440

2,444

183

n.a.

418

n.a.

965

1,360

231

n.a.

487

n.a.

661

952

265

n.a.

384

n.a.

66

1,231

192

n.a.

\0

n.a.

1,025

5\0

437

n.a.

178

n.a.

975

451

664

n.a.

262

n.a.

1,008

733

739

n.a.

414

n.a.

941

1,047

869

n.a.

445

1,595

604

715

746

807

7,389

n.a.

1,187

432

831

764

790

6,987

391

(a) Prior to 1978-79, total additions only are available-see Table 3 (E). n.a. not available.
TABLE 3(B)-PURCHASE

Year

NSW(a)

Vic. Qld(a)

Total

(six

SA

WA

Tas. States)

NT

1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

69

n.a.

330

n.a.

148

225

n.a.

186

n.a.

158

n.a.

175

143 .

87

123

204

2

5

39

163

343

17

n.a.

9

2

n.a.

9

3

n.a.

4

69

n.a.

3

57

n.a.

6

5

n.a.

27

41

n-ll-

26

34

n.a.

12

24

583

n.a.

31

581

30

(a) Prior to 1978-79, total additions only are available-see Table 3 (E). n.a. not available.
TABLE 3 (C)-LEASINGS

Year

Total

(six

NSW(a)

Vic. Qld(a)

SA

WA

Tas. States)

NT

1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

6

15

21

n.a .

. (a) Prior to 1978-79, total additions only are available-see Table 3 (E). n.a. not available.
TABLE 3 (D)-TRANSFERS

Year

NSW(a)

Vic. Qld(a)

Total

(six

SA

WA

Tas. States)

NT

1970-71

n.a.

n.a.

1971-72

n.a.

n.a.

2646 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Answers to Questions

Year

Total

(six

NSW(a)

Vic. Qld(a)

SA

WA

Tas. States)

NT

1972-73 1973-74
1974-75 1975-76 1976-77
1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

115

173

131

105

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

336

624

n.a.

3

8

247

n.a.

(a) Prior to 1978-79, total additions only are available-see Table 3(E). n.a. not available.
TABLE 3 (E)-TOTAL

Year

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

Total

NT

1970-71 1971-72
1972-73 1973-74 1974-75
1975-76 1976-77 1977-78
1978-79
1979-80

4,633

n.a.

n.a.

1,440

2,444

200

n.a.

427

5,218

n.a.

n.a.

965

1,360

233

n.a.

496

3,470

n.a.

n.a.

730

952

268

n.a.

388

2,587

n.a.

n.a.

396

1,231

261

n.a.

13

3,752

n.a.

632

1,173

735

494

n.a.

184

7,068

n.a.

796

1,161

451

680

n.a.

289

3,428

n.a.

263

1,166

733

780

n.a.

440

2,682

n.a.

474

1,116

1,047

917

n.a.

457

3,180

1,855

727

919

1,084

831

8,596

n.a.

3,119

1,331

595

1,180

782

829

7,836

n.a.

n.a. not available.
Overseas Investment in Australia: Intra-corporate Trade
(Question No. 2616)
Mr Lionel Bowen asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Has his allention been drawn to the Federal Treasury economic paper Overseas Investment in Australia which states that imports by Australian branches and subsidiaries
from their related companies overseas accounted for about t
of total Australian imports c.iJ.
(2) If so, is it a fact that the United Nations Economic and Social Council Commission on Transnational Corporations, in their publication Transnational Corporations in World Development-a Re-examination (1978) defines this type of international trade as 'intra-firm' or 'intra-corporate' trade and warns that this type of international trade has considerable and often deleterious effects on national policy options in taxation, industry, exchange rates, resources, trade, technology, research and development and the distribution of national income and wealth.
(3) Using the United Nations definition of intra-corporate trade what was the (a) total value of exports, (b) value of intra-corporate exports and (c) proportion of the former constituted by the latter, in percentage terms for each year from 1970-71 to 1980-81 in 1980-81 values.
(4) What was the (a) total value of imports, (b) value of intra-corporate imports and (c) proportion of the former constituted by the latter in the same terms and for the same years as in part (3).
(5) What are the figures for parts (3) and (4) broken down into agricultural, mineral, energy, manufactured goods, services and finance sectors.
(6) What was the (a) total value of the export of each of the major mineral products, (b) value of intra-corporate

export of each of the major mineral products and (c) proportion of the former constituted by the latter in the same terms and for the same years as in part (3).
(7) What was the (a) total value of the (i) export and (ii) import of each of the major Australian Statistical Industry Code manufacturing classifications, (b) value of intracorporate (i) exports and (ii) imports of each of the classifications and (c) proportion of each of the former constituted by each.of the latter in the same terms and for the same years as in part (3).
(8) Is he able to state what the figures were in parls (3) and (4) for each (a) country of origin of imports and (b) country of destination of exports.
(9) What was the value and proportion of the value of intra-corporate trade in parts (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7) contributed by the 6 largest corporations involv~d expressed in the same terms and for the same years as in part (3).
(10) Is he able to estimate the overall quantity of tax avoidance and evasion involved in transfer pricing in each year from 1970-71 to 1980-81 in 1980-81 dollar values.
(II) How many companies have been investigated by the Australian Taxation Commission under section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act in the last 10 years and what were the results of these investigations, including the names of tax haven countries involved in each case.
(12) Taking into account the results of the answers to parts (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7) is he able also to estimate the effect on the measurement of productivity using the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the Confederation of Australian Industry preferred measure of productivity and, accordingly, adjustments to these figures from 1970-71 to 1980-81.
(13) Taking into account the answers to parts (3) and (4), is he able to also estimate the effects of transfer pricing (under-valuing exports and over-valuing imports) on balance of payments, balance of trade, terms of trade and exchange

Answers to Questions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2647

rate in each year from 1970-71 to 1980-81 in 1980-81 dollar values.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The information sought in the honourable member's ques-

tion is either not readily available, or for some parts of the

question, simply not available. [ am not prepared to authorise

the considerable expenditure of resources which would be

required to prepare a partial answer to the question. I do,

however, refer the honourable member to my response to a re-

lated question (No. 2007) asked upon notice by Mr Howe on

29 April 1981 (House of Representatives Hansard, 19 August

1981, page500).

.,.

Advertising Promotion: Department of Defence
(Question No, 2659)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 Augu~t 1981:
(I) What sum was spent by the Minister's Departmenton advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services during the period (a) I January 1980 to 18 October 1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.
(2) What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.
(3) Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.
(4) Which advertising agencies or consultants were used for each campaign.
(5) What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.
(6) How was each agency or consultant selected.
(7) By what percentage has the departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased each year from 1975 to 1980 and during the period I January 1981 to 17 August 1981.
(8) What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The amounts spent by the Department of Defence under Item 233.1.11, Administrative and other Expenditure~Advertising, during the periods (a) I January 1980 to 18 October 1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 A.ugust 1981, were $2,707,519 and $6,134,784 respectively.
(2) By far the most significant proportion of 'expenditure was devoted to the Defence Force recruiting campaign but production of figures relating to the specific periods of time set out in Question I would require a vast amount of research. Expenditure on Defence Force recruiting advertisments and promotions comprised 93 per cent of total expenditure under Item 233.1.11 in 1979-80 and 96 per cent in 1980-81.
(3) Item 233.1.11 Administrative and other
Expenditure~Advertising.
(4) The following Commonwealth master placing/charging agencies were used for media placement, checking and monitoring media performance and all accounting matters for the Defence Force Recruiting campaign:
Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd Gordon and Gotch (Australasia) Ltd Fortune (Aus!.) Pty Ltd Country Press Ltd Country Press Co-operative Ltd SA Country Newspapers Ltd
The technical services of the following agencies and consultancies were used for research, planning and production association with Defence Force Recruiting advertising:

George Patterson Pty Ltd US.P. Needham (Sydney) Pty Ltd Paterson and Partners Pty Ltd Murray Evans Advertising Pty Ltd Doyle Dane Bernbach Pty Ltd Hayes Cowcher Dailey Pty Ltd Paton Australia Pty Ltd Thompson White & Partners/Creative Oasis Schofield Sherbon Baker Pty Ltd Rodney Silver & Partners Pty Ltd Lucas Emery Pty Ltd Young & Rubicam Pty Ltd John Clemenger Pty Ltd. Richardson'Cooper Kain Advertising Pty Ltd Tony Osborne Advertising D'Arcy MacManus & Masius Pty Ltd ANOP SRG Research Bennett Research Pty Ltd Spectrum Research Pty Ltd Dangar Research Pty Ltd
(5)~

Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd
Gordon & Gotch (Australasia) Ltd . . . . . .
Fortune (Aust.) Pty Ltd Country Press Ltd
Country Press Co-operative Ltd
SA Country Newspapers Ltd

Periods

(a)

. (b)

1,016,903 3,681,245

1,554,162 83,958 44,627 6,572 1,297

2,312,283 - 62,965
42,037 33,002 3,252

(6) By the Minister for Administrative Services in the case of the master placing/charging agencies and by the Australian Government Advertising Service in consultation with the Department for selection of agencies or consultancies researching, planning and producing advertisements.
(7) Actual costs of advertising and percentage increases and decreases in each fiscal year since 1975-1976 and in the period I January 1981 to 17 August 1981 have been:

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 I Jan. 81-17 Aug. 81

$ 2,209,177 2,395,072
2,451,521 2,417,390 2,902,963
7,182,713 5,039,209

Percentage change on
previous , fiscal year
Plus 8.4 per cent Plus 2.3 per cent Minus 1.4 per cent Plus 20 per cent Plus 147 per cent Plus 73 per cent
on 1979-80 but 29 per cent less
than 1980-81

The Australian Government Advertising Service has advised that in<lexes of percentage increases in unit costs of Commonwealth departmental Advertising since 1975 are:

2648 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Answers to Questions

1975 (base) 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 (I Jan.-17 Aug.)

Index of Unit cost of Commonwealth departmental advertising
100 110 120 128 140 153 165

(8) $5,111,000 under Item 233.1.11
Tertiary Graduates
(Question No, 2679)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to predictions that Australia will have a national shortage of tertiary graduates this decade.
(2) If so, has his Department determined the areas where shortages are expected to occur; if so, what are the identified areas.
(3) Is the government satisfied that a shortfall would not impede (a) university research, (b) national research and (c) the implementation of high technology.
(4) What steps will be taken to ensure that a shortfall does not occur.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am not aware of the source of the predictions referred to by the honourable member. The Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission has estimated, in Volume I, Part I, of its 'Report for 1982-84 Triennium', that by 1990 there will be about 1,200,000 graduates from universities and CAEs, or about 7 per cent of the population. This compares with about 660,000, or 4.7 per cent of the population in 1976. The Commission has not predicted that there will be a national shortage of tertiary graduates by the end of the decade.
(2) and (3) The Government looks to the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission to provide ongoing advice on the relationship of manpower supply to demand in areas which are critical for education planning. In Volume I of its 'Report for 1982-84 Triennium' the Commission reviewed supply of and demand for technological manpower in a number of key areas. In particular, it proposed that there should be a reallocation of resources within the advanced education sector from teacher education to the technological and business studies. The Government has supported this reallocation, and provided increased support to university research through its initiative for the establishment of Research Centres of Excellence. The Government has IIlso demonstrated its commitment to capital and quality improvement programs in T AFE designed to enhance the capacity of TAFE systems to meet increasing demands for skilled manpower.
(4) The Government will continue to seek advice from the Commission on these issues on a regular basis.

2,4,5-T
(Question No, 2735)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) What Commonwealth or State statutory requirements exist for controlling the levels of TCDD (dioxin), in such materials as herbicides containing 2,4,5-T and bacteriocidal preparations containing hexachlorophene, for example, Phisohex, during manufacture, use and disposal.
(2) What are the levels of TCDD specified in the legislation.
(3) When was the legislation assented to, in each case, and what formal mechanisms exist for its enforcement.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Commonwealth has no statutory requirements for controlling the levels of the dioxin TCDD in materials such as 2,4,5-T and bacterial preparations containing hexachlorophene during manufacture, use and disposal, since such matters are the constitutional responsibility of the States.
Hexachlorophene, when imported into Australia for use in the manufacture of pharmaceutical preparations such as Phisohex, is required to meet the standard for hexachlorophene laid down in the British Pha'rmacopoeia 1980. There is no reference in this standard to 11 level of dioxin content. However the British Pharmacopoeia Commission proposes a limit of 15 parts per billion (thousand million) for dioxin in hexachlorophene and it is likely that this will be adopted in Australia.
(2) and (3) The National Health and Medical Research Council (NH & MRC) has undertaken a review of TCDD contamination of both materials. Whilst hexachlorophene is still under consideration the NH & MRC has recommended since 1975 that 2,4,5-T containing more than 0.1 parts per million TCDD should not be permitted for use as a herbicide in Australia. This recommendation subsequently was incorporated into Standards Association of Australia, Australian Standard AS II 75-1976 'Herbicides of the Phenoxyacetic Acid Type'.
With regard to 2,4,5-T products, the following State legislation exists:
Relevant sections of the Australian Standard were incorporated into the Victorian Agricultural Chemicals Act, 1958, on 5 July 1977. In Western Australia, 2,4,5-T is manufactured under licence under the Poisoris Act (proclaimed I July 1965) and its formulations are registered under the Pesticides Regulations (Gazetted 11 April 1956).
In New South Wales, products containing 2,4,5,-T are currently controlled under the Pest Destroyers Act, 1945. This Act is being replaced by the Pesticides Act, 1978, which requires that 2,4,5-T complies with the above mentioned Australian Standard. SAA 1175-1976 is also recognised in Queensland.
In Tasmania, the level of TCDD in herbicides containing 2,4,5-T is controlled under the Poisons Act 1971 to a level ofless than 0.1 ppm.
There are no statutory requirements in South Australia for TCDD in 2,4,5-T but routine monitoring shows levels well below 0.1 ppm.

Answers to Questions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2649

Employment
(Question No. 2803)
Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 20 August 1981:
What was the net increase in employment in terms of (a) numbers employed, (b) full-time job equivalents, assuming that part-time work is on average half a job if no more accurate assessment is available and (c) full-time job equivalents

, per \00 adults aged over 18 years and under 65 years for males or under 60 years for females resident in Australia, for each of the last 6 years.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian Statistician has supplied the following estimates based on the results of labour force surveys.

ESTIMATED INCREASE IN PERSONS EMPLOYED SINCE THE CORRESPONDING PERIOD OF THE PREVIOUS YEAR: AUGUST 1976 TO AUGUST 1981

August

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

Number ('000)

56.5

97.6

-25.8

. 71.9

205.2

109.6

Full-time equivalents (a) ('000)

16.7

73.7

-56.3

68.4

166.4

94.1

Full-time equivalents (a) for males 20-64 years and fe-

males 20-59 years for each 100 of the population in the

same age groups (b) (number)

0.5

1.0

-0.6

l.l

I.7

0.3

(a) As average weekly hours worked over the period by part-time workers have been approximately 40 per cent of the aver-
age weekly hours worked by full-time workers, data in respect of part-time workers have been converted to full-time equivalents by application of a factor of 0.4.
(b) Details for persons from 18 years of age are not available for the whole of the period. The population figures used in the
calculations are those at the end of the periods shown. Note: The statistics in the table are produced from a sample collection and are therefore subject to sampling variability.
However, most movements shown in the table are statistically significant. A minus sign denotes a decrease.

Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Defence
(Question No. 2847)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I refer the honourable member to the acting Prime Minister's answer to Question No. 2839 (Hansard, 22 Sepember 1981, page 1647.

Tenosynovitis: Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet

(Question No. 3010)

Mr Les McMahon asked the Prime Minister,

upon notice, on 9 September 1981:

.

(I) Have any cases of tenosynovitis been reported to date in the Department or statutory authorities under the Minister's
jurisdiction.

(2) If so, will the Minister state (a) how many cases have been reported, (b) in what types of work the affected persons
were engaged. (c) of the cases reported how many were in respect of (i) female and (ii) male employees and (d) what age
brackets appear to be most affected, in the Department and each statutory authority.

(3) Will the Minister provide similar information in respect of carpal tunnel syndrome.

Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:-

(I) Yes.

(2) (a) 4. (b) Typing duties-3; library duties-I. (c) (i)
Females-4; (ii) Males-Nil. (d) 21 to 30 years of age-3, 41 to 50 years of age-l

(3) No cases of carpal tunnel syndrome have been

reported.

.

Homes Savings Grant Scheme

(Question No. 3058)

Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:

(I) How many applications under the Homes Savings Grant Scheme are currently awaiting approval.

(2) What sums have been allocated for Grants under the Scheme in each yearfrom 1970-71 to 1981-82.

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) As at 31 August 1981 there were \0,193 applications

awaiting processing or otherwise undetermined. Until

processing is completed, it is not possible to say how many of

these will be approv~d.

.

(2) Expenditure under the Homes Savings Grant Act 1964 and the Homes Savings Grant Act 1976 is set out hereunder:

Year 1970-71

1964 Act $
15,199,922

1976 Act

Total

$

$

15,199,922

2650 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Answers to Questions

Year

1964 Act 1976Act

Total

1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-84*

$ 17,396,611
21,286,919 24,658,242
13,163,209 6,574,726 3,29Q,099 1,049,968
189;664 128,421
41,718 33,000

$
5,034,953 33,995,538 19,999,519 71,502,459 44,591,907 74,000,000

$ 17,396,611 21,286,919 24,658,242 13,163,209 6,574,726 8,334,052 35,045,506 20,189,183 71,630,880 44,633,625 74,033,000

- Estimated expenditure.

Pensioners: Compensation for Medical Insurance Cover

(Question No. 3129)

Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health,

upon notice, on 16 September 1981:

.

Is it a fact that a pensioner, whose annual income is below
the tax-free threshold and who opts for private hospital and medical insurance cover, is not entitled to receive financial compensation for this expenditure in lieu of the 32 cents in the
dollar tax rebate which normal tax-payers are entitled to . receive.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Yes. Persons whose annual income is below the taxation threshold and are thus not liable to pay income tax, are not entitled to a rebate of tax. The amount of rebate allowable to
a taxpayer cannot exceed the tax otherwise payable.

I must emphasise that the rebate applies only in respect of
basic levels of insurance. There is no reas~m at all for, eligible
pensioners to take basic medical insurance for themselves or their dependants. This is because they are entitled to basic medical insurance cover provided to them by the Common-
wealth on the basis of no payment by them for bulk-billed services or a maximum payment of $5 per item of service if their doctors do not bulk-bill. Eligible pensioners and their depend-
ants are also entitled to free hospitalisation, but if they elect to take private hospital cover only they still may have combined medical and hospital cover at a rate lower than taxpayer who have the benefit of the rebate.

Armed Services: Average Age of Retirement
(Question No. 3138)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
What was the average age of retirement for (a) officers and (b) other ranks in the 3 branches of the Armed Services in (i) 1978, (ii) 1979 and (iii) 1980.
(2) What was the percentage of (a) officers and (b) other ranks retiring from the 3 services with periods of service of (i) up to 15 years, (ii) 15-25 years and (iii) more than 25 years.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The term 'retirement' applies specifically, in the Defence Force, to separations from the Services at the statutory retiring age. It does not apply to separations from the Services before reaching retiring age of members who are eligible for 'retirement pay' having served 20 or more years. Nor does it include a third category which comprises those members who leave the Services after serving for relatively shorter periods an~ do not receive 'retirement pay'.
It has been assumed that the question is not directed, literally, to 'retirements' as it applies in the Defence Force but to the broader category of separations which includes 'retirements' as well as the categories noted above.
Information readily available in the form requested relates to those members who left the Services with a pension entitlement, ie., who reached statutory retiring age during the three most recent financial years, together with those who separated from the Services after serving at least 20 years. These statistics are set out in the table below:
(1)-
AVERAGE AGE OF 'RETIREMENT'

NavyOfficers
ORs Army-
Officers
ORs Air Force-
Officers
ORs

1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

46

49

47

42

40

39

46

46

45

44

44

43

47

46

45

43

43

43

(2)-

PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF 'RETIRING' MEMBERS BY LENGTH OF SERVICE

Navy Officers
ORs
Army Officers
ORs
Air Force Officers
ORs

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

Less

More Less

More Less

More

than 15 to than than 15 to than than 15 to than

.15 years 25 years 25 years 15 years 25 years 25 years 15 years 25 years 25 years

2.8 48.6 48.6 1.4 87.8 10.8
1.8 52.8 45.4 .4 79.6 20.0
1.9 43.9 54.2 .0 76.5 23.5

8.8 38.6 52.6 10.1 40.5 49.4

.5 92.9

6.6

.5 95.7

3.8

1.8 48.2 50.0 .2 80.4 19.4

5.3 54.7 40.0 .5 83.8 15.7

.7 54.3 45.0 1.0 77.2 21.8

6.0 58.0 36.0 1.7 82.7 15.6

Answers to Questions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2651

Air Force and Navy: Officers of Temporary Rank .
(Question No. 3139)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) How many onicers above the rank of major, or the equivalent rank in the Air Force and the Navy, currently hold temporary rank.
(2) How many other ranks above the rank of Sergeant, and its Air Force and Navy equivalent currently hold temporary rank.
(3) How many of the officers referred to in part (1) have held their current temporary rank for longer than 12 months.
(4) How many of the other ranks referred to in part (2) have held their current temporary rank for longer than 12 months.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is provided in the table set out below:
AUSTRALIAN DEFENCE FORCE-MEMBERS HOLDING TEMPORARY RANK

Air Navy Army Force

(I) Numbers of Officers above

the Rank of Major (E)

holding Temporary (Act-

ing) Rank . . . . . 19

(2) Numbers of Other Ranks

above the Rank of

Sergeant (E) holding

Temporary (Acting)

Rank . . . . . .

0

(3) Numbers of Officers referred

to in part (I) who have

held their current tempor-

ary rank for longer than

12 months . . . . .

9

(4) Numbers of Other Ranks re-

ferred to in part (2) who

have held their current

temporary rank for longer

than 12 months

0

0

40

15

7

0

3

5

3

New South Wales Medical Benefits Fund
(Question No. 3183)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 22 September 1981:
(I) Did the New South Wales Medical Benefits Fund (MBF) have an operating deficit of$54m in 1977-78 and was this transformed into a $22m surplus the following year.
(2) Did it register an improvement in its assets position from $76m to $95m during the same period.
(3) Can this improvement be attributed solely to the reintroduction of a Government 40 per cent medical benefits subsidy, or can other reasons be advanced for the change; if so, what are the details.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
('1) According to relevant reports on the Operations of the Registered Medical Benefits and Hospital Benefits Organizations, the Medical Benefits Fund of Australia Limited (New

South Wales) recorded a combined operating deficit of $55m in 1977-78, and a combined operating surplus of $23m in 1978-79.
(2) The report also indicates that this organization increased its assets position from $76m at 30 June 1978 to $96m at 30 June 1979.
(3) No, the improvement would not have been attributed solely to the reintroduction of a Government 40 per cent medical benefits subsidy. The following factors would have been largely instrumental in bringing about the improved performance of MBF in 1978-79:
(a) In the light of continuing deficits in both the medical fund and the hospital fund, approval was given for the organization to increase its contribution rates to both funds from I April 1978. The medical basic rate was increased by 34 per cent and the hospital basic rate by 17 percent.
(b) Revised health insurance arrangements from I November 1978 provided for Commonwealth benefits to be payable at 40 per cent of the Schedule fee, with a maximum payment of $20 for anyone service. This brought about savings in fund benefit for the medical fund. However, the savings on the basic table were partly offset by a reduction of 44 per cent in the contribution rate from I November 1978. There were no changes to the hospital fund rates at that time.
(c) With the introduction of the revised arrangements from 1 November 1978, MBF also restructured its medical fund, introducing two new tables that were designed to operate at a surplus.
Home Ownership Rates
(Question No. 3230)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 23 September 1981:
(1) What percentage of the relevant Australian population own, or are in the process of acquiring ownership, of their own home.
(2) How does this figure compare with home ownership rates overseas.
(3) What percentage of the relevant Australian population fully own their own home.
(4) What are the income characteristics of those who have achieved full home ownership.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) A special survey of Housing Occupancy and Costs carried out by the Australian Bureau of Statistics in August 1980 revealed that 72 per cent of all Australian households own or are purchasing their own dwelling.
(2) The United Nations Statistical Year Book provides the following figures for comparative home ownership levels in recent years in other developed countries:

Country
UK (1976) Canada (1975) USA (1970) Japan (1973) New Zealand (1976)

Home ownership
level
percent
51 62 63 59 70

2652 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Answers to Questions

Country

Home ownership
level

France (1975) . . . . . . . Federal Republic of Germany (1972) Greece (1971) . . . . . . .

percent
45 34 71

The UN Statistical Year Book shows a home ownership ratio of 67 per cent for Australia in 1976, a figure derived from the 1976 Census.
(3) The 1981 ABS Survey of Housing Occupancy and Costs revealed that 38 per cent of Australian households own their dwelling outright.
(4) The most recent statistics on income characteristics of those who have achieved full home ownership are provided in the ABS Household Expenditure Survey 1975-76 and are shown in the following table~

INCOME CHARACTERISTICS OF HOUSEHOLDS WHO ARE OUTRIGHT OWNERS

Household weekly income 1975-76

Estimated number of outright owners
in each income
category 1975-76

Percentage of outright owners
in each income
category

Less than $80 (50 per cent of
AWE)
$80-$140 (50-80 per cent
AWE)
$140-200 (80-120 per cent
AWE)
$200-$260 (120-150 per
cent AWE)
$260-$340 (150-200 per
cent AWE)
greater than $340 (200 per cent
AWE)

397,000 232,100 227,300 180,500 144,800 196,800

per cent 29 17 16 13 II 14

Total

1,378,500

100

Australian Industrial Participation in Offsets
(Question No. 3272)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) What level of Australian industrial participation is guaranteed to Australian industry in respect of tenders of (a) British Leyland and (b) Mercedes Benz if granted the Army contract for 4 tonne trucks.
(2) Will all or part of the Australian industrial participation be in offsets rather than being part of the production of the chosen truck.
Mr KilIen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) British Leyland was not a tenderer. A tender from Leyland Motor Corporation of Australia was passed over

when vehicles were selected for evaluation in 1977. Consequently, firm levels of participation are not available.
(b) I recently announced the selection of Mercedes-Benz Australia Ltd as the supplier of Army's 4 tonne trucks subject to the negotiation of a satisfactory contract. The company has offered a firm undertaking to provide work for Australian industry equal to the value of the contract awarded to it.
(2) Australian content valued at some $25m will be incorporated in the vehicles. In addition, the Australian automotive component industry will participate in offset orders worth at least $33m for automotive-related goods and services to be placed by the German company, Daimler-Benz AG.
South Africa: Enriched Uranium
Mr Malcolm Fraser-On 14 October 1981 (Hansard, page 1969) the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen) asked me a question, without notice, concerning reports that the United States Government is about to resume supply of enriched uranium to the South African Government.
The following is in answer to the honourable member's question:
The Government is aware of reports that South Africa delivered uranium oxide feedstock to the United States in August for enrichment to fuel a nuclear power station in South Africa. Reports indicate that the low-enriched'uranium product remains under storage in the United States.
It is my understanding that United States export policy with regard to South Africa has not changed. The United States is attempting to convince South Africa to ratify the Non-Proliferation Treaty (!'IPT) and to accept full-scope IAEA safeguards. In the absence of these steps I further understand that supply of enriched material from the United States to South Africa will not be possible.
Australia's own position on the question of nuclear trade is well-known. The Government requires that as a minimum nuclear trade with non-nuclear weapon states should only be conducted with countries which have adhered to the NPT and which accept IAEA safeguards on all their nuclear activities.
Government policy does not permit nuclear dealings between Australia and South Africa. Furthermore in 1980 Australia slipported UNGA Resolution 35/206B which calls for the cessation of all forms of nuclear collaboration with South Africa.
Superannuation Liability of Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Science and
Technology
(Question No. 1328)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What statutory authorities under his aegis have liabilities to the Commonwealth by way of employer contributions for superannuation which have not been paid or which have not yet been determined.
(2) If these contributions have not been paid, what are the amounts involved and how and when is payment to be made.
(3) If the contributions have not yet been determined, when is the liability expected to be assessed and how is payment expected to be made.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2653

I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Minister for Finance to Question 1320 on 10 September 1981 (Hansard page 1265).
Malathion: Use at Brisbane Airport Mosquito Breeding Areas
(Question No. 2405)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) When was spraying of mosquito breeding areas at the Brisbane Airport carried out by his Department or under directions from his Department.
(2) Was Malathion used in the spraying; if so, was it the only suitable pesticide.
(3) Wlmt are the standard directions concerning the safe use of Malathion.
(4) Were the standard procedures for its use and for the protection of those spraying Malathion observed during the spraying operation.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Results of inquiries indicate:
(I) My Department has not undertaken spraying of mosquitos breeding areas at Brisbane Airport nor has it directed any other Commonwealth Department to do so.
(2) See (I).
(3) Label information provided for the safe use of Malathion varies in accordance with its intended use and is determined by State regulatory authorities, in the light of advice from the various expert committees involved.
(4) See (I).
Temporary Resident Visas
(Question No. 2637)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) How many persons were allowed into Australia on temporary resident visas and in what categories (e.g. teachers, domestic servants, entertainers) for each year since 1978.
(2) For each category how many relatives, dependants or others came to Australia with persons admitted on temporary resident visas for each of the same years.
(3) For how long are these visas valid and what is the maximum-period that they can be renewed.
(4) How many of the persons in each category admitted to Australia on a temporary resident visa have applied for permanent residency for each year since 1978.

(5) How many of the family members or dependants admitted to Australia on a temporary resident visa have applied for
permanent residency for each year since 1978.

'(6) What methods are there to ascertain that the skills of the people admitted on a temporary resident visa are in shortage in Australia.

(7) What were the countries of residence of applicants for temporary resident visas in each category since 1978.

(8) What was the average stay in Australia of persons
admitted with temporary resident visas in each category, from each country, each year since 1978.

(9) How many persons admitted with temporary resident visas in each category left Australia since 1978.

(10) What are the methods ofrecruitment of persons with temporary resident visas in each category and in each country.

(II) What are the methods of selection for persons admit-

ted to Australia on temporary resident visas.

.

Mr Macphee~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(\) See Table A.

(2) See Table A for total figures. Departmental statistics do not provide a segregation into individual categories.

(3) Figures are not available by category by period of stay.
Usually temporary residents are eligible to remain for periods up to 4 years.

(4) See Table B which provides figures for broad categories of occupation skills.

(5) Statistics previously in the form requested are not available. Table B provides figures on dependants.

(6) The Department of Employment and Youth Affairs is
consulted as necessary on the availability of appropriate personnel on the local labour market.

(7) Statistics are not kept of applicants by country of residence. However details of the number of applications lodged
in each country are kept. See Table C.

(8) and (9) This information is not available from the statistical records maintained by the Department. .

(\ 0) There is no active recruitment by this Department of temporary residents in any category. It is the sponsor who
finds suitable overseas personnel where they are not available locally.

(\ I) Once a person overseas has been sponsored for
temporary entry from within Australia and it has been established that no suitable person is availl\ble locally, then provided the nominee is able. to meet normal requirements and
has not come under adverse notice, avisa is issued.

Table A ARRIVALS FOR TEMPORARY RESIDENCE

Employment category
Staff for Australian Branches of Overseas Offices-
Staff exchange Representatives of overseas Companies Managerial and executive staff Other staff (incl. sub-executive) Travel Company staff Interpreters

1978
2 14 2,540 2,512 2,076 58

1979
15 863 2,417 3,807 2,207
42

January

Total

to Juile January 1978

1980

1981 June 1981

11 129 2,254 4,955 1,979 38

14 92 1,160 2,990 1,037 II

42 1,098 8,371 14,264 7,299
149

2654 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Answers to Questions

Employment category

News media representatives Admin. & Technical Staff ror Embassies-(all
sta ff except Domestics) Undergraduate working visit to Australia Working Holiday UK., Canadian and Irish
Citizens Diplomats and Officials or roreign governments
Sub-Total

Staff ror Educational, Research and Similiar Institutions-
University personnel
Teachers CSI RO and other research institutions Radio Australia Sub-Total

Entertainers and SportsmenEntertainers (a) or World renown (b) other Sportsmen (a) or undoubted international standing (i) stay orJess than 12 months (ii) stay or more than 12months Other Instructors (a) ski (b) judo, karate etc. Managers and Technicians, pers. attendants etc. Sub-Total

Proressional Specialists
Architects
Chemists Computer Personnel
Earth Scientists
Engineers (a) civil (construction)
(b) electrical
(c) marine (d) oil and mineral exploration and de-
velopment
(e) Other Industrial designer
Management Consultants Medical Para-Medical Practitioners (including
Nurses) pror. staff ror Media
Other Models and Mannequins
Sub-Total

Technical Staff

Construction industry specialists

Dredge technicians

Drilling rig technicians

Film, radio and TV technicians

.

Installation and commissioning specialists

Marine personnel

Textile industry technicians

Other

Sub-Total

Other Specialist Categories Fiances and fiancees-ror marriage
Prospective migrants-unable to be processed overseas
Young single persons having some associations with Australia

1978
255
64 305
3,910
11,736
1,449 333 229 6
2,017
154 2,056
242 553 1,457
92 23 767 5,344
II 46 444 176
53 153 106
290 983
17 102
444 290 981
10 4,106
102 8
151 16 1,454 53 36 866 2,686
1,355
76
101

1979
317
37 296
5,540 2,088 17,629
1,430 341 303
2,074
222 2,039
197 2,021
681
87 9
900 6,156
12 54 521 257
51 230 144
333 1,570
39 137
451 521 1,399 83 5,802
68 II 769 15 1,394 92 23 1,237 3,609
182
55
120

1980
238
87 366
7,793 4,466 22,316

January

Total

toJune January 1978

1981 June 1981

116

926

112

300

53

1,020

5,585
2,103 13,273

22,828 8,657 64,954

1,431 319 342
2,092

777 327 141
1,245

5,087 1,320 1,015
6 7,428

193 2,230
91 2,008
537
84 7
785 5,935
38 61 691 304
91 380 133
530 2,022
39 86
355 418 2,184 39 7,371
80 7
933 59
1,127 84 32
1,348 3,670
129

168 1,096
12 1,022
370
94 9
337 3,108
14 22 314 230
108 233
54
223 1,232
II 39
155 218 1,308 29 4,190
68 2 89
73 750
18 25 798 1,819
56

737 7,421
542 5,604 3,045
357 48
2,789 20,543
75 183 1,970 967
303 996 437
1,376 5,807
106 364
1,405 1,447 5,872
161 21,469
314 28 1,942 163 4,725 247 116 4,249 11,784
1,537
131
406

Answers to Questions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2655

Employment category
Canberra decision cases of prospective migrants with qualifications required to register, exams etc. . . . . . . . . . . .
Canberra decision-reasons not elsewhere Canberra decision-emergency situation Explore prospect of subsequent migra.tion to
Australia . . . . . . . En!. under Bilateral Agreements (cultural,
scientific etc.) . . . . . . Christmas Is. Resettlement Scheme Pearl shell fishing employees Pearl culture firm employees Domestic staff for-
(a) diplomats . . . . (b) senior reps. temporarily in Australia Chefs . . . . . . . . . Other restaurant staff Parochial duties, incl. relig. trainees Service personnel for training . Parochial duties . . . . . Persons to present public lectures Sub-Total TotalWorkers
-Dependants .
GRAND TOTAL

1978
50 199
9
73
194 9 12 77
71 21 45 83 971 638 78 16 4,078 29,967 9,341
39,308

1979
9 433
12
21
589 8 15 62
83 15 55 2 590 403 401 145 3,200 38,470 10,015
48,485

January

Total

to June January 1978

1980

1981 June 1981

596 12
230
58 76
79 21 36 17 594 708 508 130 3,194 44,578 11,994
56,572

771 3
64
33 44
33 7 13 6 289 491 410 33 2,253 25,888 6,456
32,344

59 1,999
36
94
1,077 17 118
259
266 64 149 108
2,444 2,240 1,397
324 12,725 138,903 37,806
176,709

TableB
GRANT OF RESIDENCE STATUS IN AUSTRALIA FOLLOWING ENTRY FOR TEMPORARY RESIDENCE APPLICATIONS APPROVED

Level of occupational skill
Professional and semi-professional Skilled workers Semi-skilled workers Unskilled workers Dependants Total persons

1978
392 738 362
30 858 2,380

1979
353 857 393 38 792 2,433

1980
196 606 269
12 527 1,610

January to June
1981
31 159 71 23 177 461

Total Jan. 1978July 1981
972 2,360 1,095
103 2,354 6,884

TableC APPLICATIONS FOR TEMPORARY RESIDENCE 1978-81-ALL CATEGORIES (PERSONS)

Country in which application lodged

Calendar year
1978

Calendar year 1979

Calendar year
1980

Calendar year 1981
to 31 March

Algeria A.R. Egypt Argentina
Austria
Bahrain Bangladesh
Belguim
Brazil Bulgaria
Burma Canada Chile China, P. Rep of
Czechoslovakia Denmark

5" 56 65 193
10 16
50
35 3 5 2,343 28 37
45 191

41 74
146 18 23
61 54 0 11 2,795
27 62 6 157

118 59 182
7 17 49
15 13 5 3,082 25
158 43 234

18 4438
2 7 64 8 978 2 52
7

2656 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Answers to Questions

Country in which application lodged

Calendar year 1978

Calendar year 1979

Calendar year 1980

Calendar year 1981
to 31 March

Eire Fiji Finland France G.D.R. Germany F.R. of Ghana Greece Hong Kong Hungary India Indonesia Iran Is. Rep. of Iraq Israel ltaly Jamaica Japan Kenya Korea Rep. of Kuwait Lao P. Oem. Rep. of Lebanon Libya Malaysia Malta Mexico Nauru Netherlands New Caledonia New Zealand Nigeria Pakistan Papua N.G. Peru Phillipines, The Poland Portugal Romania Saudi Arabia Singapore Solomon Is. South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Syria Tanzania Thailand Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Turkey United Arab Emirates United Kingdom US. America USSR. Vanuatu Venezuela Vietnam Western Samoa Yugoslavia Zambia Zimbabwe

306 177 21 374 12 742 15 191 421 23 129 n.a.
14* 8 424 347 10 4328 9 67" n.a. n.a. 81* n.a. 688 41 17 28 301 79 389
59 222"
5 173 104 14
II 1* 580 30 178 38 49 196 150 12* 5 117 n.a. 34 43 n.a. 7601 7564 241 2"
n.a. 5
254 n.a.

428 119* 62 490 28 1,435
1 196 190 52 207
9n.a.
15 250 395 43 5799 42 206
I

448 235 55 700 107 883 10 278 236 677 98 n.a. 68
39613
6 7435
37 300

n.a.

5

38"

121

454

584

27

21

44

78

18

16

254

324

67

13

452

362

6

17

68

42

443*

402

9

6

138

399

51

178

12

II

35

28

40

7

422

918

25

18

261

209

26

59

44

29

239

245

166

173

8

5

5

94

491

See Fiji

n.a.

5

39

12*

14

10423

9801

9885

11288

323

98

22

18

(included with Argentina)

10*

30

303

230

(included with S. Africa))

- Part of period only n.a. Not available, e.g. Post only recently established or closed for periods due to local hostilities.

230 95 14 215 11 239
25 95
127 6
n.a.
n.a. 217
13 2327
12 20* 2
9 n.a.
76 1 n.a. 2 175 I 130 * 12 156* I 132 36 2 6 6 200 2" 74 27 18 71 49
n.a. n.a. n.a.
4 3 3126* 3120 14* 8
n.a. 106

Answers to Questions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2657.

Statutory Authorities under the Attorney-General
(Question No. 2850)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called the Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hansard, 30 April 1981. page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
(I) and (2) I refer the honourable member to the answer provided to question No. 2839 -on 22 September 1981 by the then Acting Prime Minister (Hansard page 1647). Decisions to terminate the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission and the Legislative Drafting Institute were made directly as aresull of the Review of Comonwealth Functions and announced by the Prime Minister on 30 April 1981.
Delivery of National Health Scheme Prescriptions
(Question No. 2965)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 8 September 1981 :
(I) Will he take steps to authorise delivery of National Heallh Scheme dispensed items from prescriptions relayed by telephone to a pharmacist from an authorised subscriber through a registered nurse subject to checking the item against the prescription in person or by telephone at the point of delivery in the presence of a pharmacist, trained nurse or authorised prescriber.
(2) Will he authorise NHS prescription collection and dispensed item delivery charges to be met by patients or, in default of provision of written prescriptions, by prescribers.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) In relation to the communication of prescriptions to approved chemists, a pharmaceutical benefit may only be supplied by an approved chemist after the surrender of the prescription, except in the case of urgency.

In such cases, where a medical practitioner or participating dental practitioner communicates a prescription by telephone or other means to a chemist, the communicated prescription must be reduced to writing and despatched within twenty four hours to the approved chemist who supplied the benefit. However, this provision does not apply to prescriptions for supply by chemists where the law of the State or Territory requires the prescription to be in writing.
In regard to the imposition of charges, the approved chemist supplying the benefit is entitled under the National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Regulations, to charge the patient an amount equal to the co~t of delivery when the benefit is supplied at a place other than the premises in respect of which the chemist is approved. This is a matter between the chemist and the patient.
It is not envisaged that persons other than medical practitioners or participating dental practitioners will be authorised to communicate prescriptions to approved chemists. Also it is not proposed to authorise the approved chemist to impose charges to collect prescriptions.
Immigration
(Question No. 2967)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:
What percentage of applicants for migration to Australia from (a) Indo-China, (b) Lebanon and (c) Poland, are being granted Australian residence.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) There is currently little migration from Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea to Australia. Discussions with the Vietnamese authorities are proceeding with a view to agreement on procedures for an Orderly Departure Program under which applicants in Vietnam can be considered and processed in accordance with Australia's non-discriminatory migration policy and procedures.
With a few exceptions, Indo-Chinese people settling in Australia have done so as refugees. Most applicants are processed by refugee task forces or Australian migration officers in Thailand, Malaysia and other countries in South East Asia.
(b) and (c) The following table gives details of migration applications determined at Australian Embassies in Syria (where applications from residents of Lebanon are processed) and Poland over the last two years:

APPLICATIONS (PERSONS) (I) DETERMINED

Country /region

Approved

Refused

Lapsed/cancelled withdrawn

Total

Lebanon 1979-80
1980-81
Poland (a) 1979-80
1980-81

No.

%

No.

%

No.

756

58.8

514

40.0

15

642

14.5

3,757

85.0

22

175

92.6

13

6.9

384

92.1

22

5.3

II

%

1.2

1,285

0.5

4,421

0.5

189

2.6

417

(a) does not include refugees. (I) Note: the figures do not necessarily relate to applications lodged in the year concerned.

2658 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Answers to Questions

The differences in the rates of approvals reflects differences
in definitions of applications and in the migration arrange-
ments operating in the two countries. The lower percentage of Lebanese applicants approved in 1980-81 reflects a substantial increase in the number of ineligible applications Following
the introduction of the concessional independent Family nominations (lFN) in mid-1980. A large number of persons, previously rejected, reapplied under the new provisions. Most ap-
plicants were unable to obtain sufficient points under NUMAS to obtain approval even with the concessions under IFN. Migrationdirectly From Poland is restricted to persons
sponsored by relatives or Friends in Australia. In general, sponsorships are accepted only where there is a good prospect
of approval of those sponsored so that most sponsored applicants in Poland meet migrant entry requirements. This restriction is imposed by the Polish Authorities.

Parliamentary Liaison Officers under Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

(Question No. 3042)

Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:

How many Parliamentary Liaison Officer positions have existed in the Minister's Department and each Statutory Authority under the Minister's jurisdiction in each State, the
Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory For each yearFrom 1970 to 1981.

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

There are Parliamentary Liaison Officers in each regional office of the Department in the States and Territories. In some
instances these officers combine their Parliamentary liaison
activities with other Functions. Other departmental officers perForm Parliamentary liaison Functions as part of their duties. The numbers of Parliamentary Liaison Officer positions are as Follows:

Departmental Offices Australian Capital Territory (Central Office and Regional Office)
New South Wales
Northern Territory
Queensland
South Australia Tasmania Victoria
Western Australia Statutory Authorities
Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs (Established 1979)

1970-73 I

1974-77 2

1978-81 I

1970

nil

1971-72 I

1973-81 3

1970-79 nil

1980-81 I

1970-74 nil

1975-77 I

1978-79 nil

1980-81 I

1970-81 nil

1970-81 nil

1970-81 nil

1981

I

1970-81 nil

1979-81 nil

National Nursing Manpower Task Force
(Question No. 3053)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to question No. 883 (Hansard, 28 April 1981, page 1680) has the National Nursing Manpower Taskforce decided when a Further update of the inFormation is required.

(2) If the National Nursing Manpower TaskForce has updated the information how many (a) nurses and (b) nursing sisters are currently (i) registered and (ii) employed in Australia.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The October 1981 Australian Health Ministers' ConFerence supported the recommendation of the National Nursing Manpower Task Force to seek assistance From the April 1982 Australasian Nurse Registering Authorities ConFerence in collecting uniform data For updating national nursing statistics and to monitor Future nursing manpower needs.
Pregnancy Drug 'Benedictin'
(Question No. 3094)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 15 September 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to allegations by Dr William McBride in the National Times of 6 September 1981 that the pregnancy drug Benedictin (also sold under the trade names of Debendox, Lenatan and Merbental) distributed by Richardson-Mervill Inc., has similar effects on unborn children as Thalidomide.
(2) Are any of these drugs currently being distributed in Australia; if so, what action has been taken to establish their saFety.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes-I have seen the article in the National Times of 6 September 1981.
(2) Debendox is currently being distributed in Australia. The question of the safe use of Debendox was considered by the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee at the time when this matter was first raised. The Committee concluded that the evidence before it was such that the Frequency of birth deFects in the children of mothers who have taken Debendox during pregnancy had not been demonstrated to exceed that iii mothers who did not take Debendox. A number of children identified by Dr McBride as possibly having birth deFects associated with the use of Debendox are currently being reviewed on behalF of my Department. In addition my Department is currently evaluating furth~r data including those made available by Dr McBride. A recent scientific article in the British Medical Journal of I I July 1981 concerning a study of Debendox in early pregnancy concludes: These results support the hypothesis that Debendox is not teratogenic. '
Health: Commonwealth Funding
(Question No. 3112)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that cuts in Commonwealth Funding For health have reduced the staff available For the testing and examination of the quality of imported medical products including dressings, drugs and medical devices.
(2) Is it also a fact that as a result of the lack of adequate surveillance and security there is a massive influx of imported sub-standard and dangerous therapeutic goods.
(3) Will he undertake an immediate and full investigation into this whole area to ensure that the Australian public is protected From the disastrous effects arising From inFerior imported therapeutic products.

Answers to Questions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2659

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Some reduction in staffing has occurred through normal wastage. Recruitment action to replace such staff is being taken within my Department's staff ceiling allocation.
(2) No. The National Biological Standards Laboratory undertakes sampling and testing of therapeutic goods, including imported products, on a random basis, as well as promptly investigating complaints through specific testing programs. It would not be feasible to routinely sample and test the thousands of consignments of therapeutic goods which are imported into Australia annually.
(3) The present programs are practical and effective ways of detecting inferior imported therapeutic products and allowing appropriate actions to be taken in the public interest.
Meat Exports to the Middle East
Mr Nixon-On 26 August 1981 (Hansard, page 781) Mr Ian Robinson asked me the following question without notice:
Does the Minister for Primary Industry have any information as to whether there is a racket involved in Australian meat exports to the Middle East, as has been claimed in recent Press reports? Is there a possible link between the alleged fraudulent trading to the Middle East and that to the United States of America?
In my answer to the honourable member's question I indicated that I would investigate claims that kangaroo meat has been found in mutton cartons in Saudi Arabia (Hansard page 781). I now provide the following additional information:
The Executive Officer of the Australian Federation of Islamic Councils has advised that no kangaroo meat has been sent to Saudi Arabia as has been claimed. He further advised that the Saudi Arabian Charge d'Affaires in Singapore had categorically denied making any such statements.
A recently returned Australian Trade Commissioner to Riyad, Saudi Arabia, reported that the authorities in that country were satisfied with the meat inspection aspects of Australian meat.
A recent visit by two senior officers of the Australian Government has confirmed that the Saudi Arabian authorities are satisfied with measures taken to ensure the integrity of Australian export meat.
Report of the National Energy Advisory Committee
Mr Anthony-On 24 September 1981 (Hansard, page 1738) Mr Beazley asked me, as the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, the following question without notice:
I refer the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy to a recently released report~ No. 14-of the National Energy Advisory Committee on Australia's energy resources.
Does this' report express serious concern that inadequate physical data and economic assessments exist on Australia's energy resources?
Does the report also express concern that information collected by companies and States is frequently not available on a nationally co-ordinated and consistent basis?

Were similar criticisms made by the National Energy Advisory Committee over three years ago in its initial report on energy resources?
In view of these criticisms what action does the Government intend to take to establish a national information base for the assessment of Australia's energy resources?
Given the concerns of the National Energy Advisory Committee, can the Minister explain why the Government has run down staffing of the Bureau of Mineral Resources?
The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The National Energy Advisory Committee recorded in its Report No. 14 that there have been a number of constructive developments in the area of resource assessments, principally in the assessment of oil shale, since the publication of their earlier Report No. 2~'Australia's Energy Resources: An Assessment' .
In their report the Committee said that there were some areas where information was inadequate for effective analysis of Australia's renewable and non-renewable energy resources. However, the Committee also pointed out that obtaining basic data about resources was a costly process and, to warrant incurring costs for this purpose, there should be some reasonable expectation of comparable gain. For this reason the amount of information that it is sensible to obtain wbuld always fall short of that which would give a complete technical and economic enumeration of the resource situation.
The Committee did point out that for some energy resources (eg petroleum) information is not always available on a nationally co-ordinated and consistent basis. The Government is attempting to remedy this through co-opera-tion with the States.
Within the Department of National Development and Energy, the Bureau of Mineral Resources has responsibility for undertaking assessments of the nation's mineral resources.
Government authorities in each State are responsible for the assessment of coal in their State, with the Bureau of Mineral Resources being responsible for the assessment of Australia's coal resources on a national scale. The Australian Atomic Energy Commission carries out independent assessrnents of recoverable reserves of uranium. Assessments of renewable energy resources are being assisted through the NERDD program.
Restructuring the Bureau of Mineral Resources to enhance its role. as a centre of geoscience research is nearing completion. This research is a prerequisite for effective exploration and resource assessment. Research will be undertaken by four new divisions; a fifth division will be responsible for undertaking assessments of the nation's mineral resources with particular attention being paid to energy resources. Recruitment is actively underway to support these activities.
Canberra Women's Refuge
(Question No. 1722)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How was the 1979-80 grant of $57,800 to the Canberra Women's Refuge by the Capital Territory Health Commission determined.
(2) What functions does the centre undertake, and how is it financed.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

2660 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) The 1979-80 Community Health Grant of $57,800 was determined by the Capital Territory Health Commission, having regard to the estimates of expenditure for the year submitted by the Canberra Women's Refuge to the Commission.
(2) The Refuge provides temporary accommodation and domestic support for women and children in crisis situations. The support may extend to cover counselling and subsequent referr\ll to other appropriate agencies. These activities are funded by the Commission.
Outside school hours care ($10,000 p.a.) and vacation care ($3884 for December 1980 to September 1981) for the children of women accommodated at the refuge are funded through the Children's Services Program, whiCh is administered by the Department of Social Security. A grant for supplementary needs (e.g. transporting children to day care centres) is also provided under that Program.
The refuge operates a follow-up support and counselling service for former residents ($8,000 p.a.). This service is funded under the Family Support Services Scheme which is a component of the Children's Services Program and which is administered jointly with State and Territory Governments.
In addition, a welfare grant of $3,000 was provided by the Department of the Capital Territory in 1979-80 for capital equipment.

Apprentices: Australia Post and Telecom Australia
(Question No. 2450)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 4; June 1981:
How many apprentices, and in what trades has (a) Australia Post and (b) Telecom Australia employed in each State and Territory in each year since the formation of the twu separate commissions.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Details of the numbers and trades of apprentices employed by Australia Post and Telecom Australia are listed below. No apprentices have been employed by Australia Post in Tasmania, the Australian Capital Territory or the Northern Territory since the formation of the Commission.
Apprentices employed by Telecom Australia in the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory are included in the New South Wales and South Australian totals respectively.

APPRENTICES EMPLOYED BY AUSTRALIA POST BY TRADE/STATE

Year

Trade/State

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

Total

New South WalesCarpenter Fitter and Turner Locksmith Motor Mechanic Painter Sheet Metal Worker Signwriter . . . Telecom Tradesman

7

5

6

23

18

II

10

8

5

7

59

I

2

2

7

I

3

4

3

3

3

I7

2

2

2

3

3

13

4

7

I

2

3

4

3

14

16

6

22

Total
VictoriaCarpenter Electrical Fitter and Mechanic Fitter and Turner Locksmith Motor Mechanic Signwriter

49

29

26

20

18

20

162

2

I

7

18

22

18

I7

18

19

112

10

8

8

4

3

3

36

3

4

2

2

2

2

10

3

Total
QueenslandCarpenter . . . . . . EleciricalFitter and Mechanic Refrigerator Mechanic

33

35

31

25

24

24

I 2

172
1 4 3

Total
South AustraliaCarpenter Electrical Fitter and Mechanic Fitter and Turner

4

2

8

Total

Answers to Questions

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2661

Trade/State
Western AustraliaElectrical Fitter and Mechanic
Total
Total

Year

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

84

65

57

46

46

49

TELECOM AUSTRALIA-APPRENTICES (TOTAL FULL-TIME)

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

September 1975Blacksmith
Body Maker Carpenter Cook Electrical Fitter and Mechanic Electrop1ater Electrical Fitter
Fitter and Turner French Polisher Instrument Maker Locksmith Motor Mechanic Mechanic (Repair)
Diesel Mechanic Plant Mechanic Motor CyCle Mechanic Painter Painter and Signwriter Panel Beater Plumber Sheet Metal Worker Signwriter Spray Painter
Structural Steel Tradesman Technician (Telecom) Upholsterer Watch and Clock Maker Wood Machinist Welder

I

24

15

5

2

4

2

40

19

18

2

1

44

11

24

31

14

2

5

3

I

1

5

2

3

40

25

16

7

11

2

6

2

9

7

10

10

2

2

4

5

2

6

6

8

6

2

7

3

3

I

9

940

505

370

276

390

43

1

I

6

4

2

2

Total

1,182

609

451

320

428

48

June 1976Blacksmith Body Maker Carpenter Cook App Fitter Electrical Fitter and Mech Electroplater
Electrical Fitter Fitter and Turner French Polisher Instrument Maker Locksmith Motor Mechanic Mechanic (Repair) Diesel Mechanic Plant Mechanic Motor Cycle Mechanic Painter Painter and Sign Writer Panel Beater Plumber

1

20

18

4

3

2

53

18

7

2

9

6

29

I

16

25

23

2

2

3

3

I

5

2

3

40

22

17

5

11

7

2

7

8

16

1

12

2

1

5

2

2

6

I

5

Total 2
Hq.

2
347
Total
I I 52
77 4
55 76
5 6 5 101 17 7 10 I 18
9 6 23 13 2 9 2,524 1 1 6 8
3,038
I 48
78 17 46 55 4 6 5 95 16 8 16
1 20
4 9 5

2662 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Answers to Questions

Sheet Metal Worker Signwriter Spray Painter Structural Steel Tradesman Technician (Telecom) Upholsterer Watch and Clock Maker Wood Machinist Welder
Total
June 1977Blacksmith Body Maker Carpenter Cook Electrical Fitter and Mech Electroplater Electrical Fitter Fitter and Turner French Polisher Instrument Maker Locksmith Motor Mechanic Mechanic (Repair) Diesel Mechanic Plant Mechanic Motor Cycle Mechanic Painter Painter and Sign Writer Panel Beater Plumber Sheet Metal Worker Signwriter Spray Painter Structural Steel Tradesman Technician (Telecom) Upholsterer Watch and Clock Maker Wood Machinist Welder
Total
June 1978Blacksmith Body Maker Carpenter AppCher Cook Electrical Fitter and Mech Electroplater Electrical Fitter Appr Fitter Fitter and Turner French Polisher Instrument Maker Locksmith Motor Mechanic Mechanic (Repair) Diesel Mechanic Plant Mechanic Motor Cycle Mechanic Painter Painter and Sign Writer Panel Beater Plumber Sheet Metal Worker

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

Hq.

Total

5

8

5

2

21

9

3

12

9

679

354

330

245

321

44

2

I

5

4

3

2

9 1,973
2
I
6 9

896

487

403

284

352

45

2,467

I

18

19

2

3

2

47

19

18

8

3

3

35

18

9

2

3

3

I

5

2

2

I

26

14

5

8

10

2

3

6

2

34

7

20

9

4

5

6

3

6

5

2

7

5

4

1

8

505

373

337

250

276

39

2

2

I

4

4

698

505

409

278

303

41

I
44
96 3 35 32 4 6 5 53 23 41 20
16
I
9 6 17 17
I
8 1,780
2
4 10
2,234

I

I

15

21

4

3

46

I

1

I

I

43

34

18

5

4

2

106

3

I

5

3

3

16

20

9

2

2

4

54

2

1

3

4

5

2

3

5

34

31

17

2

8

2

94

1.2.

4

6 5

4

2

28 5

23

23

7

2

2

14

2

3

5

3

I

II

4

4

3

4

9

2

20

Answers to Questions
Sign writer Spray Painter Structural Steel Tradesman Technician (Telecom) Upholsterer Watch and Clock Maker Wood Machinist Welder
Total
June 1979Blacksmith App Body Maker Boilermaker Carpenter Cook Electrical Filler and Mech Electroplater Electrical Filler Appr Filler Filler and Turner French Polisher Instrument Maker Locksmith Motor Mechanic Mechanic (Repair) Diesel Mechanic Plant Mechanic MotorCycle Mechanic Painter Painter and Sign Writer Panel Beater Plumber Sheet Metal Worker Sign writer Spray Painter Structural Steel Tradesman Technician (Telecom) Upholsterer Watch and Clock Maker Wood Machinist Welder
Total
June 1980Blacksmith Boilermaker Carpenter Cook Electrical Filler and Mech Electroplater Electrical Filler Appr Filler Filler and Turner French Polisher Instrument Maker Locksmith Motor Mechanic Mechanic (Repair) Diesel Mechanic Plant Mechanic Motor Cycle Mechanic Painter Painter and Sign Writer Panel Beater Plumber Sheet Metal Worker

28 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2663

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

Hq.

Total

8

7

3

18

7

I

429

430

356

214

173

34

2

8 1,636
2

4

2

2

8

3

4

2

10

622

570

440

235

199

42

6

2,114

13

19

2

3

32

14

7

2

2

2

34

7

18

15

2

3

2

2

3

2

39

28

12

4

7

3

9

5

5

2

2

8

21

4

4

3

8

2

3

5

6

10

3

I

8

8

3

3

7

I

319

310

337

147

83

36

I

7

2

5

3

2

2

499

447

408

17l

110

46

39

60

4

34

7

3

42

3

4

5

93

23

8

21

12 2 13 3 27 22

8 1,232
I

10 12

1,686

13

II

3

2

31

17

28

10

8

2

65

2

2

4

7

7

I

22

II

10

3

50

2

I

3

I

4

2

6

41

27

18

7

8

104

6

5

5

I

2

19

8

8

4

4

2

II

2

6

3

12

3

3

7

8

II

2

31

2664 REPRESENTATIVES 28 October 1981

Answers to Questions

Sign writer Spray Painter Structural Steel Tradesman App Plant Mechanic Technician (Telecom) Upholsterer Watch and Clock Maker Wood Machinist Welder
Total

NSW

Vic.

Qld

9

7

2

7

16

601

442

389

SA

WA

Tas.

165

58

44

Hg.

Total

18

8 16 4 1,703

6

I

5

5

2

764

558

466

189

84

55

8
\3
8 2,124


