House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 122, 1981 Thursday, 7 May 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2091

ThursdaYrl May 1981
Mr SPEAKER CRt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10.30 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Proposed Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline
services in Australia; (ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
by Mr Jacobi, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Morris and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs of life: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.

9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way ofhigher prices for beer.
i 1. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an
upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
1. Recognise the importance and place of the Australian Hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
2. Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon, Mr Millar and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
A substantial contribution to Australia's economy by the payment of taxation and to the quality oflife of fellow Australians, is made by parents in the work-force who have preschool children_
Taxation relief for adequate child-care is necessary to enable these patents to avail themselves of child-care facilities in order to take paid employment.
Your petitioners therefore humhly pray that tax-payers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other tax-payers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of ReprC.!lentatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny Unemployment Benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.

2092 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Petitions

That the level of Benefits for all unemployed people, and including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120 per cent of the poverty line.
That future employment policies'be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.
Public acknowledgement of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles.
Petition received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(1) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned Australian citizens showeth:
That the last increase in the Supplementary Assistance or rent allowance payable to Invalid and Age pensioners was made in 1974;
That since that time, average weekly rents, as gauged by increases in average Queensland Housing Commission rents, have risen by approximately 150 per cent and continue to rise at an alarming rate.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will at the earliest Oppojltmity index Supplementary Assistance to increases in theeost of living by the same biannual process applied to increases in the pension itself.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned Australian citizens showeth:
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital has been of inestimable value to eligible repatriation beneficiaries for many years, and the closure or dispersal of the facilities available at the hospital would be a retrograde step.
The proposed decision to close Rosemount Repatriation Hospital through active discouragement by departmental administrative officers of any further referrals by medical officers of patients for medically prescribed occupational therapy is objectionable.
Closure of Rosemount Repatriatio~ Hospital would
severely disadvantage veterans in Brisbane's northern suburbs, as well as their relatives and friends who would be required to travel a great distance in order to visit hospitalised veterans at either of the two alternative Repatriation hospitals.
Closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital and transfer of patients to Greenslopes would greatly add to the Administrative burden of that repatriation and general hospital.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will reverse its announced decision to close the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Great Barrier Reef: Oil Exploration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens respec tfully showeth:
That the undersigned are of the opinion that the Great Barrier Reef and region must be protected in entirety from the potentially destructive affects of mining and respectfully demand that you ensure this by declaring a continuous marine park of the reef zone from Fraser Island to the Torres Strait in 1981, for which management plans of the type devised for the Capricornia Section can be prepared and discussed in due course.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Herbicides and Pesticides
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That sufficient doubts have been raised concerning the use of herbicides 24D and 24ST, particularly in the Beaudesert and Albert Shires, and in other parts of south Queensland,

Petitions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2093

where residents have complaiped of an unusually high incidence of birth deformities anti lniscarriages as well as physical illness and other disorders oftU,a large scale. For your petitioners therefore do humbly pray that the Australian Government ban the use and importation of these herbic;ides in Australia until all doubts about the harmful effects of their use are resolved by scientific investigation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general and as every insulindependent diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the NHS and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Falconer.
Petition received. Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning'responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose; and
(b) the'National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, industry and educational research laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits) which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.

That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of cosmetic companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were SUbjected to research.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys. Petition received.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(l) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product of any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sand mining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.

Use ofLive Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.

3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored Public Enquiry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of by Mr Humphreys.

live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research insti-

tutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.

Petition received.

2094 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Petitions

Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth. Noting that:
(l) Though the abolition of fees for post secondary education has not of its own accord improved access to education, the re-imposition of fees will make it more difficult for students from average families as well as many mature age students to commence or continue tertiary education.
(2) While supporting a government funded scheme of short term emergency loans, we believe the introduction of a comprehensive loans scheme would undermine the TEAS scheme and put students and graduates into debt to finance companies and discourage poorer students from attending post secondary institutions call in capitals.
We the undersigned, oppose any attempts to introduce fees or a comprehensive loans scheme for post secondary education and call upon the government to restate its commitment to education without tuitors fees or loans and assure students that no such options are under consideration for the 1981 budget.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hurford.
Petition received.
Defence Service Home Loans
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the members of the Women's Services of the 1939-45 War not at present considered eligible for Defence Service Home Loans should qualify as "Australian Soldiers" under the Defence Service Homes Act. They volunteered for service with the Naval, Military and Air Forces, serving wherever they were sent in whatever capacity they were required and yet are refused Defence Service Home Loans.
They took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies which meant to fight His Majesty's enemies, and although not used in actual combat in war zones, they were available for that use and had a sufficiently grave need arisen would have been used, to serve with distinction as have women of other lands.
In accordance with the Acts and Regulations of the period, the women of the Military Forces had enlisted for service anywhere, some of the Naval women to sail in any waters, others with service on warships optional, while the women of the Air Force could have been sent to Papua New Guinea or other territories under the control or care of Australia.
Ex-servicemen of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force who volunteered in the 1939-45 War but were not sent to War Zones are granted home loans. Not to grant eligibility to all Ex-servicewomen of 1938-45 War is unjust and unfair.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you favourably consider amending the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all membe~s of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jarman.
Petition received.

Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker ,and Member of the House of Representatives of the Aust'rklian House assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of childrens services, which has been reduced by almost 40% in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 budget. And further, that annual budget allocations in the area of childrens services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
Petizione All 'Onorevole responsabile ed agli Onorevoli membri della Camera dei deputati riuniti in Parliamento. La petizione di alcuni cittadini dimostra:
Che l'allocazione di fondi nell'area dei servizi sociali per l'infanzia che sono stati ridotti in pratica del 40% sia di nuovo ristabilita fino a raggiungere almeno l'ammontare allocato nel Bilancio 1975-76. Inoltre, ehe i fondi destinati ai suddetti servizi siano spesi interamente per gli scopi designatio
by Dr Klugman.
Petition received.
Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions and the ACTU, the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our National Airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Staging of American BS2 Bombers
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B52 bombers:
Jeopardizes the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52's: (a) Carried nuclear weapons (b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another
State. Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy. Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian

Fraser Goyernment

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2095

Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region. .".
Jeopardizes the welfare bf.~lw,9tizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents.
Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific rc:gion and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your Petitioners' therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US. Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage, Mr Beazley, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Campbell, Dr Cass, Mr Charles, Mrs Child, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Holding, Mr Humphreys, Mr Jacobi, Mrs Kelly, Mr Kent, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Mountford and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.

(4) the deceitful way in which the States were deprived of $70m to which the Australian people were entitled; and
(5) the extraordinary behaviour of the Prime Minister and the Treasurer in seeking to publicly humiliate the Premiers through shoddy leaks to the media.
I would expect that, as a matter of self-respect, the Government would want to take this motion immediately.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The motion will be taken immediately.
Suspension of Standing Orders Motion (by Mr Sinclair)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Leader of the Opposition moving his motion forthwith.
Motion of Condemnation Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (10.37)-1 move:

Australian Broadcasting Commission: Melbourne Showband
To the Honounible, the Speaker and Members of the Australian Parliament in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth that:
As regular viewers and listeners of the ABC Melbourne Showband we were disappointed to learn of the dismissal of seventeen members of this outstanding orchestra.
We have had a great deal of pleasure over the past years viewing and listening to this band's fine music. It is the only full-time light orchestra in Australia and we are disgusted to think that such talented musicians should be dismissed in this manner.
We therefore call on the Federal Government to rescind this decision and make more money available for the continuance of the full Showband.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.
FRASER GOVERNMENT
Notice of Motion
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-l give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House condemns the Government for-
(1) its erratic and unstable behaviour, its preoccupation with its internal dissension and the paralysis of the proper functions of government and of this Parliament because of the Government's total distraction with these problems;
(2) the unfair and inequitable manner proposed for the elimination of or reduction in important community programs;
(3) the serious damage caused to the federal system by savage and unfair reductions in funding provided for the States;

That this House condemns the Government for-
(1) its erratic and unstable behaviour, its preoccupation with its internal dissension and the paralysis of the proper functions of government and of this Parliament because of the Government's total distraction with these problems;
(2) the unfair and inequitable manner proposed for the elimination of or reduction in important community programs;
(3) the serious damage caused to the federal system by savage and unfair reductions in funding provided for the States;
(4) the deceitful way in which the States were deprived of $70m to which the Australian people were entitled; and
(5) the extraordinary behaviour of the Prime Minister and the Treasurer in seeking to publicly humiliate the Premiers through shoddy leaks to the media.
The Opposition does not take this action lightly. Formal moves to censure the government of the day are made only when the state of the nation's affairs demands them-when the government has patently failed to fulfil the trust given to it by the people. This describes precisely the condition of the Government today.
Over the past 10 days, and especially over the past 48 hours, various events have given the nation an extraordinary insight into the degraded state into which this Government has descended: The disarray, the turmoil, the confusion and the incompetence of the Government itself, and the consequent paralysis and corruption of the Parliament. Because of these events, the truth is now apparent. Behind that stony Easter Island image, nothing stirs but personal and malevolent ambition.
The forces that motivate this Government have nothing to do with the welfare of the nation; they have all to do with the survival in power of the Government. The new health program, the Lynch

2096 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Fraser Government

Committee proposals, and the results of the Premiers Conference, show that what this Government intends for the next decade is not the great leap forward that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcom Fraser) promised during the election last October, but a timid scramble backwards. They show that all that this Government has in mind for the 1980s is nostalgia for the 19508, when the hiwes were urged on to ever greater affluence and the have-nots were left to fend for themselves.
The nation is entitled to ask why the Government is in such a dishevelled state. The answer can be found in the Prime Minister's contemptuous treatment of the Premiers and the experience of his former Minister for Industrial Relations. The petty vindictiveness of the Prime Minister towards the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) and his selective leaking of confidential Cabinet decisions in order to score cheap points off the Premiers, show that the Prime Minister will go to extreme lengths to protect his ascendancy over his colleagues.
The honourable member for Kooyong has now told us the reasons for this degradation of parliamentary and government affairs: The Prime Minister's manic determination to get his way, his suspicion of his colleagues, the subversion of government in factional interests, the bitter tensions that exist within the coalition. The honourable member for Kooyong has put it on the scoreboard. These are the reasons that, seven months after the election, the Government has achieved nothing, save a few favours for a few friends. These are the reasons that the nation's affairs are in such a disorganised, ineffective state. These are the reasons that the Prime Minister and his colleagues deserve the most severe censure of this Parliament and the nation.
The Prime Minister has nobody but himself to blame for the latest crisis in which he finds himself embroiled. He was not content with simply taking the States to the cleaners to the tune of $70m. He was determined to ensure that everyone should know how clever he was, and how tough he could be in a confrontation with the Premiers. He embarked on a strategy on Monday in which he set up the Treasurer (Mr Howard) to leak the details of their cleverness to selected journalists. When this did not produce the desired headlines, the necessary stage-managed publicity, the Prime Minister called a background briefing of journalists from the Herald and Weekly Times group of newspapers, among them Mr Trevor Hawkins from the Sun News-Pictorial, Mr Wallace Brown of the Courier Mail, and Mr Geof Kitney of the Perth Daily News. This briefing in the Prime Minister's office took place on Tuesday night, and

produced the news stories yesterday morning which so incensed the Western Australian Premier, Sir Charles Court.
It was from these incidents that flowed the extraordinary sequence of events last night in which the Prime Minister and the Treasurer between them held four Press conferences to try to extricate the Prime Minister from the consequences of his smart-Alick behaviour. I emphasise that these were, of course, Press conferences. At no stage did the Prime Minister seek to come into this House and attempt to justify his deceit of the Premiers, or to explain why he thought it necessary to leak to the Press information that could only be seen as humiliating to all State governments and contemptuous of the Australian people. Nor has there yet been any explanation to the Parliament why this Prime Minister believes he has some special exemption from the normal Westminster conventions that preclude Ministers from breaching Cabinet confidentiality.
As past events have demonstrated, however, this Prime Minister obviously believes the usual rules and proper standards concerning a great range of attitudes, among them trust, loyalty and honesty, both in personal relationships and in his conduct of government, simply do not apply to him. The honourable member for Kooyong made this perfectly clear in his speech to the House last week explaining his resignation from the Fraser Ministry. What has happened this week serves only to substantiate the very strong criticisms of the Prime Minister that were contained in that speech. Let me remind the House that, like the Peacock resignation, the events of the past 48 hours sprang from that much abused political tactic, the background briefing. In the case of the honourable member for Kooyong, so-called senior government officials were the source of the story that appeared in the Australian on 14 April concerning allegations damaging to his political and personal integrity. As the honourable member said last week, it was this story, and the Prime Minister's gross disloyalty to him in not denying it in detail, that finally provoked his resignation.
The source of the Australian story has not been disclosed. Yet ironically we now have the same tactic of the background briefing being used, again in an issue concerning the Prime Minister, again with the same euphemistic source of senior government officials, and again causing political fall-out for the Government. The difference this time is that the Prime Minister has been caught out. He has been forced to admit his direct involvement, both in authorising the Treasurer to leak to the Press, and then by calling his own background briefing to reinforce his disclosure of

Fraser Government

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2097

information humiliating to the Premiers but of Ministerial patronage above all else. They are

short term advantage to himself. I suggest that, if standards that have been publicly paraded in the

the honourable member for Kooyong ever had past 48 hours to the discomfort, I am sure, of

any doubts as to the identity of the source of the many honourable members opposite whose sense

Australian story that shafted him, he would have of honesty and decency is as outraged as is that of

few remaining doubts after the events of the past any other member of this Parliament or the com-

48 hours. I suggest also that few other members of munity by the Prime Minister's behaviour in the

this Parliament would now have any real doubts past fortnight.

either, irrespective of any denials to the contrary. The Prime Minister's conduct in this matter,
with all of his twisting and turning in the last 48 hours-first of all to exploit the circumstances and then to preserve his political hide-raises fundamental issues that go to the heart of this censure motion. First, there is the broad question of Commonwealth-State relations. Clearly the Prime Minister and the Treasurer believe that conferences with the Premiers are, as one Premier now describes them, no more than exercises in bluff in which the biggest cheat wins. There is no doubt the principle was upheld on this occasion. Equally clearly, this Government is utterly contemptuous of such conferences as forums for meaningful and responsible negotiations. Second, there is the matter of economic management.

The Prime Minister has prevaricated, he has evaded, he has sneered, he has threatened, he has boasted and he has used his staff to hector in an attempt to intimidate the Australian Broadcasting Commission into scrapping video film of a stumbling and shifty interview he gave last night. After that appalling performance on being confronted by questions he did not want to answer on events his own foolish actions had precipitated, he tried to censor the news. His Press secretary, Mr Barnett, who gracelessly is accommodated in the officials enclosure opposite, thundered around the Press Gallery corridors last night like a half-pay reject from Cop Shop trying to bully and badger the ABC journalists into censoring the news, and when that did not work, levelling threats against them. Is that the standard that this parliamentary

On this occasion the Government had made up institution has sunk to? Are they the ingredients,

its mind on the maximum finance it would share the qualities, of the ethical standards that the

among the States. It then set about seeing how far Prime Minister clings to?

it could squeeze the Premiers to stay under that limit, irrespective of the merits of their individual arguments or of the needs of the States in terms of economic and welfare development. That is, this is not just a repudiation of the Premiers but it is a rejection of the rights of the people of this country. Having succeeded by shaving $70m off the funds that Cabinet had agreed the Commonwealth could afford, the Prime Minister could not resist boasting of his success or, when his cheap. sneering backfired, pushing the Treasurer forward to take his place and to take the blame. This is not only an arrogant and irresponsible means of economic management, it is also wholly consistent with this Government's erratic and ad hoc administration of the last 5f years.
Finally, there are the ethics of the Prime Minister's behaviour. We on this side of the House have long held the view that this Government cannot

All that the Prime Minister has not done is the only thing he should have done when this issue burst about him; that is, he has not come into this Parliament, admitted his mistake and his guiltinstead of hiding behind the Treasurer-and he has not reconvened the Premiers Conference to offer explanations and apologies as well as the short-changed $70m. What that demonstrates, of course, is that Parliament continues to be as much of an irrelevance to this Prime Minister as it has always been to his Government. Question Time is a farce; the Standing Orders are misused as an obstruction to proper scrutiny and accountability; the Notice Paper is no more than a stock-list of deferred debates and questions on notice, some of which have been waiting for six months for an answer. The Government's legislative program is a joke.

be trusted and that this Prime Minister can be We are now in the tenth week of sitting, yet

trusted least of all. We have said so, forcefully and nothing of real substance has gone through this

with certainty, whenever the occasion warranted. Parliament since the election, apart from an apol-

I say so again today. I go further and say that the ogy of a Bill to establish a restricted Human

standards of the Prime Minister are the standards Rights Commission and a piece of pay-off legis-

of the bully, the standards of the sneak and the lation to Mr Rupert Murdoch to guarantee his

standards of the snake oil salesman. They are new airline's purchase of 21 new aircraft. If the

standards that infect this Government from the Prime Minister does forget old friends within his

top and they are standards that have been own ranks at least he remembers to pay off old

adopted by those who seek promotion and Prime debts to people outside the Parliament. Freedom

2098 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Fraser Government

of information legislation which frees no information at all is jammed in the Senate, and we are all still waiting for the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) to bring before the Parliament his foreshadowed amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act, a Bill which has all the earmarks of another sell-out of the public interest to this Government's great and powerful friends.
What we can make of this is that Parliament has done nothing because this Government has nothing for it to do. It reacts; it does not initiate. It has no perceived objective except to stay in office by gimmickry and deceit, and no vision beyond the political problems of the immediate 24 hours. All these aspects of this Government's conduct are crystallised in the events of the last 48 hours.
No single issue better characterises this Government's lack of integrity, or better illustrates its fundamental dishonesty, than does the issue of health care. Of all the broken promises, the dishonoured commitments, the smart, mealymouthed slogans, the double dealing and the double standards, and the deliberate and calculated lies of the last 5t years it is the Fraser Government's policies and actions on health care which epitomise its basic character, its subservience to wealth and privilege and its mean and grubby behaviour towards the rest of the Australian people.
We on this side of the House see the question of health care quite differently from our opponents. We believe health care is a right, not a privilege. That is why we introduced the Medibank scheme in 1974. It is why we remain committed to the reintroduction of a universal health insurance scheme at the first opportunity after the next election. If the new health program is an example of the Government's duplicity, the Lynch committee's proposals-coupled with the results of the Premiers Conference-demonstrate equally well the Government's timidity. Three and a half years ago the Prime Minister announced that we were ready, as he put it, 'to stride into a new era of prosperity and development'. Over the past fortnight we have been given a glimpse of this Government's vision of what this era contains. What a miserable, dispirited vision it is!
In the Lynch committee program, and throughout the results of the Premiers Conference, the Government is demonstrating that it has decided to run away from its responsibilities. It somehow sees virtues in this-virtue that is given the name of small government. In the real world, of course, small government is meaningless. In the real

world, pressures and expectations exist that demand government thatcis aware, government that is realistic, government -in contact with the people and not, as the Lynch committee would have it, government cut off from them. In this real world, there are more than two million people trying to survive in poverty. For with all its potential, this society somehow manages to have one of the most inequitable distributions of wealth in the industrialised world. Social and economic injustices abound in welfare programs, in housing, in health, education, in the law, in the distribution of wealth, income and opportunity. Discrimination plagues such minority groups as migrants and Aboriginal Australians, who suffer under one of the highest incidences of disease in the world. The drive for equal rights for women has all but been abandoned. The need for rational urban planning, housing and regional development programs has been denied.
Individual citizens--no match on their own for ever-growing corporations and their everwidening power-deserve more influence in their jobs and in the market place and greater protection for their environment. This is the reality and the Government has run away from it. The only vision that stirs its leader is that of power and how to maintain it, no matter how malevolent, damaging and divisive the measures that have to be adopted to achieve that end. Yesterday's events show that he will abuse his relationship with the Press, ignore the Parliament and even subvert national economic policy-making to maintain his ascendancy over those he imagines to be a threat to him and his position.
Everywhere in the nation's administration is confusion, contradiction and incompetence. The Fraser Government and its ways have become a farce. Long after the people have swept it out of office the joke will be going round the pubs that the Fraser Government was the government that decided to sell a cement works in the city where it had just closed down all the building industry. Any normal Prime Minister who presided over such chaos would resign, even if only out of selfrespect. But this Prime Minister is not normal. He gained power with whatever unsavory weapons were to hand. He is obviously determined to hang on to it, no matter what the cost to the nation or what damage it does to his own party.
By this motion the House seeks to recall the Prime Minister and his colleagues to their senses. It seeks to remind them that Australians expect more from their Government than they have received from this Administration-confusion and incompetence conce~ning everything but the

Fraser Government

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2099

maintenance of power and the concentrated purthe Prime Minister and the Treasurer, take de-

suit of vendettas against assumed rivals. This light in making fools of the leaders of all the

Prime Minister almostJjsingle handedly has States?

managed to infect and corrupt the body politic in

this country to an unbelievable degree. There is no In what way were the Premiers made fools of?

longer respect or confidence within the comIt was on the basis that the Prime Minister and the

munity for the way in which political government Treasurer would withhold from the States not a

of this nation is conducted by the Fraser Governmere $7Om but $28Om of Australian taxpayers'

ment and there is only one man who can accept money-not the Prime Minister's money, not the

the responsibility for that very black honour-the Treasurer's money and not the Commonwealth's

Prime Minister of this country. He is a disgrace to money, but Australians' money. Why do the

this nation. He ought to be scourged from office. I States need that money? Honourable members

thoroughly recommend the motion tO,the House. ought to know the problems of the States. Is it any

Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?

wonder that Sir Charles Court is on record in regard to this matter? He is the Government par-

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) ties' leader in Western Australia. Honourable

(10.57)-1 second the motion. 1 ask for leave of members opposite might not like him but at least

the House to amend the motion to make it a cenhe has enough courage to stand up and make them

sure rather than a condemnation. It affects the look weak and cowardly-and that is why they

time factor.

are here today. The only reason they have come

Mr Sinclair-Leave is refused.

into this Parliament to listen to the debate is that they have been instructed to do so, otherwise they

Mr SPEAKER-Leave is refused.

will not retain their title. Why was Sir Charles

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-It does not make any
difference whether this motion is called a condemnation or a censure; everybody in the nation knows it is one of censure on the Government.
Last evening we came into this Parliament asking the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to make
a statement in the House. He declined to' do it.
Why? Because he was afraid of the debate that

Court so upset, as every Premier was upset? Not one of them accepted the offer made. They nego-
tiated furiously. They argued, in the interests of
the Australian people, that the Government should give them what they needed. The Govern-
ment denied them their rights, which means it has denied the rights of every Australian. Sir Charles Court said:

would then have taken place. The only reason I have been misled by the Prime Minister. In February 1976

there were any Press conferences or television apI was promised a new deal on federalism. It guaranteed me

pearances yesterday was that Sir Charles Court said: 'Unless you, the Prime Minister and the

increased allocation from the Federal coffers, but I have been deceived.

Treasurer, go in front of the Australian public to
say you deliberately deceived us 1 will bring you down as leader and as Treasurer. 1 will move for
your sacking, and as 1 have a fair bit of control in
Western Australia 1 will guarantee there will be a replacement both for the Prime Minister and for the Treasurer'. That is the only reason the two dis-
tinguished gentlemen decided to go to air last
night. But, they did not have enough courage to come into this House and debate the matter that
was before the nation.

In other words, Sir Charles Court has said: 'You,
Mr Prime Minister, have gone back on your word.
You broke your undertaking. You said in 1976 that we would not be worse off as States. We are
substantially worse off and you have deceived me.' How did the Prime Minister do it? The ar-
rangement was that the States were to get 39.87
per cent of the personal income tax receipts. Under this formula they get a mere 38 per cent.
Does the Prime Minister expect them to accept
it? No! It would mean a drop overall of about

What is before the nation? How is it that the $280m. The Prime Minister informed the Press

Prime Minister can say to the nation: 'I have that the States received 10 per cent. They did not

taken all the money out of the taxpayers' pockets get 10 per cent because the Government guaran-

but I will not give as much as the States need; 1 teed that included in their allocation this time was

will withhold it and 1 will do it by deceit and dethe provision for urban transport and soil conser-

ception'? He says: 'When 1 have fooled the Premvation, for which previously specific purpose

iers and made them look complete idiots, 1 will grants were made. They received 9 per cent. The

then give a background briefing to the Press as to Prime Minister has even misled the nation on

how stupid and foolish they were'. What sort of that. They needed 13 per cent. If one adds on the

federalism is that? What sort of national leaderother 4 per cent one will arrive at the amount of

ship is it when those two distinguished gentlemen, $280m. DOeG the Prime Minister believe the

2100 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Fraser Government

States were just going to put that money in the bank and not use it?
Let us look at what else the Government has done to the taxpayer~ of Australia. Let us look at the health program. The Government has dec, manded that when a person goes to hospital as an outpatient he or she must pay $15 a time. Can one imagine the situation of a person who is dependent upon a dialysis machine and who has to go to hospital at least four times a month and the situation of those suffering from skin diseases who have to attend the outpatients' department perhaps once a week? The Government has demanded that the States extract extra money from these poor, unfortunate taxpayers who suffer ill health. What sort of a health scheme is it that is run only on a Treasury basis? How can a government run a health scheme on the basis of monetary allocation and not on the needs of the sick, the poor and the underprivileged? The Government has demanded that the States extract millions of dollars from the Australian people in their efforts to keep their health. What sort of a nation is it that cannot afford a health program?
The Government guaranteed in its previous election campaign that it would maintain Medibank. What a joke that is. That is one example of the many promises the Government made. The Government promised that it would maintain wage indexation and tax indexation. It intended to maintain all the rights and privileges of the Australian nation. The Prime Minister has broken promise after promise. The chickens have come home to roost now because the Government's own kith and kin, the wool growers and others, are sending urgent telegrams saying: 'Look what you have done in relation to wool testing. It will affect 100,000 wool growers and the test will not even be accepted internationally'.
Even the Prime Minister's own supporters cannot tolerate him any more. When the Premiers as a group say that he is not to be trusted, why should he remain in office? If the Prime Minister were to go to the nation now on the basis of this so-called arrangement with the States, 'every Premier, irrespective of his politics, would vote against him. They would oppose him and ask for him to be removed from office because he is of no value to the nation. The reason is this: Unless a person has integrity and political honesty he or she is not entitled to hold office. Thecbehaviour of the Prime Minister. right across the spectrum of this nation, whether it be in relation to national affairs or international affairs, is of deceit and deception. It does not matter what the Prime Minister tells us in this Parliament, he is prone to deceive us. He is prone to have arrangements made

with the United States of America that do not mean what they say an<b,~rrangements made with the States that do not ffie;;an what they say. He has given indications in thIS Parliament of his intentions but he never carries them out. Promises made at election time are never carried out. These are the problems in relation to what is said--
Mr Sainsbury-Oh, phooey.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-'Oh, phooey" says the interjector at the back of the chamber. He holds a marginal seat that we will take next time there is an election. Let us look at the record of the Government. Let us take one issue that affects the States. I refer to the area of pre-schools. I was the Minister who went around to every Premier and who at the time had responsibilty for looking after children under the age of five years. I said to them: 'I will put it in writing that we promise to provide 75 per cent of the recurrent costs oflooking after pre-school children'. This we did. If we look at New South Wales, for example-this situation applies right across the board-we find now that the Commonwealth's contribution to recurrent costs for pre-school children is a mere 30 per cent. If we look at itfrom the point of view of children under five being cared for in New South Wales, that State now has to pay $8.2m for this care. The figure in 1976-77 was a mere $1.7m. Is this not symptomatic of all the things this Government has done? If people go to Queanbeyan Hospital they will pay more; if they send children to the pre-school at Queanbeyan they will pay more.
Let us have a look at what has happened from the point of view of housing grants. In 1975 $127m was allocated for housing grants. In 1980-81, $90m was allocated. This represents a reduction in monetary terms and a 50 per cent reduction in real terms. Let us look at dwelling construction. In 1977 New South Wales was able to construct 3,000 houses for low income earners. But with the money which has been allocated by this Government it will be able to construct 1,200 houses. Is it any wonder that the States are asking: 'What are you going to do for us?' Australian taxpayers are involved. Tturn now to the question of looking after children in institutions. Again the Government says that this is another State responsibility. In 1976 the Government gave a measly $5 for each child in an institution. That allocation has not been increased since 1976. So the States-I use New South Wales as an examplenow have to provide $27.50 for each child. This Government gives nothing. That applies right across the board. The States have now been given a signal thatthis Government will not provide any unemployment benefit to 16 and 17 year oIds. The

Fraser Government

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2101

States will have to pay for their institutional or other care. This Government gives them nothing. And this is a nationalgovernment interested in welfare!
Let us look now at the meals on wheels situation. In the three years that we were in government we increased the subsidy for meals on wheels on three occasions. This Government has increased it once. That service is not able to keep going as it cannot: keep up with the costs. The States are having to provide meals for the pensioners and the poor as this Government is not prepared to do it. The States have to do this using taxpayers' money in the States. The meals on wheels operation requires vehicles to operate and this Government has not increased the subsidy for these vehicles but has escalated petrol tax by 400 per cent. In social welfare programs-whether we are talking about pre-schools, housing, juvenile problems or the care of young or old people-this Government has failed at every turn. The States could use $280m. They would use it for Australians who are paying taxes now. What right has this Government as trustee to say that it will appropriate that money to itself because it has a mandate so to do? Where is this Government's mandate to do any of these things? Where is its mandate to deny care to children? Where is its mandate to whittle down the States' housing finances? Where is its mandate to deny help to the underprivileged, whether they be in institutions or anything of that nature?
Mr Ruddock-Your mandate would increase taxes.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-That is just it. This Government's mandate is: Do not increase the taxes federally but sock the people really hard through the States. The honourable member for Dundas should try to tell the people in his electorate that their taxes have been reduced. They will say to him: 'Ruddock, you are out of your mind. We are paying a fortune for the care of our children. We cannot get housing loans at reasonable interest rates. We are paying enormous costs which the States have to impose for transport, health care, and every other charge'. What a thimble and pea trick it is for this Government to say: 'We will reduce the taxes to you but you will pay through the nose'. The whole idea of federalism was to give everybody in Australia a fair share of the wealth. This Government has approached it on the basis that the States should try to do the best they can. The Government knows better than anyone else that some States have more capacity to levy taxes than others. Is this Government running federalism on the basis that there has to be double taxation? Obviously it is.

There has to be a Federal tax. There has to be a State tax. That is the Government's policy. If we go to any of the people in Australia today they say 'What do we need a national government for? It opted out of everything'-except selling this country to overseas interests. The Government has opted out of everything. What is it going to do now as a national government? Why does it not talk about being involved in education? Why does it not talk about being involved in health? Why is it not involved in housing? Why is it not involved in urban transport where the Government has slashed programs to ribbons? The Government promised in every election campaign, for example, to assist the country lines program. After the election the Government deprived the program of the moneys that were promised. Everywhere that the Government has made promises it has failed to fulfil them.
What does it mean? The interjection referred to taxes. The Government says: 'Perhaps we will drop Federal income tax rates by $2 or $3 but the mugs outside won't know that. They will have to pay another $20 or $30 through State taxes but we will go away as being good economic managers'. I make the point-luckily this is the point-that the State Ministers for Health will be here tomorrow. I hope that those Ministers tear the Government to ribbons on the basis of how the Government misled them. The Premiers are coming back. They would love to come back tomorrow. They ought to be here tomorrow to tear the Government limb from limb on the basis of how the Government deceived them by saying that it could not afford any more money.
The Prime Minister went out and told the Press that it was beyond any possibility that the States could get another one per cent increase. In fact, as Sir Charles Court has said, under the arrangements, the promises made to him in February 1976, he was entitled to another 4 per cent from the point of view of keeping up with the costs of living. Inflation is spiralling. Who has to pay the costs of inflation? Interest rates now are 17 per cent or more. Who is paying that? The Australian taxpayer. Where is the Government's economic management at any level we want to look at? How dreadful is it to think that we had a parliament in session yesterday and not one of the Government's leaders could find time to come into this House to discuss the problems as to why the States were upset, as to why the Premiers of every State were concerned as to what was to happen to their programs! The Prime Minister could not have cared less. It was not until Sir Charles Court said: 'Listen, unless you go in and make a public confession and show how weak you are, I

2102 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Fraser Government

will bring you down, from Western Australia. I will guarantee that the Liberal machine there will move into action and we will have a new leader in the national Parliament very soon'. That is where the influence came from. Top marks to Sir Charles Court! Even though his politics are poor, his principles in this area are accurate.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentlemen's time has expired.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister) (11.12)-This Government in 1975 and in successive elections and with record majorities was given a mandate to govern this country well. We wi 11 discharge that duty through this Parliament and through future parliaments:
Opposition members interjecting Mr SPEAKER-I ask honourable members on my left not to keep up the interjection level which means that the right honourable gentleman cannot be heard. I ask all honourable members to observe that. Mr MALCOLM FRASER-In 1975 this Government was first given a mandate to govern this country well. After that election and through successive elections and with record majorities this duty has been discharged, and it will continue to be through this Parliament and through successive parliaments. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) spoke of the state of the nation as though there was no hope and confidence in the wider community. How far apart can he be from the feelings, the sense of confidence and optimism, that is now shared in every corner of Australia? How far is he from the imaginative decisions that we have taken over the last few days in health, in the Review of Commonwealth Functions and, indeed, in the Premiers Conference itself? The Leader of the Opposition and the Australian Labor Party can only look to the past and the prescriptions of the past which show that they believe it is government, government decisions, government bureaucracies and large spending which must determine it all. A classic example is health where the Labor Party believes the Government through taxpayers' funds should provide everything, should spend everything and do everything. We happen to have a different belief. We believe that available funds should be concentrated on the disadvantaged and on those in need. We do not believe that taxpayers' money should be used to pay unnecessary subsidies to those who are better off in the community. We do not believe in undermining individual responsibility by centralised bureaucracy. We believe the user should pay and the user is entitled to the

influence that comes from paying. We do not believe in dual control ofc,.the Federal and State governments over Australia's hospitals. We believe the States have responsibilities that they ought to discharge. Labor's arrogant assumption that Canberra knows best is false indeed.
The central part of this debate is whether the people of Australia, the taxpayers, should have dollars to spend on their own account or whether the Government should continue to absorb larger and larger funds, leaving less and less freedom to people throughout this country. A very essential principle consistent with political freedom is economic freedom, freedom to make decisions and to choose and determine one's own future. Labor's high taxes, big bureaucracy and interfering regulations undermined this economy in the past and they would do it again. We well know that the predictions of the Leader of the Opposition about the Australian economy time and again have proved to be so very wrong.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Honourable members on my left are interjecting at a very loud level. This is a motion moved by the Party leader, the Leader of the Opposition. He has made serious charges against the Government. In any sense of fairness, especially in the national Parliament where it is a major national issue that is being debated, the right honourable gentleman will be heard in silence.
Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The Prime Minister is not answering the charge. This is Professor Kemp's 1975 policy speech.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Blaxland will resume his seat and remain silent.
Mr Hayden-This is written but unrehearsed. Obviously he has no intention of answering the debate.
Mr SPEAKElt-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will give example to his followers either by his continual interjections or by his silence. This is the national Parliament and I ask the Leader of the Opposition to maintain proper decorum and remain silent.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I accept that. I will set the standard for my supporters, which, unlike that of the Prime Minister, will be a decent one.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Leader of the Opposition has not shown it yet, but let us see whether he can for the rest of this debate. I was indicating that the Leader of the Opposition's economic predictions have proved very wrong on

Fraser Government

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2103

so many occasions and they are wrong for this greater assistance to the disadvantaged than

decade. In June last year he said that we would Labor ever dreamed of providing.

have an inflation rate of 12 per cent for the year to December. How wrong he was. In 1978 he said that we would enter the 1980s with unemployment approaching a million. How wrong he was and how wrong he is. He said that the 1980s are looming as a decade of despair. The only despair will be in the hearts and minds of the members of the Australian Labor Party as they dig graves for themselves.

We need to understand that the money we spend, the money Labor would like to spend, the money Premiers ask for, cannot be taken out of the sky. It does not belong to the Commonwealth; it does not belong to the States; it belongs to the taxpayers, the individual men and women of this nation. It is not a question of cheating taxpayers; it is not a question of cheating the States; it is a question of making a proper judgment about what

The Commonwealth went into this particular Premiers Conference which has led to this debate with a negotiating position. It would have been vastly offensive to the Premiers if we had made a Cabinet decision which said: 'These are the dollars, these are the cents. We have no negotiating position; we have no capacity to listen to your arguments, no capacity to adjust as a consequence of the arguments that are put'. The Cabinet decision made it perfectly plain that at most the funds given to the Premiers would be no higher in

resources should be used by government and what resources should be left to the people, the taxpayers of Australia. There is no robbery in that, and there is nothing new in States complaining. There is nothing new in States asking for more funds, but if we have a Commonwealth government, as we did in Labor's term, which does not have the capacity to say no to greater and increased demands for expenditure, then quite plainly we destroy this economy and destroy the well-being of Australia's families.

real terms than the year before, but that the final We provided the maximum funds that were re-

decision would be determined at the time by the sponsible on the arguments of the day and within

Treasurer (Mr Howard) and myself in conjuncthe discretion provided by Cabinet. That was the

tion with other colleagues who were at that Conappropriate thing to do to protect the well-being of

ference. The decision was made on that day. The this economy and the well-being of Australian

decision stands. The Commonwealth demonfamilies and taxpayers. It is quite plain that tax-

strated that it was reasonable, that it was flexible payers are fed up with governments or political

and that it listened to the Premiers. The Premiers parties in opposition which just want to spend and

would expect us to go to that Conference with a spend and go on spending. They know that that

negotiating position and with some capacity for way lies disaster for themselves, for their

movement. If we did anything else it would cerbusinesses, and for their children. Quite plainly,

tainly be offensive to all Premiers.

the States should show responsibility, as all

governments should, and cut waste and bureauc-

Our fundamental concern in these matters is to racy and over-regulation. They should repeat the

protect the taxpayers of Australia. The Oppoexample of Sir Phillip Lynch and his committee

sition, the Labor Party, and most of the Premiers which reviewed Commonwealth functions. I have

say that they want to spend more and more funds. no doubt that each State could pursue the same

If we acceded to all the requests of the Premiers, if exercise with merit.

we acceded to the exhortations of the Australian Labor Party, the taxpayers of this country would have no funds at all left for themselves. Protection of the Australian taxpayer is essential to achieve the basic objectives which are important to this nation. Those objectives include higher rates of growth-high by world standards, high by the standards of the last decade-and lower rates of inflation than we had under Labor, lower rates of inflation than will be found in other countries. Over 300,000 jobs have been created under our

Somebody has tried to suggest that there is something wrong in a Cabinet decision being made public. I should have thought that overwhelmingly the purpose of Cabinet decisions is to make them public, and the Treasurer and I, in consultation, did just that. There is nothing wrong with Cabinet decisions being made public. That is why Cabinet decisions are made-for the purpose of government. To suggest that there is something wrong in that is a strange thing indeed.

policies over the last two years. What other indusThe Labor Party once more shows itself as a

trialised country can show a performance party defending higher taxation and big spending.

equivalent to that in the circumstances we have? We need to understand that the Leader of the

In addition, there has been greater help to those in Labor Party has said that the challenge to social-

need than on any other occasion, greater security ism is the rapid spread of philosophies based on

for those in need through indexation of pensions, lower taxes and smaller government. He knows

2104 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Fraser Government

that as the Australian people come to understand very clear between the Government and the Op-

better and better that their well-being is dependent position; the philosophies are clear between us:

upon those philosophies, the chance of socialism Labor's way of big government, socialism in the

having its day in Australia will be abandoned for extreme, higher and higher taxes,higher and

all time. What kind of political party is it that sees higher government spending leading to stag-

cuts in government spending as robbing governnation, unemployment and inflation or the

ments? This Government is supporting taxpayers Government's way, which is building a great

and giving them greater influence over the affairs future for Australia and for all the people of

of this nation. If the Opposition had been responAustralia.

sible, it would have been supporting the Government in what it did at the Premiers Conference. The Labor Party, as always, at the last election--

Mr HAWKE (Wills) (11.27)-I rise to reply to the statement made by the senior spokesman for the Government, as he has come to be known. Before I deal with that in detail let me dispose of

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The right honourable some of the canards with which he opened this

gentleman will resume his seat. The honourable horrible speech that he has inflicted upon this

member for Burke has interjected constantly. I House today. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm

warn him to cease.

Frase'r) referred to the fact that there is a sense of

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Labor Party has shown, as it did at the last election and the election before that and the one before that, that

confidence in every corner of this country. I wonder how many corners of this country this Prime Minister has gone to.

it is totally out of touch with the needs, aspirMr Katter-Time!

ations, hopes and beliefs of the Australian people. As Mr Willis said: If Labor did not win in 1980 it faced a mammoth task in rebuilding the public sector and in convincing the electorate that it should pay a higher level of tax to enable it to do so'. Well, it will never persuade the Australian people that that would be a desirable objective. The benefits of our policies are now becoming plain. We are determined that Australia will not go the way of other countries, strangled by bureaucracies, strangled by higher and higher taxes and strangled by governments which seek to make all decisions for all the people, leaving them no freedom for themselves.

Mr Jarman-I raise a point Of order, Mr Speaker. The clock showed that the honourable member's time had expired. It has now been adjusted.
Mr HAWKE-It is no wonder that honourable members are afraid; they will get all they want in 15 minutes. I wonder how many corners of this country this Prime Minister has gone to. Has he gone to those corners of the country in which the two million people living in poverty exist? Do those people have a sense of confidence in the future of this country which is now not one nation, as I said before, but two nations? What freedom do they have to determine their future?

The Leader of the Opposition said that the future was miserable and dispirited. Well, it is only miserable and dispirited for him and the Labor Party, because under our policies Australia can and will have and is having economic growth unparalleled in the Western world today with higher real incomes, lower taxes than the people would have had under Labor, and with 300,000 more jobs over the last two years and lower rates of inflation.

Let us put aside these hopeless assertions by this man who has created a level of two million people living in poverty in this country and come to the facts of the situation which are now before this Parliament. What are the facts? They are simply that the Prime Minister has lied to the Premiers of Australia. With his Treasurer (Mr Howard) he went into the Premiers Conference and told the Premiers unequivocally that the situation with which they were confronted was thatthat was the

Mr Robert Brown-I raise a point of order, Mr limit of the capacity of the Commonwealth

Speaker. The Prime Minister has brought in the Government of Australia to transfer funds under

wrong speech. I have heard this one before.

this vaunted new federalism from the Federal

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hunter will resume his seat.

Government to the States to enable the States to undertake the face to face obligations of government to people, to ensure that Australians have

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If the honourable the greatest opportunity of living a decent life. He

gentleman does not like the truth, that is his busitold them that that was the limit of the capacity of

ness. The Government's policies provide the only this Government. Having lied to them, what hap-

way in which to achieve these objectives and to pened? The nature of this man is that he is not

provide better care for those in need. The choice is capable of living with what he perceives to be a

Fraser Government

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2105

victory. He then, by the nature of his makeup, has to twist the knife and rub people's noses into the ground.
So what did he do? First of all he went to his highly paid man, his hatchet man, Barnett, the man who has to spend so much of his time doing this job that last year he had an overtime bill of $29,000. This man said to these spokesmen: 'Look what our clever Prime Minister and our clever Treasurer did. The Prime Minister lied to the Premiers. They could have got another $70m'. What could they have done with the $70m in terms of looking after the people of this country? But no, we have such a clever Prime Minister that he lied to the Premiers! He told them that what they got was the maximum. Mr Barnett said that what was said by the Treasurer and what was said by the Prime Minister was not the case. The Prime Minister and the Treasurer lied and then when the lies became apparent Mr Barnett was sent out to try to stand over people to try to remedy the situation.
Mr Sinclair-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The honourable gentleman is constantly using the word 'lie'. It is an unparliamentary term. It is inappropriate, inaccurate and it is deliberately false. It is designed to distort the argument from the valid basis on which it should be put. I submit to you, Mr Speaker, that it is an unparliamentary expression and that it should therefore be withdrawn.
Honourable members interjecting
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the House to come to order. This is a matter which has concerned me. No honourable member is entitled to cast reflections on another honourable member unless there is a specific motion which enables him to do so. The terms of this motion are not a censure on any member of the Parliament. It is in fact a motion which condemns the Government and because of the W:ly in which the motion is put I cannot permit personal attacks upon individual members of the House. I therefore ask the honourable member for Wills to cease using the term.

Let us come to the canards which are told by this Prime Minister and this Government in terms of what the philosophy is which justifies their position. In terms of their concepts, they say they are not a government of big government; they are the government of lesser government. Let us look at the facts as distinct from what they put out. Between 1972-73 and 1975-76 Commonwealth Budget receipts as a proportion of gross domestic product averaged 23.9 per cent. This was during the period of the Labor Government. The percentage has grown inexorably under this Government. Between 1976-77 and 1980-81 the amount taken by the Commonwealth Government as a proportion of gross domestic product has gone up from an average of 23.9 per cent during the period of the Labor Government to 25.8 per cent.
This Government is not a government of lesser government; it is a government of less equitable government. What is the evidence of this? The evidence is clear. One should look at the Government's approach in terms of the sort of regulatory mechanism it is going to impose on this community. The Government says it is wrong to have a mechanism imposed upon industry in terms of the Prices Justification Tribunal or in terms of the Trade Practices Commission so it either abolishes these mechanisms or emasculates them. But at the same time the Government heaps upon heap the mechanisms which it imposes in the industrial relations field to the point where the Industrial Relations Bureau, this monstrosity, is maintainedagainst the advice of the employers,. against the advice of the trade union movement, against the advice of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and against the advice of his own Minister who has just resigned because he could not stand the stench of this Government. This is the living proof that this is not a government committed to smaller or lesser government. As I said before, it is a goverrtment which can be properly described only as a government of the privileged, by the privileged and for the privileged.

Mr HAWKE-Mr Speaker, whether deceit has been practised by this Prime Minister and this Treasurer will not necessarily be judged by the manipulated numbers in this House. A judgment on whether deception has been practised will be made by the Premiers of Australia. The Premiers of Australia will have no doubt whether deception has been practised because they were there and they were told what the limits were. Subsequently the Prime Minister told another, different story that shows that $70m which could
have been made available was not made available.

What do we find in terms of this new federalism? We are told by the Prime Minister that it wiII create a new co-operative relationship with the States. In fact, what has happened under the Prime Minister is that we have reached a situation where he will not make all that is available from Commonwealth revenues to the States. He gives them misguided information. In fact, the situation has been reached where this morning the Premier of Queensland described the action of the Prime Minister as malicious and misleading. Why does
the Premier of Queensland say this about the

2106 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Fraser Government

Prime Minister? The reason is that the Governthey represent to the Prime Minister a manifes-

ment says one thing and practises another. Has tation of his conception of what this country

the Prime Minister in any way attempted to meet should be about.

the charges made by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen)? There is no way in which that has been done. Has the Prime Minister met the charge? This is the crucial and critical point.

Clearly, it is a concept, as I said, of two classes of people-the privileged who will have their privileges maintained and increased, and against that an increasing number of people whose opportunity for a decent life will be pressed further and further into the ground. Is it any accident that

The charge is that the Prime Minister and the after five years of Fraserism and this sort of

Treasurer have deliberately misled the Premiers government there has been a doubling of the

of the States on basic issues regarding federalism number of people living in poverty?

on what moneys will be available to provide serMr Jarman-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of

vices to the people of this country. As a result of order. Is it in order for the honourable member for that misleading, the Premiers have departed from Hawker to be reading a newspaper while his

the presence of the Prime Minister and the future leader is speaking?

Treasurer and returned to their States. They are currently undertaking an examination of what additional taxes and imposts they will have to place

Mr SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.

upon the people of Australia to continue to proMr HAWKE-We can see how worried they

vide services which will enable people to lead deare when they try to consume time in that way.

cent lives. I ask: Can a more fundamental charge The fact that the number of people who are living be made against the morality and integrity of a in poverty in this country has doubled is not an ac-

government? This is a government which on one cident. It is the result of the deliberate implemen-

hand says there must be honesty and truth in retation of policies calculated by this Prime Minis-

lations and then on the other hand enters into ter to produce that result. It does not happen by

negotiations in which it is not prepared to tell the accident. These things happen because govern-

truth in regard to these fundamental matters ments do not provide services to people-they do

which determine how the economy of this country not provide services to the poor, the unemployed,

will operate and how the welfare of its people will the underprivileged, the Aboriginals and the

be determined.

people who depend on legal aid. Those sorts of

Is it any wonder that what we are witnessing today is a disintegration of government? The sacrifices being made under this Government are not sacrifices by the Prime Minister but sacrifices which he has imposed on others. The back benches of this Parliament and the chanceries of this world are littered with those people sacrificed by the Prime Minister. They have been sacrificed because, as has been said, he is possessed of a manic determination to get his own way.
Mr Young-No Country Party members have been sacrificed.

things come about only because governments provide them, but State governments can provide them only if they are provided with the maximum amount of money which will enable them to do these things and if the Federal Government has its priorities right.
In regard to the first element, we have seen this week-it stands unrefuted by the statement of the Prime Minister-the situation in which the Prime Minister has not told the truth, in which he has withheld money from the States. That is money which, under the management of this Federal Government, will not be used to do the jobs which

Mr HAWKE-No Country Party members have been sacrificed. Of course it is one rule for poor subservient members of the Liberal Party. They must toe the line. If in any way they try to express an opinion they are for the high jump. If the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) pre-

need to be done in order, as the Prime Minister said in opening his speech, to give a sense of confidence in every corner of this country. If we are to look after the people of this country, economic management has to be carried out in a way that produces that result.

empts a Cabinet decision about Trans-Australia Let us finally nail this misrepresentation that

Airlines that, of course, is all right. If the Minister under the economic management of the Prime

for Communications (Mr Sinclair) wants to say Minister and this Government we have produced

something about what should happen there is no marvellous results. Very simply, the fact is that in

question of control applying to leading members the period of this Government the economic per-

of the National Country Party; they are immune. formance of Australia vis-a-vis the Organisation

Why are they immune? They are immune because for Economic Co-operation and Development,

Fraser Government

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2107

has been significantly worse in terms of growth and in terms of inflation. The facts are on record. The average rate of growth in Australia in the period 1976 to 1979 was 2.8 per cent. That was the performance in this country. What was the OECD average? It was 4 per cent. The figure was significantly less in this country than in the OECD. What was the inflation performance? Inflation in Australia was 11 per cent and the OECD average was 8.5 per cent. So, in the period 1976 to 1979 the Government failed in terms of growth performance and it failed in terms of inflation performance. It has produced that result because of this concept that it will not deal honestly with the economics of this country. At this Government's level of control it does not deal honestly; but, it has reached the bottom of the barrel now when it lies and tells untruths and deceives its own kind. It deceived Liberal Premiers. It deceived Sir Charles Court and it deceived Bjelke-Petersen.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman's time has expired.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (11.42)-1 would like in the first part of my remarks to deal with what I believe to be the central issue in this debate and, most particularly, the central issue of the events of the past 48 hours. That is the proposition that in some way the Commonwealth Government has robbed the States of approximately $70m. It is a charge that 1 can understand. I can understand why it has been made in the circumstances of the past 48 hours but during this debate, because I regard that issue as being absolutely crucial to the credibility of what has been said by the Opposition and to the merits of this debate, I want to examine the approach of the Commonwealth to the Premiers Conference in its proper perspective.
All of us know-none better than people who sit on the Opposition front benches-that in any discussion or in negotiation the people negotiating on behalf of the parties have a certain capacity and a certain flexibility. They are not sent to the negotiating table with one, and one only, instruction. They are given guidance. They are told what is the ambit of their authority and are given guidance as to what they should do. The truth is that the Federal Cabinet gave to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and me, as the Cabinet has done on the occasion of earlier Premiers Conferences, authority to make a decision on the day of the Conference as to the final amount that should be given. That fact cannot be stressed too much. We were not told, when the Cabinet took its decision, that we had to give the States the same in real terms plus absorption. We were told that

under no circumstances should we go beyond that figure, that we should make an assessment on the day in the light of economic circumstances and budgetary considerations as to the appropriate amount. For it to be suggested in those circumstances that we have in some way robbed the States and that we have in some way deceived them is totally to misrepresent and to misunderstand the nature of a conference such as this. It is a total misunderstanding of the nature of Cabinet giving to Ministers a general authority and a total misunderstanding of what happened on the day of that Conference.
As I have already indicated, at that Conference negotiations started on the basis of there being an offer by the Commonwealth of 8 per cent plus absorption. After very lengthy discussion that figure was increased by an amount of approximately $27m as a result of a decision on the part of the Commonwealth-a decision which was taken by the Prime Minister and me in consultation with the other five Ministers who were present at the Conference. That decision was to increase the amount by $27m by providing to the States of South Australia, Tasmania and Victoria a sufficient additional supplement so that their total increase would not be less than 8 per cent, thus increasing the overall amount to about 8+ per cent.
After dinner and after lengthy discussion between the seven Commonwealth Ministers, it was decided to increase the amount. I repeat that that decision was taken only after that lengthy discussion. It was not a unanimous discussion. As everyone would expect, dilTering points of view were expressed in this discussion. It was decided to increase that amount to 9 pel' cent plus absorption. I regard that as an entirely proper, predictable and justifiable procedure for the Commonwealth to take at a conference such as this. To suggest that this is a procedure that in some way robs the States, deceives the States and is in some way dishonourable on the part of the Commonwealth is to misunderstand the nature of these types of negotiations.
We indicated very clearly throughout the entirety of. the Conference just precisely what our position was. Therefore, 1 want to emphasise as powerfully as I can that the proposition that in some way the States have been robbed of $70m is a proposition without substance. We are not, as the Prime Minister and others have said during this debate, talking about whether it is the States' money or the Commonwealth's money. We are talking about it being the money of the taxpayers of Australia. We were given authority by our

2108 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Fraser Government

Cabinet colleagues. We were not given a direcalways contemplated that there would be a review

tion. The central thing about the Cabinet authof those tax sharing arrangements after they had

ority that was given to the Prime Minister and been in operation foraniumber of years. There

me-it has to be repeated again and again-was was never any commitment that the arrangements

that a decision as to the final amount to be offered made then would be continued in perpetuity to

to the States should be made at the Conference in the letter. To suggest otherwise is to misread the

the light of budgetary and economic circumnature of those arrangements and the proposition

stances that existed at the time. That was the dethat was entered into at that time.

cision that was taken by the seven Commonwealth Ministers who were present at the Conference, including the Prime Minister and me.

I reject charges that the Commonwealth has abrogated the arrangement made in 1976. We have not abrogated the arrangement made in

We have heard a great deal over recent years 1976. The States wanted a review of the tax

from many Premiers around Australia that the sharing arrangements as much as the Common-

problem with Premiers Conferences is that the wealth did. No Premier was more vocal than the,

Commonwealth goes to them with a fixed posPremier of New South Wales in wanting a review

ition, that the Commonwealth is not prepared to of the tax sharing arrangmcnts. The Deputy

move and is not prepared to listen to argument. Leader of the Opposition ought to know that.

They suggest that we might as well send the Premiers a letter or a telex with the result. It has been suggested that the Conferences at no stage evince

Mr Lionel Bowen-What about Sir Charles Court?

any Cabinet flexibility or willingness to move. On Mr SPEAKER-The Deputy Leader of the

this occasion we demonstrated a flexibility. We Opposition will cease interjecting.

demonstrated a capacity to move. We demonstrated a willingness to listen to argument. In

Mr HOWARD-Mr Speaker--

those circumstances, for it to be suggested around Mr SPEAKER-The Treasurer will resume

Australia now by Premiers on both sides of the his seat. I remind the Deputy Leader of the Oppo-

fence that in some way we have not handled this sition that he spoke to the motion which is before

thing properly is a complete misunderstanding of the House. He seconded the motion. I ask him

the situation. In reality, what we have done is to now to hear the speaker from the other side.

conduct a negotiation in the manner that has been urged upon us time and again by the Premiers all around Australia. I find that an odd circumstance. I find it an odd charge and I find it a complete misunderstanding of the nature of the Premiers Conferences. We negotiated within our mandate. We were not given--

Mr HOWARD-During this debate the Opposition has talked a great deal about economic conditions in Australia. In my concluding moments I would like to say a few things about economic conditions in Australia. I remind the House that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and the honour-

Mr Scholes-The Commonwealth will never able member for Wills spent most of their

have a negotiating position again.

speeches talking about economic conditions in

Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Corio. The House will come to order. I am not prepared to allow this continual noise. When an honourable member has the call he is entitled to be heard.

Australia. I point out to the House how absurd it is for those gentlemen to talk in those terms in the face of the economic performance of this country at the present time. Let us talk about the growth rates of Australia compared with those of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Devel-

Mr HOWARD-We were not given an inopment countries. Let us talk about the fact that

struction to give that additional $70m. For it to be non-farm product in this country is rising by

suggested that the States have been in any way about 4 per cent this year against a Budget predic-

robbed of that money is a complete distortion of tion of 3t per cent. Let us talk about the fact that

the circumstance and a complete misunderstandfixed private sector capital investment will rise by

ing of the nature of Premiers Conferences. about 20 per cent in real terms this financial year.

Throughout the course of this debate criticism has Let us talk about the fact that this country is the

been made of the federalism policies of this envy of the industrialised world so far as overseas

Government. Let me remind the House and in investment is concerned. Let us talk about the

particular the Deputy Leader of the Opposition fact that the inflation rate of this country is sig-

(Mr Lionel Bowen) and the honourable member nificantly below the average of the industrialised

for Wills (Mr Hawke) that when the tax sharing world. Let us talk about the fact that businessmen

arrangements were first negotiated in 1976 it was all around Australia have renewed confidence and

Fraser Government

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2109

expectations about the economic future of Australia. Finally~-

Mr Charles J ones--I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Let us talk about the leak.

Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.

Mr HOWARD-Finally, as the hour approaches 12 o'clock and the time comes for me to conclude my remarks, let us talk about the unemployment figures that will become public in five minutes time. The figures will show the best performance in the area of unemployment for many years.

Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (11.55)-Mr Speaker--

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

69

Noes

49

NOES

Campbell,G.
Charles, D. E. Child,J.
Cohen,B. Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E.
Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M. J.
Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V.
Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L.
Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Kelly, R.J.
Kent, L. Kerin, 1. C.
Klugman, R. E.
McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Muntford, J. G.
Scholes,G.G.D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Urcn,T. West,S.J. Willis,R.
Young,M.J.

Question so resolved in the affimative,

Original question put:

That the motion (Mr Hayden's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

49

Noes

69

Majority

20

Majority

20

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney,R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W, p. Cowan, D. B. Deau,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Fraser, Malcolm Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris G. McD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges, J:C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.
Hun~R.J.D.
Hyde,J.M.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John
Brown, Robert

NOES

Jarman,A.W. Jull,D.F. Katler, R. C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T. Macphee,!. M. Millar, P.C. Moore,J.C. Newman, K, E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. 1. White, P. N. D.
Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J.

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. B1ewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Frec,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, D.E.

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baumc,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A.
Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Jan Carlton, 1. J.
Chapman, H. G. p,

NOES

Jacobi,R. JeDkin" H. A. John,on,I.es (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. Meleay,leo McMahon, Les Mildrcn, J. B. Miltol1,P. Morris,P.f'. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. West,S.J. Wi11i',R. Young,M.J.
Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. KilIen,D.J. Lloyd,B. lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. 1. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, I. M. MilIar,P.C. MoorejJ.C. Newman, K. E.

2110 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Personal Explanation

NOES

Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Fraser, Malcolm Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller)
Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M.

Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, 1. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.I.
White, P. N. D.

Question so resolved in the negative.

EDUCATION FUNDING .Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(1) deplores the Federal Government's inability or unwillingness to support the education of Australia's youth by-
(a) withdrawing funding from the Curriculum Development Centre and threatening its abolishment; and
(b) withdrawing funding from Australian Education Council curriculum projects; and
(2) calls on the Federal Government to revoke these illadvised decisions of the Commonwealth Functions Review committee, otherwise known as the razor gang.

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I ask that questions be placed on the Notice Paper.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman claims to have been misrepresented?
Mr SINCLAIR-Yes, Mr Speaker. Mr SPEAKER-'-He may proceed. Mr SINCLAIR-The Sydney Morning Herald of 4 May made the following comment:
Mr Ian Sinclair is refusing to put on oath his denial that he knew Australia continued to breach an international trade agreement by selling cheap milk powlier.
On 27 February 1981 I received a letter from Senator Peter Rae, Chairman of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations, in which he set down particulars of some evidence received by that Committee and asked for my comments on it. I responded to that letter on 16 March and then on 22 April 1981. I further reponded in the following way:

Dear Senator Rae, The letter under your hand as Chairman of the Senate
Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations dated 25th March, 1981, has been received.
My response to your earlier correspondence of the 16th March, 1981, was written as a Minister in accordance with the several Oaths taken relating to that office.
My comments were based on my own recollection and supported by Departmental records and my Ministerial diaries.
In my letter of 16 March 1981 I set down in considerable detail my response to Senator Rae's letter which was dated 27 February 1981. As my letter stated, the detail was in accordance with my own recollection and was written as a Minister of the Crown. I have now received a further letter from Senator Rae dated 6 May 1981 in which he comments, inter alia:
Nevertheless, we are left with the dilemma that sworn evidence was given to the Committee which is contradicted only by an unsworn letter from you.
In your letter dated 22 April 1981 you stated the written evidence you gave to the Committee by letter dated 16 March 1981 was given as a 'Minister in accordance with the several Oaths taken relating to that office'.
From our examination of the oaths taken by Ministers we are unable to see any declaration that would place written evidence given by a Minister on the same basis as sworn evidence.
I do not believe it appropriate that a Minister of this House should appear and give sworn evidence before a committee of the other House. Therefore, I make this statement with respect to the evidence that I have tendered to that Committee in the Parliament and, of course, in accordance with my responsibilities to this Parliament. I believe that is the correct and proper form by which I can respond to the honourable senator. I assert to that honourable gentleman and to the members of the Senate Committee that I believe the evidence given to them is totally correct and has the substance of my being a Minister and giving it in this place. I do not believe there is any reason for a statutory declaration to be given to confirm formal correspondence entered into by me as a Minister in this place.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford Smith)-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence. I do not wish to cast any reflection upon the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair). Often it is very difficult for Senate committees to understand that they cannot get evidence from Ministers of the Crown. It would be in the. interests of the Parliament and the Minister if he made a statement indicating where the evidence given is in conflict and why. Then everybody in both Houses would know the position.
Mr SPEAKER-No doubt that proposal has been heard by the right honourable gentleman. I

Grievance Debate

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2111

granted him indulgence to make a personal explanation. He stated why he did not make a statutory declaration. My ruling is that that ends that matter. I have no doubt that the points raised by the honourable gentleman would have been heard by the right honourable gentleman.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Trade Marks Amendment Bill 1981.
Designs Amendment Bill 1981.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Bill 1981.
GRIEVANCE DEBAT.E
35-Hour Working Week-Public Service: Staff Ceilings-Passports-Campbelltown City
Council-Telephone Service in Shoalhaven Area
Question proposed:
That grievances be noted.
Mr COHEN (Robertson) (12.14)-A few weeks ago this House was debating the 35-hour week. Unfortunately I was not able to speak in that debate. Today I want to suggest to the House a way in which the 35-hour week can be introduced into at least one part of the economy to the satisfaction of the whole communityemployers, workers and consumers. I ask the honourable members to listen patiently to what I have to say and not to close their minds and reject the proposals until they have considered them carefully. I want to talk about one sector of the economy-retailing, because that is one area with which I am fully familiar. The House is aware that for over 20 years I have been involved in retailing in men's and ladies' fashion on the North Shore of Sydney. Before becoming a member of Parliament I was the full time manager of a business and since 1969 I have retained my interest in that business; so I am sure that the House will accept that I have sufficient experience to speak with some authority.
I am sure that everyone would be aware of the controversy that has surrounded not only the question of the 35-hour week but also the question of extended shopping hours, in particular, Saturday afternoon shopping. What surprises me in this debate is that the proposals I am about to put forward have not, to the best of my knowledge, been suggested before. Let me first of all summarise the different views of the three groups involved in the debate. The attitude of employers varies. One view is that they should be allowed to trade when they wish and if they could have extended shopping hours the consumers would

spend more, thus increasing the general prosperity. Consumer spending has been sluggish in recent years. The employers argue that if consumers had extended shopping hours, particularly on the weekend, they would spend more. The argument that retailers wish to open only to give better service is in my view nonsense. The reason--there should be no need to apologise for that--is that they would hope to sell more. Undoubtedly, consumers would get better service with extended shopping hours, but that surely is not the motive. Increased turnover and profitability is a perfectly legitimate goal in a free enterprise society and retailers should not be coy about saying so.
Other retailers argue against extended shopping hours because they claim that the consumer has so much to spend irrespective of the time available. They argue that opening their shops for longer periods would simply increase overheads, particularly wages, without any commensurate increase in turnover. The result, they believe, would be reduced profitability and reduced leisure, particularly for small shop keepers who incidentally provide the vast majority of retail outlets. To maintain profitability they would have to increase margins, thus passing the costs on to the consumer.
Let us look at extended shopping hours from an employee's point of view. The average retail shop is open from 9 a.m. to 5.30 p.m., five days a week, one evening a week from 5.30 p.m. to 9 p.m. and Saturday morning from 8.30 a.m. until 12 noon although conditions vary from State to State and within States. Shops are open for almost 50 hours. Shop assistants work a 40-hour week. They also rarely ever get a full weekend off. Unlike the rest of the community, they are unable to go away for a weekend. That is the great disadvantage that most retail employees have.
From the consumers' point of view, the majority of the work force is at work at the same time the shops are open. With the exception of their lunch hour, Saturday morning and one evening a week the opportunity to shop leisurely is severely restricted. For most people whose place of work is a distance from shopping centres, the only opportunity to shop is on Saturday morning or one evening a week. These are the times when shops are crowded and shopping becomes a very tortuous experience. The consumers rightly ask the question: 'Why can't shops be open at times when we are not at work?' This debate has gone on in this country for decades without any resolution. Some years ago one night a week shopping was

2112 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Grievance Debate

introduced in most States and this has at least relieved some of the pressure that occurred on Saturday morning.
I recently took out some figures from my own business to ascertain the pattern of retail shopping hours for men's and ladies' wear. The figures were taken over many months and it was fascinating to observe the incredible consistency in the figures. Let me run through the men's wear figures: Monday 12 per cent, Tuesday 8 per cent, Wednesday 11 per cent, Thursday 26 per cent, Friday 14 per cent and Saturday 29 per cent. There are only 3t hours for shopping on Saturday. The figures for ladies' wear are: Monday 7 per cent, Tuesday 17 per cent, Wednesday 15 per cent, Thursday 25 per cent, Friday 19 per cent and Saturday 17 per cent. The important point is that the figures for Thursday were accounted for during the period between 6 p.m. and 9 p.m. In other words, 61 per cent of women's wear and 69 per cent of men's wear was sold on Thursday, Thursday evening, Friday and Saturday morning. A more detailed analysis revealed that approximately 40 per cent of women's wear and 50 per cent of men's wear was purchased on Thursday night and Saturday morning; in other words, 50 per cent of the turnover was done in 10 per cent of the shopping hour time available-the hours when shops were open and factories were closed.
I am fully aware that men's clothing would probably be one of the most sought after goods in the after-hours period. Friday, and to a lesser degree, Saturday are the big food shopping days. However, from discussions I have had with many other retailers who sell different merchandise I can assure the House that most stores take between 30 per cent and 50 per cent of their turnover during those five to six extra hours on Thursday night and Saturday morning. My experience is solely in suburban stores. We must be conscious of the fact that there has been and will continue to be a major shift in retail shopping from the central business districts in the cities to the suburban shopping centres as occurred during the 1960s and 1970s:
If I have been a little long-winded in coming to my suggested changes please forgive me, but it is important to understand fully the background to what I propose. My proposition is that retail shops should open until 4 p.m. on Saturday afternoon and close all day Monday and that on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday mornings they open at 9.30 a.m. Little or no business is done in the first hour that shops are open.
Let me now detail the benefits to all sectors of the community. In the case of the employers,

there is a slight reduction in overheads and also increased leisure. That is important for small shop keepers. The big advantages, however, for small shop keepers would be the Monday when warehouses, offices, banks would be open and their shops closed. It is a major problem for most small shop keepers to find the time to study properly ranges of goods and to see their accountants, their bank managers and their suppliers without spending valuable time away from their shops. A full day to do the 101 chores that need to be done outside the store would be a godsend to most small retailers.
In the case of the employees, the benefits would be enormous. Every weekend would be a full two days off, enabling them to go away if they wished from late Saturday afternoon at 4 o'clock until Tuesday morning. The working week could be 35 hours without any problem. The greatest advantage to employees would be the convenience of enjoying the beach, sporting facilities, restaurants and tourist resorts on Monday when they are not as crowded as they normally are on Saturday and Sunday. This would also be mutually beneficial to the recreation industry which finds Monday a very quiet day.
One further idea that might be feasible-it has been suggested to me-is the idea that the central business district, that is, the city proper which I am told has suffered a very profound fall-off in Saturday morning shopping since the shift to the suburbs during the past 20 years, should not open at all on Saturday but remain open on Monday. This then would enable suburban shop assistants and employers to shop individually or as a family in the city. So, we would have, in fact, six days for shopping but a different five days in the city proper to the five in the suburbs.
Finally, let us look at the advantages to the consumer. The consumer would gain an extra four hours shopping on Saturday afternoon. This may not appear much, but on the figures that I provided earlier, illustrating that between 60 per cent and 70 per cent of retail shopping is done on Thursday evening, Friday and Saturday morning, the extra four hours, is, in effect, an increase of 33 per cent 011 the peak shopping period. I have given this matter much thought over many years. I have discussed it with shop assistants, retailers and customers. I have always found that 99 per cent of people agree and say: 'Well, why hasn't it been done? It seems the sensible thing to do'. I ask that this at least be given serious consideration and that the matter at least be the subject of discussion and debate. Why not at least try it for a trial period?

Grievance Debate

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2113

Finally, let me say that 1 disagree completely with the suggestion that the Government proposed last week to deregulate completely shopping hours in Canberra. We need regulation to prevent overheads soaring, increased costs, reduced leisure, both to the employee and the employer-I might add that I know what it is like never to have a weekend off-and the exploitation of shop assistants. It is unfortunate that that does occur in some cases. The idea that the consumer should be able to buy something 24 hours a day, seven days a week, is nonsense and unrealistic. Let us give the consumer a better deal with Saturday afternoon shopping, the shop assistants 35 hours a week, a full weekend off every week and the retailer more profitability and more leisure.
Mr ADERMANN (Fisher) (12.24)-Last week in this House the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) made a statement on actions proposed pursuant to the deliberations and investigations of the committee for the Review of Commonwealth Functions. I accept that the result sought is economic growth, more jobs, higher incomes and a better life for all. I accept too the commitment to smaller government and the view that the Government should avoid excessive intrusion into the individual's rights and opportunities to make his own choices and set his own goals and priorities. I welcome too the philosophy of returning to State and local government responsibilities and administration which properly ought to repose there, and a commencement on the removal of the wasteful, inefficient duplication and overlap. I too enjoin the States to address themselves to a similar review, because restraint, efficiency and resistance of bureaucratic topheaviness is no less necessary in State government and could produce considerable benefits.
One of the discernible consequences of the Whitlam Labor Government was an explosive growth in the public sector with remarkable growth in departments and in the Public Service. The legacy of those policies in instability, destruction of confidence in the private sector, inflation and unemployment have been clearly seen and many times clearly exposed in the Parliament. Thus the restraints in staff ceilings and the actions taken by the Government to contain this bureaucratic monolith have been well intentioned. The Prime Minister has indicated that the reduction or abolition of functions and changes outlined could lead to a total reduction in staffing of 16,000 to 17,000.
I want to comment on that aspect and highlight some very real concern that I feel not about the goal but about the progress to that goal. The

growth in the Public Service was observed at all levels, all divisions and all classifications. New departments had emerged with their traditional pyramid of power and personnel. It has not only been a growth in clerks and officers at the lower level but also a growth in the Second Division in assistant secretaries, first assistant secretaries and the whole range of positions. At these higher levels, each with its own service staff, secretaries, clerks and advisers, the growth has been equally discerned. But I am most concerned that when staff ceilings are set and retrenchments are made so often the cuts and retrenchments are at the lower end of the scale. The top half of the pyramid, which determines the numbers in the lower echelon who should be dispensed with, is relatively undisturbed. The structure remains and the basis exists and can proliferate again if the Government relaxes its restraint.
What is the result which unfortunately manifests itself in a purely arbitrary reduction in staff ceilings? Unfortunately, for all the Government's intention otherwise, it can be service and help to the public which suffer. At the lower level we can see fewer personnel in local social security offices and Commonwealth Employment Service offices and fewer nursing staff in repatriation hospitals-in short, at the level where services and assistance are dispensed to the public and to the taxpayers who provide the salaries of the Public Service. This does happen and I believe it has happened. Higher up the scale we hear complaints that staff ceilings are preventing provision of information and services, yet the peaceful waters at those levels often do not exhibit a ripple.
I agree with the Government's aims to contain and reduce the public sector, and I realise that unless we maintain that course we cannot hope to obtain economic stability and give the private sector room to move, to grow and to provide jobs. But the Government cannot sit back and say that its aim of 16,000 or 17,000 fewer public servants will be attained-or, as the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) is reported as saying 16,000 or 17,000 fewer snouts at the trough-and just hope that the Public Service will reorganise itself into that new structure. My concern is where and how the reductions will be achieved. Will they be only or almost entirely at the lower levels or will there be very close supervision which will ensure that we will not achieve a smaller though very top-heavy and inefficient structure? Will the people who rely on the services and who should benefit from the reduction in bureaucratic growth and controls suffer frustration, reduced effiencies and services?

2114 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Grievance Debate

I accept that there is a capacity and a desirpainstaking, and the goal can be realised. But the

ability to achieve the sorts of reductions the Prime Government's task is equally to oversee and res-

Minister envisaged. Otherwise the Government tructure the pyramid as it was to identify the goal.

and the Committee need not have bothered to inThat implementation is a job for government, not

itiate such a review but could have let instability just a sloughing off of the blokes at the lower

and inflation have their day. What I want to levels of the Service by the chaps in the big chairs

stress, ad nauseam if honourable members like, is at the top. If the Government proceeds on the

that the task has not ended; it has just begun. The course that I advocate it will have the unqualified

Government can and must maintain service and support of everyone on this side of the House and

consideration to the community, and it can do the overwhelming majority of the Australian

that only if restructuring, efficiencies and repeople. So much else of the program put by the

straints cover the whole spectrum of the bureaucPrime Minister to the Parliament-for example,

racy. If we have just as many chiefs with just as the elimination of duplication, inefficiencies and

many secretaries, advisers and comforters and waste-hinges on how the bureaucracy is restruc-

16,000 or 17,000 fewer nurses, counter officers, tured. That restructuring cannot be delegated, it

social workers and helpers, then we have a disasmust personally be implemented by every Minis-

ter. If pensioners are inconvenienced, if their ter in the department which he heads and for

cheques are delayed or misplaced and if their which he is responsible. Then it can be done, it

opportunities to get help from the local and reshould be done and it must be done. They are hard

gional offices diminishes, then we arrive at an unoptions. They cannot be shirked or we will slide

desirable goal. I believe those services, that help back into the dark valley which we have begun to

and compassion, can remain and even improve climb out of.

with the reductions which are envisaged, but not if the chief remains and the braves are sacrificed and not if the reductions are at the service level only and not in the top administration also.

Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (12.33)-Whilst I disagree with the general position taken by the honourable member for Fisher '(Mr Adermann), I must say that I applaud his sentiments about the

My injunction to the Government is not to service to the public. My concern is that the

leave it to the Public Service to work out a fair dismeasures which the Government is undertaking

tribution of staff. If that is the course we are to will result in a decrease in that service and a take then we will get reduced services and diminishing of its quality. This is germaine to the efficiencies and moans from the top echelon about points I want to make today.

unfair staff ceilings. Where the Government I draw to the attention of the House a matter

should receive commendation, it will receive which has caused and which is continuing to cause

odium and condemnation ifthat is the mechanism considerable anxiety, annoyance, frustration and

employed. This is a task for the Government, a inconvenience to a large number of people in my task for each of its Ministers, individually and colelectorate of Ballarat and, I suggest, to an even

lectively, to implement. That magnifying glass, greater number of people in other parts of the that review, that examination and that restructurcountry. I refer to the problems experienced by

ing must equally be focused at the top of the pyrapeople applying for passports to travel outside mid. The base of the pyramid can diminish in size this country. They include travellers, the travel only if the apex is reduced. There have been subagents who are attempting to service them,

stantial benefits from the reduction of the size of businessmen and a great number of all sorts of the bureaucracy, but the benefits should have and other people who under normal circumstances

could have been considerably greater. At times would not have to suffer the inconvenience of services have been affected because of the arbiwaiting many weeks, as they do today.

trary nature of the cuts. Thus I can only endorse and not criticise the aim to reduce the bureaucratic monster. The goal has been announced and the underlying philosophy is very sound. However, the path to its achievement is crucial and its effectiveness is dependent on the path that we take. I know that there will be compassion and understanding; but, as I say, let us be sure that we do not end up with 17,000 fewer at the base and an unchanged number in the Second Division.

From my inquiries it appears that there is some discrepancy between the statements emanating from the passport office of the Department of Foreign Affairs and those emanating from the clients. According to the Department, the current time for applications to be processed and issued is something like two weeks for applications made across the counter and about 25 days for application made by mail. According to the experience of travel agents and people who have come to see

The Government has put a sound proposition me a five week delay would be considered a short

to Parliament. The review has been thorough and period. That is not two weeks. This delay does

Grievance Debate

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2115

affect a large number of people who are planning trips. One agent indicated that the norm for the issuance of a passport would be closer to eight weeks. In fact, the other day, I received word from a person who had to wait nine weeks to be issued with a passport. Of course, this is something which is quite intolerable.
There appears to have been a breakdown in the system somewhere. A lot of people, many of whom have not travelled before and who were looking forward to their trips, have developed considerable anxiety and have experienced disruption not only to their plans for leaving this country but also to the plans the'y have made for visits to other countries. In fact, I heard of one instance the other day of one intending traveller having to cancel his trip as a result of these delays. Many of the people affected include those intending to visit families overseas and, as I said, people conducting business and people who are going on well-earned trips, many of whom have waited for many years until they retired to make those trips. Some of these trips have been aborted, truncated or in some ways upset. It IS difficult to have to postpone a flight. People who book on advance purchase excursion fares find themselves inconvenienced. Some people have had to shorten their journeys or, as I said, cancel them because of what would appear to be a process of neglect. I do not know whether this process is deliberate but, certainly, it is a process of neglect by the Government in this crucial area of the Public Service.
Some direct effects relate to 1981, but certainly not just to 1981. I think one has to look at an earlier period to see where the rot began. Early in 1981 a new form was introduced for completion by passport applicants. This again caused considerable concern to people. I know this from personal experience. People came to my office requesting me to complete their forms because they were concerned about the complexity of the form. At the same time a new machine was introduced in the passport office supposedly to streamline the process. But the personnel issuing the passports were not familiar with how the machine operated. This slowed down the process. Then the normal seasonal fall-off in demand for passports over the Christmas period did not occur in 1980. So, the normal catch-up period did not eventuate.
The culmination of those factors led to a serious backlog in the processing of applications. Until 1975 the processing of passport applications was handled by the Department of Immigration. Thereafter that matter was taken over by the Department of Foreign Affairs. The demand for passports since 1975 has risen by 50 per cent. But

the Department of Foreign Affairs still has the same number of staff, to a large degree, handling applications in the same way as the Department of Immigration did at that time. In response to numerous complaints and a submission by the Department of Foreign Affairs-God bless the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) who is sitting at the table-the Public Service Board provided some additional staff in Melbourne and Sydney. I understand that IS additional staff were provided in Melbourne and six additional staff were provided in Sydney. However, these are temporary staff. No new permanent staff have been allocated. The temporary staff can be expected to leave when the demand falls off.
The Government's decision concerning the requirements [or travellers to and from New Zealand to hold passports or visas is expected to lead to a new rush on passport applications when that provision comes into effect in July this year. I ask honourable members to bear in mind the backlog of applications which already exists. The Department of Foreign Affairs has said that the situation has improved significantly. I have already referred to the discrepancies between the stories of the Department and the clients. I have been putting the stories of the clients but, of course, we must consider the Department's story also. The Department says that the situation has improved significantly and the waiting time for passports is now two weeks only for over-thecounter applications and 25 days for those applications made by mail.
It is always unfortunate, I think, when people have to stand up in this House and berate the Government. Yet, because of events of recent days one has to bring to the attention of the people of this country some of the underlying causes of this sort of neglect. Perhaps we have seen the culmination of the Government's pursuit of a particular ideology over the last week or fortnight. Action taken in 1975 and measures introduced since then have led to the present situation. The high priests of this neo-Benthamite religion of Milton Friedman, so liberally spread as they are through this Government they are spread all over the place this morning-intone their monotonous and somwhat monstrous incantations with mesmeric effects upon their fellows. That is evident from what took place this morning. The principal symbol of their religion is small government. But small government is neither synonymous with nor sufficient for nor a substitute for good government. The Government stands condemned for its failure to provide trained personnel in the Department of Foreign Alfairs to

2116 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Voting Rightsfor Migrants

ensure that the legitimate needs of the public are met.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (12,43)-The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) and I have today issued a joint statement condemning the brutal bashing of the town planner of the Campbelltown City Council by standover thugs wh? are trying to force the Council to give up its action to prevent a brothel from operating in Iolanthe Street, Campbelltown. The mayor of Campbelltown and aldermen-my friends and colleagues right across the political spectrumhave been subjected to continuing telephone threats by criminals involved in the brothel business. I warn these thugs that any attempt to threaten democratically elected representatives in this way strikes at the very heart of the democratic process and that the people of Australia will not tolerate it. None of us elected to represent the people of this area will bow to this kind of thuggery.
In the minute remaining I say briefly that tomorrow at 6 a.m., 12,000 subscribers in the Shoalhaven telephone area will gain full access to the subscriber trunk dialling service of the Australian telephone system when the new $3m Nowra telephone exchange begins operations. I am overjoyed that this is taking place at this time because there was a time when some pressure existed for this project to be deferred. I am very grateful indeed to two former Ministers for Telecommunications, the late Eric Robinson and the now retired Tony Staley, and the former chairman of Telecom Australia, Mr Bob Somervaille, who agreed to my strong representations that this project go ahead earlier than scheduled. I am grateful because Nowra now has full access to the STD service instead of having, as I understand it, the oldest telephone exchange of any large city in Australia. I am grateful to Telecom for all the work it has done. I am grateful particularly to the people who had charge of providing a service under the old and very tired exchange systemthe Telecom operators, the technicians and the trunk call operators in the exchange. For years they have struggled to provide an adequate service to the people ofmy electorate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! It is now 15 minutes to one o'clock. In accordance with Standing Order 106 the debate is interrupted. 1put the question:
That grievances be noted.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

VOTING RIGHTS FOR MIGRANTS -!. ~ - Ministerial Statement
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)-by leave-I take .this opportunity to report to the House on discussions with State and Northern Territory Ministers about the eligibility for the franchise of new settlers. This matter has been discussed among Ministers responsible for immigration and ethnic affairs matters regularly for the past two years or so. At our last meeting which was held on 14 and 15 April 1981 agreement was reached on the following:
(1) Migrants, irrespective of their country of origin should be treated equally in relation to requirements to enrol, on their right to vote at elections for parliament and to nominate as a candidate for election to parliament;
(2) Australian citizenship is the appropriate basis for the franchise;
(3) No person currently enrolled as an elector should be disenfranchised;
(4) Uniform legislation to give effect to the foregoing should be enacted by the Commonwealth and all States.
In addition, all Ministers agreed that it would be appropriate to introduce the new arrangements from 1 January 1982 but this is subject to confirmation by respective governments.
Honourable members will be aware that under existing legislation British subjects may enrol and vote after six months residence in \ustralia whereas other migrants must attain Australian citizenship-involving a minimum residence period of three years-before they are entitled to enrol and vote. In the interests of clarity, it should be noted that the term 'British subject' includes citizens of most former British colonies. T seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a list of 42 countries whose citizens are British subjects and entitled to vote under existing laws after six months residence in Australia. Honourable members will note that the list runs from the Bahamas and Bangladesh to Zambia and Zimbabwe. Of course, some former British colonies removed themselves from the Commonwealth and their people from British subject status but the majority remained and retained that status.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
List of countries to which the status of British subject is applied under the Australian Citizenship ACT:
Bahamas; Bangladesh; Barbados; Botswana; Canada; Cyprus; Dominica; Fiji; The Gambia; Ghana; Grenada; Guyana; India; Jamaica; Kenya; Kiribati; Lesotho; Malawi;

Voting Rights/or Migrants

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2117

Malaysia; Malta; Mauritius; Nauru; NQw Zealand; Nigeria; Papua New Guinea; Saint Lucia; Saint Vincent; Seychelles; Siera Leone; Singaporer; Solomon Islands; Sri Lanka; Swaziland; Tanzania; Tonga; Trinidad and Tobago;

social and political development of Australia. The changes reflect the cultural diversity of modern Australia and its independent identity.

Tuvalu; Uganda; United Kingdom and Colonies; Western Samoa; Zambia and Zimbabwe.

The term 'British subject' is included in many

Mr MACPHEE-The removal of the anomaly between British subjects and other migrants was recommended by the Report of the Review of Post-arrival Programs and Services for Migrants more widely known as the Galbally report. When this report was tabled in the Parliament in May 1978 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced the Government's acceptance of all of its recommendations. The report in this respect stated:

Commonwealth and State Acts, apart from electorallegislation. I am informed that it is now used only by the United Kingdom and Australia and that the United Kingdom is moving to adopt other approaches. It is fitting, therefore, that Australian legislation be re-examined as well. In most countries, the primary condition for obtaining the franchise is citizenship. Comparison with other countries, however, should not be taken too far because Australian law obliges all eligible voters to enrol and to vote. This is not the situation in

We observe that while migrants who are British subjects are eligible to vote after residence in Australia for six months,

many countries.

non-British migrants must become citizens by naturalisation before they are eligible to vote in Federal elections. We recommend that anomalies in voting rights be resolved and that all migrants be placed on an equal footing in their voting

Australia's franchise for British subjects without citizenship is associated with our origins as a series of British colonies. Indeed, before 26

rights.

January 1949 when Australian citizenship was

Following the Galbally report an interdepartmental committee examined and reported on voting rights. After examination of that report by Cabinet I discussed this question with my State and Territory counterparts at a conference of Ministers in Darwin in 1980. It was agreed at that conference that Ministers would seek the reactions of their respective Cabinets and report back at the next conference which was held in April 1981. At that conference last month, Ministers expressed strong support for the changes I have just foreshadowed. I emphasise that the changes will not, of themselves, confer a right to vote upon any

introduced all Australians were British subjects. That term described a common or shared status of citizenship of the Commonwealth of Nations. In the 1940s, each of these nations introduced its own citizenship but retained strong links with other Commonwealth nations by granting each of its citizens the status of a British subject. In Australia citizenship itself was more readily available to British subjects than to other settlers until 1973. Since then, all settlers have had to satisfy the same residence requirement for citizenship. We are now taking the next step and placing the franchise on an equal footing.

further categories of people. The only group of migrants affected by the changes will be British subjects-that is people who are not Australian citizens-who have not enrolled before the end of 1981. In future, British subjects will not be entitled to enrol unless they become Australian citizens. I should also emphasise that the changes will not disenfranchise anyone.

The most fundamental reflection of commitment to the nation is citizenship. The most fundamental expression of citizenship is the right to elect those who govern the nation. Against that background it is of interest to consider some statistics. As at 30 June 1979 it was estimated that about 2.6 million overseas-born residents of Australia had periods of residence greater than

After 1 January 1982 or such other date as the the three years necessary to apply for citizenship.

governments might decide all persons currently In fact only 1.4 million-about half-had become

enrolled will be obliged by law to remain on the citizens. When we study the 1.2 million who had

electoral rolls and to vote at elections. However, residentially qualified to apply but had not be-

after that date, of those persons not enrolled, only come citizens, we find the British subject group

Australian citizens will be entitled and required to comprised almost 70 per cent of the residentially-

enrol and vote. One of the options considered by qualified non-citizens. Analysis of the period of

Ministers was that British subjects already enresidence in Australia also reveals a noteworthy

rolled should be permitted to take themselves off pattern. Of the migrants born in the United King-

the roll. Ministers decided that this option should dom, including the Republic of Ireland, who had

not be adopted. As a consequence, compulsory not taken citizenship, about 60 per cent had lived

enrolment and voting will continue for all those in Australia for more than 4 years; about 36 per

who are now on the roll and who will in future be cent had lived in here for 10 or more years; and

eligible to be on the roll. The introduction of these about 13 per cent had lived here for 22 years or

changes will constitute a further milestone in the more. It is for these sorts of reasons that a study

2118 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Voting Rightsfor Migrants

has been made of the Citizenship Act and of policies, practices and procedures associated with citizenship. When. the results of those studies have been fully evaluated, further anomalies will be removed.

one of the 42 British and so-called former British areas or from the United Kingdom itself should now have citizenship as the basis for the franchise. This is the same burden as that carried by migrants from other parts of the world.

In foreshadowing legislation to vary the entitlement of future migrants to enrol and to vote, I emphasise two things:
Firstly, all Australian residents who believe they qualify for Australian citizenship should enquire at the nearest office of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs or lodge an application; and, secondly, British subjects who believe they are entitled to enrol on the Commonwealth Electoral Roll should inquire at or make application to the Australian Electoral Office before the end of 1981.
I commend this decision to the House. I present the following paper:
Voting Rights for Migrants-Ministerial Statement, 7 May 1981.
Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (12.55)-The Opposition, as is warranted, treats the announcement by the Government with the seriousness that it deserves. We see the ramifications of the change and it is to be hoped that the changes enunciated by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) do not in any way offend those people already living in Australia. I think everyone in this country would agree that all people coming to live in Australia should be treated in exactly the same way. Whilst the Galbally Review of Post-arrival Programs and Services to Migrants may have recommended along those lines I do not know that it went as far as to say that citizenship ought to be the basis for the franchise. Nonetheless, that is a stand which the Australian Labor Party takes at the moment.
I point out at the outset that the policy put forward at the election in October last year by the Labor Party, expressed by my colleagues the honourable member for Maribyrnong (Dr Cass) who was then the shadow Minister and by the leader of the Labor Party, was that all migrants, irrespective of where they come from, should have citizenship for the purposes of the franchise but that the period after which they would become eligible to make application for citizenship should be reduced from three years to one year. I make it quite clear that in respect of the statement made by the Minister the Opposition has not changed its mind. The Opposition believes it is right that all migrants should be treated equally. In this case that means people coming from any

We in the Opposition see no major substantive argument for leaving the set period at three years. Indeed, according to the figures given by the Minister it appears that the period stipulated does not seem to make much difference to the migrants themselves. Those people who do not wish to take out citizenship do not seem to have been affected by the reduction from five years to three years. It may be the case that they will not be affected by a reduction in the period from three years to one year. Whilst it is the overwhelming view of the Labor Party at the moment that citizenship ought to be the basis for the franchise-certainly, it is a view I hold very strongly at a personal level - It IS not a view that goes unchallenged. As honourable members would be aware, views have been expressed by some members of the New South Wales Labor Party committee on ethnic affairsalthough action has not been taken by the New South Wales Government-that a mere 12 months residency should be the basis for a person's being allowed to vote in this country. People from other parts of Australia hold similar views. It may be that there are people in the Government parties who hold such views.
At the moment the policy we put forward at the last election stands as far as the Labor Party is concerned. If the Government has a substantive reason for continuing with the three-year residency period then such a reason is certainly not to be found in the Minister's statement. We cannot find any argument why that three-year period remains. I think it is quite a change not only to say to people who might be described as British subjects that in the future 'You will have to take out citizenship' but also to say The period to which the change relates will increase from six months to three years'. Again it seems to me that it would have been better to compromise the time period with that citizenship commitment. Perhaps the residency period then could have been reduced quite substantially. Certainly, a Labor government would look very closely, as soon as it came to office, at reducing the period for all people, not just British subjects, in terms of applications for citizenship in this country. I make those points in relation to where we stand.
I think it is also important to say in relation to the measure that agreement with the States, of course, has been sought but that again there are varying views within the States as to what they

Voting Rightsfor Migrants

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2119

want to do. It is not just the Department of Immifor the Government maintaining the three-year

gration and Ethnic Affiairs that is affected; the qualifying period, and on coming to office a Labor

electoral laws of the States and Commonwealth Government would immediately review that

will have to be changed. It is to be hoped that the period with a determination to reduce it to 12

States will follow suit. As I said earlier, New months.

South Wales-the largest of the States in terms of
population-is looki~g closely.at reside.ncy as the basis for the voting rIght. Agam, we wlll have to be cognisant if the States after the change is implemented this year move to liberalise the opportunity for people to be placed on the electoral
roll.

Whilst in the Minister's statement some men-
tion was made of the term 'British subject' ap-
pearing in Acts of Parliament, it ought to be made even clearer that the term 'British subject' appears in no fewer than 75 Acts of this Parlia-
ment. That situation ought to be looked at and dealt with quickly. It appears in Acts such as the

Sitting suspended from 1 to 2.15 p.m.
Mr YOUNG-I wish to conclude my remarks because there is an arrangement-I am thankful to the Government for it-that if I reduce my period of speaking to the House then the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent), the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) and the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous) can say a few words about their experiences in this field. Between them, they have had a great deal of experience. In support of this question of dealing with all migrants equal~y, I reiterate what the Labor Party had to say at lts conferences in 1979 and 1980. It said:

Atomic Energy Act, the Australian Coastal Ship-
ping Commission Act, the Australian Institute of
Marine Science Act, the Australian National Airlines Act, the Broadcasting and Television Act,
the Christmas Island Act, the Commonwealth
Banks Act, the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918, the Commonwealth Police Act 1957, the
Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Act 1961 and the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act
1972. If the Minister is determined, as he says in his speech, to do something about it-as is the United Kingdom-then it ought to be done as
soon as possible to clean up the discrimination
which is now very much a part of the legislation in the way in which it has been framed by this

. . . 'there shall be no distinction between Australian citizens whether born in Australia or overseas in legal, social and

Parliament.

political rights' . . . 'a Labor Government will amend all Federal Acts to specify "Australian citizen" wherever the term "British sUbject" appears . . .'

The Opposition gives enthusiastic support to the treatment which in future will flow from this
statement whereby all who come to make

I will say a little bit more about that later. It Australia their home will be treated equally, irres-

continued:

pective of where they come from. We do say that

'At the same time, the existing rights of British subjects the qualifying period should have been looked at

already living in Australia would be preserved'.

more closely by the Government. We think there

The Labor Party policy states:

is a case for shortening that period to closer to the

A Labor Government will grant citizenship to all permanent Australian residents of good character (who apply for

six months which was previously necessary for all British subjects rather than extending it to three

it), after 12 months continuous resi~enc~ in this co.untry. years, which was the period applicable to all other

These provisions will apply to all ImmIgrants comm~.to Australia whether from the Commonwealth or not. BrItish subjects already in Australia at the time of proclamation of the Act will preserve their existing privileges. However, they

migrants. In that respect we say that upon becoming the Government we will be looking at reduc-
ing the period to 12 months.

will be encouraged to become Australian citizens.
All immigrants arriving after the legislation rela~ing to citizenship is introduced will be treated equall~, .wIthout any prejudice to their country of birth, colour or religIOn.
It is quite clear to the House from that statement that the Labor Party is in accord with the equality of treatment which as a result of this statement of the Minister of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs is to be given to all people who come to Australia to make it their home. I reiterate that it is important to encourage as many people as possible who are now eligible to go on the electoral roll to do so before January 1982, because after that time they will face a far more difficult hurdle. I would like also to reiterate that we see no substantive reason

Mr FALCONER (Casey) (2.19)-The House is debating a statement by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) on the subject of voting rights for migrants. The Minister, in his statement, outlined decisions which were being taken following consultations on 14 and 15 April between himself and State Ministers responsible for immigration and ethnic affairs. The Minister outlined that agreement was reached at that meeting on the following propositions:
(1) Migrants, irrespective of their country of origin should be treated equally in relation to requirements to enrol, on their right to vote at elections for parliament and to nominate as a candidate for election to parliament;

2120 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Voting Rightsfor Migrants

(2) Australian citizenship is the appropriate basis for the franchise;

for their assisted passage but their attitude of mind was that it was something of a working hol-

I note that the honourable member for Port iday, or maybe in other cases people felt that they

Adelaide (Mr Young) on' behalf of the Oppowanted to come to Australia but after arriving

sition has expressed support for the changes and living here for a while felt they had no long

which are to be introduced, although he has done term commitment to the country. That became
so in a somewhat qualified way in that he has obvious only after a couple of years. Therefore, r

suggested that a Labor government would want to suggest that any substantial reduction in the

review the period of residence whiCh qualified present period of residence required for the taking

people for citizenship. It is of interest to note that out of citizenship would not be in the best

he did not say a Labor government would reduce interests of this country and would not be in the

the period required for citizenship. He left it very best interests of the migrants who want to make

open by saying that it would 'look very closely' at Australia their home for the rest of their lives.

the period for citizenship. I suggest to the House that it is all very well for Labor spokesmen in Opposition to suggest that they would look at that period and lead people to believe that there is a strong prospect that they would reduce the residential period for citizenship. However, it is interesting and instructive to note that Labor parties in government have agreed with the present period. The communique from the conference of Ministers responsible for immigration and ethnic affairs held on 14 and 15 April stated:
The Conference expressed strong support for adopting a uniform Australia-wide qualification for voting rights based on Australian citizenship. Citizenship is available to all people

I commend the Minister's statement to the House. I look forward to some bipartisan support on this matter and I hope that the Labor Party in Opposition will not seek to use the opportunity to curry support with migrant groups on the basis of suggestions that the Labor Party in government has not been prepared to carry out.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (2.25)~I am honoured to follow my colleague on this side of the House, the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young), into the debate on the statement of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affai~8 (Mr Macphee). May I say also that I have some practi-

after three years' residence. People already enrolled will have cal experience in the matters the Minister men-

their existing rights preserved. Ministers agreed to work toward introducing this change by I January 1982 although some States face technical problems which will first need ~o be resolved.

tioned as I was disenfranchised myself for more than five years after my arrival in Australia. I ask the honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer),

So, State and Commonwealth governments of whatever political complexion agreed that these changes based on the present period of three years residence should be introduced.

whose Government was practising the disenfranchising of migrants for five years until we came into office in 1972 and reduced that period to three years, how he would support that
proposition? On the one hand, he talked about

I suppose it would be fair to say that any period waiting for three years, but under his Government

of residence required for citizenship is to some the franchise was given to many migrants six
extent an arbitrary one and it might be subject to months after arrival in this country. r cannot rec-

some adjustment one way or another. I suggest to oncile one attitude with the other.

the House that something like the present period of three years is a logical and appropriate period rather than, say, a marked reduction to one year. There is a need to ensure that people who vote in our national and State elections have a commitment to Australia. The Minister said in his statement to the House:

In our recent history we have pursued policies to attract migrants as settlers. Therefore, it is our responsibility to assist migrants in the difficult task of settlement and to make sure that they share equal rights, opportunities and duties, as do all Australians. I agree with the Minister when he stated:

The most fundamental reflection of commitment to the nation is citizenship. The most fundamental expression of citizenship is the right to elect those who govern the nation.

Migrants, irrespective of their country of origin should be treated equally in relation to requirements to enrol, on their right to vote at elections for Parliament and to nominate as a

The pattern of immigration in the past indicates candidate for election to Parliament.

that a number of people came to this country The Minister's way of achieving equality differs

under assisted migration programs from the somewhat from mine. The proposal that settlers

United Kingdom and from other countries in the from the British Commonwealth should take out

1950s and 19608 and it was not uncommon for a Australian citizenship in itself is not opposed.

number of those people to stay for, say, two years However, the requirement of three years' resi-

and then go back to their country of origin. Cerdence before one can apply for citizenship is the

tainly they completed the requirements to qualify key to our opposition. By disenfranchising British

Voting Rightsfor Migrants

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2121

settlers for three years we do not help anybody. It make the ceremonies more simple and more ac-

is not the way to go about introducing equality. ceptable to those people who have not taken out

This Government knows how to pervert facts to citizenship.

cover up its intentions. Let me mention only that it is toying with the idea of lifting the retiring age of women to 65 years, under the guise of equality, instead of reducing the male pensionable age to 60 for those who wish to retire early. Equality and equal treatment is not achieved by pulling everybody into the mud but by lifting up those who are not treated fairly. After all, equal pay for women does not mean lowering the male pay but improving the pay of women who are discriminated against.

Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (2.30)-1 represent a portion of the Illawarra region of New South Wales which has one of the greatest concentrations of migrant communities. I also have a name which clearly is not an Anglo-Saxon name, and in fact I was the first member of my family to be born in this country. I speak, therefore, with some feeling about the necessity for migrants who come to Australia to recognise their need to have a real determination to become Australian citizens before doing so. I support what the honour-

The proposal of my colleague the honourable able member for Casey (Mr Falconer) said on this

member for Port Adelaide that all settlers be exmatter. In particular, I want to say that I reject

tended the privilege of becoming Australian citientirely the proposition that a naturalisation

zens after 12 months residence, which is Labor's ceremony should be described as a humiliating ex-

policy, is a much fairer approach to this question perience, and I was most disappointed to hear the

and a much more equitable solution. But even previous speaker, the honourable member for

that in itself will not eliminate discrimination unHotham (Mr Kent), describe it as such. I hope

less we accept the policy of the Australian Labor that the tone set by the honourable member.is not

Party and remove the requirement that an applione that will be maintained in this debate.

cant for citizenship has to demonstrate an adequate knowledge of the English language. Such a requirement, of which our racist bureaucrats in the Minister's Department are so fond, certainly discriminates against migrants from non-English speaking countries. I hope that the Minister will ask his Party to accept our policy on this matter.

I point out that in setting a period of three years as the proper limit before one is entitled to become an Australian citizen and therefore to vote in elections, the Australian Government has followed a principle that is accepted throughout the world, with the exception of New Zealand, where a slightly different situation exists. Honourable

The Minister also mentioned in his statement members opposite must recognise, when suggest-

that 1.2 million migrants who qualified residening that this period should be reduced to one year,

tially have failed to take out Australian citizenthat the countries from which all our migrants

ship, and he said that 70 per cent of them are come specify a period of residency of at least three

British subjects. J do not think that by years as their basic requirement before allowing

disenfranchising them in the future the Governpeople to become citizens. Everyone of these

ment will force them to become citizens. After all, major sources of our migrants has a rule that the

there are approximately 400,000 migrants of nonOpposition says should not exist in Australia. For

British background who also have not taken out example, in Austria the period is 10 years; in Ger-

citizenship. I believe it is known to the Minister many 10 years; in Greece eight years; in Italy five

that many migrants are reluctant to go through years; in Holland five years----.:

the citizenship ceremony as it is a humiliating procedure, especially in regard to the oath. The re-

Mr Kent-They don't need migrants.

quirement for renunciation of their old country is Mr BAUME-The babble opposite indicate

painful to them.

that those countries are not inviting migrants. Let

I thank the Minister for the arrangement that me say that in the major migrant receiving--

allowed me to speak in this debate. A couple of Mr Kent--They are countries people migrate

my colleagues also want to say a few words, so I from.

will not extend my remarks. However, I mention to the Minister that the Victorian Minister of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Kennett, is working on an alteration of the citizenship rules to cut out the requirement for migrants to renounce allegiance to their old country. I hope that the

Mr BAUME-J wish that babble would cease. It is such a pest.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for Hotham will remain silent.

Minister will take notice of that and will assist the Mr BAUME-He has had one go which was

Victorian Minister of Immigration and Ethnic incomprehensible. I wish he would not keep going

Affairs to alter the wording of the oath and to now. Amongst the major migrant receiving

2122 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Voting Rightsfor Migrants

nations of the world, Canada has a basic residence words. I say initially that I agree with my col-

requirement of three out of the preceding four league the honour.@.g~e member for Hotham (Mr

years. The United Kingdom requires five years, Kent) that ~MPfPblems which migrants have to

and most migrants in my area come from the face in the citizenship ceremony can be felt and

United Kingdom. A period of five years' residence understood only by those who have had to go

is required in Britain before a person is entitled to through it. It is all right for people from the other

take out citizenship. In the United States of side of the chamber to make noises but they do

America it is five years. Those aie the world's not know the problems which this ceremony cre-

largest countries in terms of receiving migrants. ates for some migrants. I was not put in the pos-

We are not even matching them. In our generous ition of having to renounce a previous allegiance.

approach to migrants, after three years, instead of This is the area, I think, which needs to be looked

five or ten or all the other periods I mentioned, at. I simply hope that the Minister has that in

they can become Australian citizens in what the mind.

honourable member for Hotham has described as a humiliating ceremony, a humiliating experience. I suggest that the Government deserves support from the migrant communities for taking a very generous view, in world terms, of the amount of time people should stay before being allowed to vote and to become Australian citizens. I am overjoyed to see that the Government is now removing the anomaly by which some. people who were British subjects did not have to become Australian citizens before being entitled to vote. I believe it is right that the franchise should be given to Australian citizens and to no other people, except those who have already qualified for the franchise, of course. I support the view that there should be no retrospective action. I think that the Government has done the right thing in this matter.

I will touch on some points which have been alluded to in the razor gang report. We have an indication that the administrative procedures in the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs for granting citizenship will be streamlined. That is all we know, but I hope that that streamlining will provide those migrants who wish to become Australian citizens with the opportunity merely to fill in a form before a justice of peace, if that is their desire. From my own experience, working in the electorate, I have to say that the local government councils do a marvellous job when a ceremony involves a number of people. It is only the comradeship of the local government people and, perhaps, a migrant's friends that takes away
some of the problems which he faces at the time of having to renounce his former country. As I said earlier, that is the reason I support the point of

I wish to make one final point. It seems to me to view of the "honourable member for Hotham on

be absolutely vital that the Government should the citizenship ceremony itself.

protect the citizens of Australia by providing a reasonable time such as three years before migrants become eligible for citizenship. It is possible that, as a result of some error, some people who come to Australia may well not be desirable residents, as is shown by the level of the 4eportations. The waiting period of three years will protect this country from the very few migrants who come to Australia who are not desirable residents and who prove that by committing offences.

I will touch on another area which J think is very important. I hope that the Minister will take note of it. I refer to the requirement in the application for citizenship for a person to speak English. I have a constituent, a 57-year-old Greek
lady, who was refused citizenship because she did not meet the necessary qualifications. I put it to the Minister and to the Government that at 57
years of age-the Government should bear in mind that this migrant has been here for seven

I support wholeheartedly the Minister's stateyears-the opportunity for her-indeed, her

ment. Its contents were agreed to by all the States, ability-to pick up the language will be quite a

I think, including the Labor States. That is why I problem. In effect she will be being denied citizen-

suggest that it is disappointing to see in this House ship and the right to vote.

today an attempt to create a feeling of division on this matter by trying to appeal in a pretty base way to some small migrant groups.

I draw attention to the list of countries which has been provided by the Minister. I believe that there are 42 of them: A number of countries on

Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (2.36)-1 say at the that list are not English-speaking countries. They

outset that the statement by the Minister for Iminclude Cyprus, Fiji, Guyana, India, Jamaica and

migration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) many others. Problems can be encountered by

raises more questions than it provides answers. I people from those countries in meeting the

sincerely hope that the Minister will be able to qualifications for voting. A major point in the Op-

provide those answers at a later date. I am neverposition's position in regard to this statement is

theless grateful for the opportunity to say a few that the Government is not giving something; it is

Voting Rightsjor Migrants

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2123

taking away from the current position and privileges that have been alforded British subjects. They di<:i not previously have to fulfil the new requirement that the Government has suggested. Therefore, a new restriction is to be imposed on them. Their status will be reduced. I suggest to the Minister and the Government that it would have been far better to have lifted the privileges enjoyed by other sections of our migrant population to those that have been enjoyed by migrants from the United Kingdom. This is the main thrust of the Opposition's argument.
I conclude by referring briefly to the number of cuts being implemented in the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs by the razor gang. I have alluded to the citizenship procedures. The information service is to be terminated. Other roles of the Department are to be rationalisedthat is a beautiful word. Adult migrant and refugee education programs will be restricted.
Mr Ruddock-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. Not only is there an agreement in relation to the time that honourable members have in which to speak but also the honourable member for Hindmarsh is raising material that is in no way covered in the statement which has been given to the Parliament today.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The Chair is not party to any arrangement. Some latitude is given to all honourable members. 1 will hear the honourable member for Hindmarsh but 1 remind him to be relevant.
Mr SCOTTI accept that there was an agree-
ment in regard to time. If r had not been interrup-
ted 1 would have finished my speech. I thank the Minister for making his statement. I hope that the points 1 have raised have been noted and will be attended to.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (2.43)-1 wish to make some comments on the important statement that has been made by the Minister for Immi~ gration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee). The statement deals with the eligibility of new settlers in Australia to vote. For a long time different tests have applied to people coming from different parts of the world. That has been a matter of some concern to migrants. That concern is certainly appreciated by me. In the past those people who came from former British colonies were able to enrol in order to vote shortly after their arrival whereas those who came from other countries were not. The Minister has made it quite clear that migrants to Australia, wherever they come from, seeking to vote in Australian elections will be able to do so on the same basis, that is, when

they become citizens of Australia. I think that is a fair test.
There seemed to be some unanimity of view when the Opposition spokesman on this matter, the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young), addressed the House. Having heard some of the other Opposition speakers one could be forgiven for believing that that is no longer the case. The Government takes the view that citizenship is the appropriate test for people to be eligible to vote. The principal matter that has been called into question by the Opposition has been the length of time it might take a person to qualify for Australian citizenship. It ought to be clearly noted that Australia provides in its three-year eligibility test a very generous basis upon which people may seek to become Australian citizens. The honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) directed the attention of the House to the time it takes to acquire eligibility to apply for citizenship in other countries. That is important when we consider many of the countries whose former citizens come to Australia to settle. Quite frequently those countries set an inordinate time Which people who have taken up permanent residence have to wait before they can qualify for citizenship. In relation to some of the European countries, 10 years of continuous residence is required before migrants in Austria and in the Federal Republic of Germany qualify for citizenship. In Greece-a considerable number of new Australian residents and citizens are from Greece-it is required that the people seeking Greek citizenship spend eight of the 10 years preceding the application in Greece. In Italylikewise there are many Italians who have setled in Australia - five years' residence is required.
I do not wish in any way to appear racist in the matters I am mentioning. I do not believe it applies only to European countries. For instance, in Malaysia 10 years within the 12 years preceding the application-including the one year immediately preceding the date of application-is the period for which people of that country must have been resident before they seek citizenship. I could go on. These comparisons with other parts of the world indicate that the requirements in Australia are extraordinarily generous. But one ought to ask oneself: What do the migrants want? When we look at the figures we find that on average it takes eight to nine years for people who have taken up permanent residence to apply for Australian citizenship; that is, when they exercise their own choice. I do not wish to debate this matter at length.
In case it is thought that Australia, in taking the approach that citizenship ought to be the test, is

2124 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Voting Rightsjor Migrants

being unreasonable, let me add one other importWhile this is happening humane considerations

ant fact. In no country, apart from New Zealand, are being thrown a~L~Qe with respect to the family

is the test for eligibility to vote other than citizenreunion schem~,C1;l;rrent1y, this scheme is respon-

ship of that country. Of course, New Zealand sible for approximately 20 per cent of total settler

with its very special relationships with countries arrivals. It is clear that this intake is far too small

in the Pacific region has a different basis for that. to accommodate many worthy cases. Whilst no

That, of course, is understood. Citizenship is the statistics are kept which show what proportion of

natural basis upon which eligibility to vote should immigration applications are made in the family

be granted. Nobody would expect it to be otherreunion category, experience in my own elector-

wise. People should have some loyalty to the ate and information from other honourable

country in which they settle. I believe that is the members whose electorates contain large numbers

test involved in terms of citizenship.

of migrants, strongly suggest that many appli-

Some criticism has been offered of the tests for citizenship. I see nothing wrong with the test of renouncing all other allegiance. I think it is an important criterion for people taking up Australian citizenship. Imagine people claiming to be citizens of Australia in a situation, say, in the last war, in which they had come from Germany or perhaps Japan, had taken up permanent residence and

cations are refused. Whilst we lack hard data as a result of the failure of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs to record relevant statistics, an analysis of families of immigrant patients admitted to the psychiatric hospital in Royal Park, Victoria, showed that only one-third of those surveyed had their whole family in Australia.

were seeking Australian citizenship, but were not If this reflects the general situation, clearly the

prepared to renounce all other allegiance in order situation is creating considerable distress for many

to enjoy Australian citizenship. Is that what families in Australia who are forced to live with-

honourable members opposite are saying? If they out the support of their relatives as well as for

are saying that these people should not renounce those overseas who need the support of their fam-

all other allegiance I believe they are selling ilies in Australia. I suggest that this is an import-

Australia short. That is what is involved in the ant reason why many of those migrants already

matter.

here are not too keen to become Australian citi-

Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (2.47)~The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) referred to the fact that about half of

zens. If more families were reunited in Australia there would be an increase in applications for
citizenship.

our permanent residents are not becoming AusApart from purely humanitarian principles

tralian citizens. There are various causes for this there is no reason to believe that immigrants

situation, including that which was referred to by settled under the family reunion scheme are any

my colleagues; namely, the need to shorten the less succe.>sfully settled than those who enter

period of eligibility. It should be no more than one under the Numerical Multifactor Assessment Sys-

year. We urge the Government to consider this tem. I seriously question whether the NUMAS

change seriously. However, a further factor is factors are any more likely to result in successful

very important here. I believe many people are re~ settlement than is the experience of being

luctant to become citizens because they do not reunited with, and assisted by, one's family in that

have the whole of their family in Australia and complex process. Indeed, it would seem to me

have little hope of achieving a full family reunion that many of the NUMAS factors, such as respon-

under present circumstances.

siveness, presentation, and initiative, are difficult

At the moment the proportion of migrants coming to Australia under the general eligibility scheme which deals with skilled workers is almost the same as that for people coming in under the scheme of family reunion. Y6t many of these skilled workers have not been recruited to go to specific jobs. They have immigrated because of a

and perhaps impossible to assess with any great accuracy and are probably irrelevant to the settlement process anyway. Other factors such as competence in English, education, literacy and adaptability have a distinct Anglo-Saxon bias and do not necessarily result in more successful settlement.

general belief that there is a demand for their In the light of these observations I submit that

skills. The result is that often those entering there should be a substantial increase in family re-

Australia under general eligibility criteria cannot union migration to Australia. In the short term we

find employment for their skills and are contribu~ should be looking at doubling the number in that

ting to the unemployment boom while at the same category while also creating conditions which

time they lack an adequate family support system. would allow for even greater numbers in future

Voting Rightsfor Migrants

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2125

years. In pursuit of this goal I submit that all per- 'almost' or some qualifying adjective. The point I

manent residents of Australia should be able to am trying to make is that we can have a thorough-

sponsor all relatives, bot'hl~dependent and going review. I wish that honourable members op-

independent, who wish to emigrate, with excepposite would consider the consequences of their

tions being made only on the grounds of health or recommendations in respect of family reunion,

character. Priority should be given to closest relaespecially regarding the job market, the level of

tives such as brothers and sisters with a gradual skills, the numbers involved, the infrastructure

move to categories such as cousins, nieces, costs and so on.

nephews and other extended family members.

I support the honourable member for Casey

Whilst total numbers entering under the family (Mr Falconer) when he said that in 1975 in the

reunion scheme would increase substantially last calendar of the Whitlam Government there

under this proposal, the total number of migrants was a net outfiow from Australia of 5,000 people.

could remain the same or be only marginally That is hardly consistent with the kinds of state-

increased. This can be achieved by the abolition of ments now coming from the honourable member

NUMAS and the substitution of a scheme which I for Burke. Another matter that was ancillary to

have forwarded to the Minister in my submission the debate was raised by the honourable member

to him concerning NUMAS. That scheme would for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) referring to the

ensure that only those skilled workers who have a number of Acts that might have to be changed as

specific job to which to go would be admitted. I a consequence of this statement. In fact, I draw

believe if we move towards these changes both his attention to the fact that in my speech I said:

British subjects and other residents will be more The term British Subject is included in many Common-

keen to become Australian citizens, and to particiwealth and State Acts, apart from electoral legislation. I am

pate fully in Australian life-including voting.

informed than it is now used only by the United Kingdom and Australia and that the United Kingdom is moving to adopt

Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Imother approaches. It is fitting, therefore, that Australian legismigration and Ethnic Affairs) (2.53)-Whilst lation be re-examined as well.

several of the comments which have been made It is the Government's intention to do that. I

have had some relevance to the overall question expect that the State governments will do the

of citizenship they have been fairly far removed same.

from the statement. I made. Therefore, I will dispose of those matters first before referring to those which were relevant to the statement. The honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous), who spoke last, made remarks relevant to the Numerical Multifactor Assessment System review. They will be taken into account by me in the course of preparing my recommendations to Cabinet. However, I wish to leave him with a couple of thoughts. Firstly, he said that we should have almost unlimited family reunion. I ask him to consider the level of the skills of persons and the numbers of persons who would come into Australia. He mentioned in particular that brothers and sisters should get priority. I ask him to consider, under a non-discriminatory policy, how many hundreds of thousands of people that will involve each year and whether--

The honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) also raised a number of matters that are being looked at in the broader context of citizenship. I thank him for the constructive comments which he made. They are being looked at currently by me. I established a task force, in fact headed by Mr Kiosoglous from South Australia, to look at aspects of the Australian Citizenship Act and that includes procedures including the questions of ceremonies. I have to say in fairness to the honourable member for Rotham (Mr Kent) that he and I attend some ceremonies together. Not all of them are of the quality of ceremony that is, in fact, performed in Wollongong about which the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) was speaking. There is a very uneven quality in the ceremonies. I think the recommendations which I will finally put to Cabi-

Dr Theophanous-Mr Deputy Speaker, r take net will take account of the comments of both the
a point of order. I did not say 'unlimited honourable member for Hotham and the honour-

increase'--

able member for Hindmarsh. I welcome com-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! If the honourable member is of the view that he has been misrepresented he can raise that matter with me at a convenient time.

ments from both sides of the House over the next few months about the overall question of citizenship because we are planning for the Budget session major reviews to that Act. With the exception of the 1973 Whitlam Government amend-

Mr MACPHEE-I did not say 'unlimited' ments there have been no real amendments to

either. I do not wish to take up the time of the that Act since it was introduced in 1949. It is cer-

House by debating that matter. I said 'virtually' or tainly due for a major overhaul.

2126 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Voting Rights/or Migrants

The point was made by several people, including the honourable member for Hindmarsh, that somehow or other this proposition is taking away the rights from British subjects. It is not doing that at all. I have gone out of my way today to stress that we are not taking away from any person any entitlement that he or she now has. We are not taking away any franchise. One could argue, I suppose, that in prospect we are taking away from future migrants who are classified in those 42 countries as being British subjects something that they might have expected to enjoy. They will be well aware of that when they migrate. If that deters them from migrating I would be very surprised. If it does, so be it.
It has been argued by the Opposition that we produce equality by lowering the requirement for everyone to the British subject requirement of six months' residency. Then a compromise was advanced to make that time 12 months. I might say that on the argument advanced by the Opposition if we do that we are still taking something away from the British subjects. We are not, in reality, doing that at all. I ask the House to consider this matter: We have a highly complex system of government in Australia. It is not uncommon for us as members of the Federal Parliament to be assailed by people at meetings and elsewhere about matters which we know are within the purview of local government or State government. Indeed, the honourable member for Hindmarsh once raised a matter at Question Time, I recall, with my colleague the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) about a matter that was fairly and squarely within the realm of a State Minister.
If it is difficult enough for people born in Australia to understand the distribution of powers under our Constitution and if it is difficult enough for them to make judgments about where responsibility lies and how votes should be cast it certainly is difficult for persons coming into Australia, especially if they do not speak English when they arrive, to be able to cast their votes in an informed fashion. Despite the efforts now being made in respect of adult migrant education I honestly believe, and the Government certainly believes, it would be irresponsible to give to people, unused for the most part to a federal structure with a bicameral legislature and a proportional representation system in the Senate, the right to vote until they really have understood the nature of the institution. Let us remember too that many of them have come from nondemocratic societies.
Another point about the proposal is that it has been discussed fully by the State Ministers and me at two lengthy conferences in the past year. The

State Ministers and I reached agreement in principle. We recommended to our respective Cabinets what the changes ought to be. Each of those Cabinets, including the New South Wales Cabinet, came to the view reflected in my statement to the House today. Really, the Opposition would do well to take note of the fact that the eight governments-the Federal, the Northern Territory and the six States-are in agreement about this measure. I have undertaken to the State governments that when the Electoral Act is amended or when the draft of the amendment is available I will circulate it to the States and they will be able to provide for reciprocal legislation. In 1973 the Whitlam Government introduced changes to the Australian citizenship Act and made a three-year residence requirement for everyone, British subject or not. I would have thought that should have been welcomed then as a step in the right direction. I would have thought also most honourable members would have agreed that the principal privilege of citizenship is the right to vote. Whilst it can be argued that some of the great European civilisations certainly allowed residents to be very active leaders in their communities, it can be argued that if a resident can have a commitment is it too much to ask that that resident show the commitment by becoming a citizen? The Government believes the appropriate way is that citizenship should be the basis for franchise, that citizenship is the recognition of commitment to our country.
Finally, I refer to the question of whether we are depriving anyone of any benefits. I remind the House of the statistics that I gave about the number of persons from the United Kingdom who have been here for many years and who have not taken out citizenship. Many of them may now choose to do so when they recognise that the right to vote goes with it. Other studies will be made in the course of the work of the task force on citizenship to find out why people choose not to take out citizenship. In conjunction with the States we will be conducting a citizenship awareness raising program. This is not to get jingoistic and so forth but to encourage more people to make that final commitment and take out citizenship. We have a close system of consultation with the States. Just as I have been consulting the ethnic groups with the honourable member for Port Adelaide over the review of NUMAS we are consulting the ethnic groups themselves and the State Ministers at the moment about the proposal. The State Ministers and I have agreed to meet when I have proposals to put to them about citizenship so that all aspects of the policy, procedures and possible

Consumer Protection

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2127

legislative changes will be examined in conjunction with them. There is a'!great deal of consultation proceeding. I hope that the Opposition, having registered its view today, will reflect upon it and will seek to bring itself into line with the States, the Territory and the Federal Government.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

CONSUMER PROTECTION

Discussion of Matter of Public Importance

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:

The Fraser Government's further abandonment of consumer interests by, among other means, the disbanding of the Prices Justification Tribunal and the reduction in the consumer protection functions of the Trade Practices
Commission.

I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.

More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-

Motion (by Mr Macphee) put:

That the business of the day be called on.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

63

Noes

46

Majority

17

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier. J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian CarIton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D.M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher,P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J.

Hyde,J.M.
Jull,D.F.
Killen,D.J. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, J. M. Moore, J. C. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, J. MoC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.

AYES
Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.I. White, P. N. D.

NOES

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N.
Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. CharIes, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B.
Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J.
Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L.
Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Jacobi,R.

Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J.
Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E.
McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. . Morrison, W. L.
Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L.
Theophanous, A. C. Dren, T. West,S.J.
Willis,R. Young,M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative

WOOL INDUSTRY AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.

Second Reading
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3.10)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Wool Industry Act 1972. Honourable members will recall that previous amendments which became law on 23 May 1980 provided for wool grower levies in the Market Support Fund to be progressively refunded to wool growers as the credit balance in the Fund reached agreed satisfactory levels. The Market Support Fund was established in September 1974 to provide funds to operate the Wool Reserve Price Scheme. Since that time wool growers have contributed to the Fund through a 5 per cent levy on their gross sales value of shorn wool.
The 1980 amendments to the Act were introduced after the Government acceded to strong requests from the Wool Council of Australia to revolve the Fund. The views of all sectors of the industry were canvassed at the time and not all agreed with the Council's proposals. However, contributions to the Fund are made by wool growers and it is only right that the views of growers should be given primary consideration. Revolving the Fund means that repayments will be made to the wool growers who contributed the

2128 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Consumer Protection

money on a first in first out basis after the Fund has reached an agreed satisfactory level. The Act provides that the Minister for Primary Industry will, with the written agreement of the Wool Council of Australia, make a declaration specifying a period of contributions to be returned to wool growers.
The level of the Fund currently stands well above $400m. This is in excess of requirements to operate the Reserve Price Scheme and it isrealistic at this stage to consider refunding levies collected during the first year of the Fund's operation. The continued collection of the 5 per cent levy will enable the Fund to be maintained at the desired level, for its primary role of market support. Development of the administrative procedures has been a complex task and has, however, revealed a number of aspects of the Act which need to be modified to remove certain difficulties and anomalies before the refund scheme is implemented. While the overall administration of the refund scheme is to be in the hands of the Australian Wool Corporation, much of the detailed work will be performed by wool brokers and wool merchants who are registered with the Commissioner of Taxation as agents for the collection of wool tax. These firms are referred to in the Act as 'registered persons'.
It is clearly undesirable for the Corporation, which does not hold the necessary wool transaction records, to be burdened with the task of making refunds to individual growers where this task could otherwise be undertaken more simply and less expensively by registered persons.
Wool growers who sold their wooi to or through a registered person will normally receive their refunds through that same person; that is, the firm which collected the 5 per cent levy. The Act as it stands provides that where a registered person ceases to be registered, the Corporation will pay the refunds directly to the wool grower clients. To cater for the situation where the firm concerned has since gone out of business, it was provided that refunds to clients of that firm were to be made by the Corporation. Some firms have ceased to be registered persons for the purposes of refunds because they were absorbed in takeovers or because they became registered under a different name. It now appears that many successor firms are capable of making these refunds, but are precluded from doing so by the provisions of section 42K(7) of the Act, which requires the Wool Corporation to make refunds in situations of this nature. Again, it is undesirable that the Corporation be burdened with the cost intensive task of making refunds to individual growers

where this work could be performed automatically by firms wpich have 'inherited' these growers as clients. Accordingly, clause 7 of this Bill amends the Act to remedy this situation.
A further proposed amendment removes an anomaly created by wool growers entering into certain. types of forward selling transactions. Under the Act as it stands at present, a decision to refund 1974-75 Market Support Fund levy payments would mean that some growers who sold wool forward before shearing prior to 1974-75, and eventually paid the levy during 1974-75 after shearing, would not be eligible for a refund. Other growers, however, who sold forward in 1974-75 but did not pay the levy until the following year would be eligible for a refund in respect of 1974-75. This situation is inequitable and not consistent with the first-in-first-out principle for revolving the Fund. Clause 5 of the Bill corrects the anomaly be deeming the time of sale of wool to be that time when payment for the wool is made.
An amendment proposed by clause 4 of the Bill will enable the Corporation, and registered persons assisting the Corporation, to be reimbursed for administrative costs incurred before the formal declaration of a refund period. The Bill amends the Act to enable these costs, which could not otherwise be recouped, to be charged to the Market Support Fund.
A number of other amendments of the principal Act are considered desirable and timely and it is opportune to introduce them now. I will refer to each of them briefly. The Bill provides in clause 10 that a statement given to a wool grower claiming a refund should set out the findings of the Corporation regarding the facts of the claim as well as the reasons for the Corporation's decision. The Bill also provides for an increase in the membership, and in the quorum for a meeting, of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. (Quorum formed). Since a significant proportion of the wool clip is tested in stores controlled by private treaty merchants it is appropriate that their organisation be represented on the AWTA. Additionally, the Wool Council of Australia is of the view that, as growers pay for the bulk of wool testing, the Council should be directly represented on the Authority.
Honourable members will be aware that the Government has made a separate decision to sell the AWTA, but no time scale has yet been set. Nevertheless, it is still appropriate for the Government to provide for the Authority's continued administration. Accordingly, clause 14 of the Bill provides for representation by both the Wool Council and private treaty merchants. As a

Fish (Export Charge) Legislation

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2129

result of this amendment, all major industry organisations will be represented on the Australian Wool Testing Authority. They will thus have an input in consideration of the future sale of the Authority and a first hand association with the shaping of ongoing testing and certification of wool. Clause 16 of the Bill revises the provision regarding declaration of pecuniary interests by Corporation members. The revision is in harmony with the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry concerning Public Duty and Private Interest. All members of the Corporation are required to declare any pecuniary interests in matters being discussed or considered by a meeting of the Corporation, and for that declaration to be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. Icommend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.

To achieve the 50 per cent cost recovery, it is proposed that the following rates be recommended to the Governor-General for promulgationby regulation; rock 10bster-3.9 cents per kilogram; all other shellfish except oysters, squid, cuttlefish and octopus-2.5 cents per kilogram; all other fish except oysters in the shell or half shell-0.34 cents per kilogram; oysters in the shell or half shell-l cent per dozen. On current estimates of fish exports for 1981-82 these rates will yield approximately $lm in a full year. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.
FISH (EXPORT INSPECTION CHARGE) COLLECTION BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.

FISH (EXPORT INSPECTION CHARGE) BILL 1981

Second Reading Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3.22)-1 move:

Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3.19)-1 move:
That the Billbe now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to introduce, as from 1 July 1981, charges to recoup part of the cost borne by the Commonwealth for inspecting fish for export. This is part of the Government's program to recover costs of providing export inspection for certain agricultural and fishery products. Export inspection is designed to ensure that products meet minimum standards of quality, hygiene and presentation when exported. In 1979 the Government introduced charging for meat, grain and wool inspection aimed at recovering approximately 50 per cent of the inspeCtion costs of the Commonwealth. The Government proposes that fees aimed at a similar level of recovery should be imposed for similar services provided by my Department to seafood exporters.
Turning to specifics in this Bill, honourable members will see that it provides for the recovery of fish .export inspection costs to be achieved through charges on fish inspected for export and for which an export permit has been issued under the Exports (Fish) Regulations. The Bill provides that the person to whom an export permit is issued under the Exports (Fish) Regulations is liable to pay the charge. Exemptions may be provided in the regulations.

That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is related to the Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill 1981 which was just introduced. Its purpose is to provide for the collection of charges proposed in that Bill. It follows the provisions for the collection of levies in other export inspection ch~rge legislation. Specifically, provision is made for exporters to pay charges due to the Commonwealth for the inspection of fish for which an export permit has been issued under the Exports (Fish) Regulations. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (onmotion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.
DRIED FRUIT (EXPORT INSPECTION CHARGE) BILL 1981
Bill presented by-Mr Nixon, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Pri.- mary Industry) (3.23)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is associated with other Bills just introduced for export inspection charges on fishery products. The purpose of this Bill is to impose charges for the export inspection of dried fruit from 1 July 1981. The Government's intention is to recover approximately half the total inspection costs of these products. A maximum rate of charge is specified, namely $11 per tonne. The actual rate of charge will be specified in regulations. It is proposed that a rate of $5.50 per tonne for exports in 1981-82 be recommended to

2130 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Plant Variety Rights Bill

the Governor-General for promulgation in regulations. On the basis of long term export averages, charges at this rate will yield approximately $259,000 in a full year. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.
DRIED FRUIT (EXPORT INSPECTION CHARGE) COLLECTION BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.
Second reading Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3.25)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is associated with the Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Bill 1981 just introduced. It is designed to provide for the collection of charges proposed in that Bill. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.
PLANT VARIETY RIGHTS BILL 1981 Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3.26)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to make possible the granting of proprietary rights, somewhat similar to a grant of patent rights, to people who breed or develop new plant varieties. Whilst this is a new area of legislation in Australia, similar type schemes are currently operating in Europe, the United Kingdom, South Africa, the United States of America, New Zealand, Japan and several other countries. The proposed Australian scheme will, on the advice of the Australian Agricultural Council, be restricted to horticultural, ornamental and other selected pasture and fodder species. The major field crops and annual pasture species will not be considered for registration under the scheme.
The scheme, as set out in the B.m, will permit a plant breeder, who has developed a new plant variety, to apply to a registration authority for the grant of a right to confer sole ownership of that variety on him. Such rights will permit plant breeders, or organisations employing plant breeders, to levy and collect royalties from people selling or producing new varieties registered under the scheme. I emphasise that the granting of a right does not imply that the variety is better than

an existing one, but simply, as with other patents, that it is different.
A major advall,fna'ge resulting from a plant variety rights scheme will be increased availability of new plant varieties to the Australian horticultural, agricultural and plant nursery industries, with consequential benefits to farmers and gardeners. There is evidence that, in the absence of rights, Australia has been denied access to some potentially valuable varieties of plants developed overseas. These varieties have ranged through pasture grasses, grape vines, and a number of horticultural crop and orchard plants.
Plant improvement by breeding is a long and costly process. Rights of ownership of a new variety, with royalties on sales, will compensate to some extent the costs incurred and will provide a stimulus to companies and private breeders to enter into long term breeding programs. Such additional plant breeding will complement the work being undertaken by government funded organisations.
The development of the proposed Australian plant variety rights scheme has extended over several years. It evolved through a series of technical consultations between representatives of the Commonwealth, the States, seed industry groups and the Nurserymen's Association. The legislation covering the operations of similar type schemes in other countries was also examined in detail. I add that the Australian Agricultural Council has been closely involved with the scheme since it was first proposed. The Council will have an essential and key role in the operation of the scheme and it has already contributed substantially to the principles embodied in the present Bill.
In briefthese principles are:
The scheme will not have the potential to cover all plant species. It will be restricted in its scope.
Participation in the scheme will be entirely voluntary. A breeder may choose whether to release a new variety without applying for protection.
The grant of a right will be given where a new variety can be clearly distinguished by one or more important characteristics from any other variety whose existence is a matter of common knowledge. These characteristics must be capable of precise recognition and description and the variety must be homogenous and stable in it characteristics-in other words, it must remain true to its description after repeated reproduction or propagation.

Plant Variety Rights Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2131

Nothing in the Bill will prevent farmers or gardeners retaining seed of protected varieties for sowing of crops for sale for human and animal consumption. Protected varieties will also be freely available for research purposes and to plant breeders for use in breeding programs.
Protection of a right, once granted, will be the responsibility of the owner of the new variety, through the normal legal process.
There will be provision for appeals to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and for the protection of the public interest.
The Act will be administered by my Department in which a registrar of plant varieties will be appointed. In the initial stages, only a limited number of species will be eligible for registration. These species will be determined on the recommendation of the Australian Agricultural Council.
The whole question of plant variety rights in Australia has already aroused considerable controversy. This is not entirely surprising, as similar arguments of opposition to such schemes were put forward in the United States, Canada and other countries. Some of the arguments that have been raised in Australia are misleading and show a lack of understanding of what is intended. For instance, there have been claims that under the scheme it will be illegal to grow existing well known varieties. That is not true. There have even been claims that plant breeders will deliberately breed disease susceptible plants that will require massive inputs of pesticides and fertilisers to survive. That is a ridiculous argument.
Other arguments do raise important issues, but these generally are not related to matters within the scope of plant variety rights schemes. For example, the preservation of plant genetic resources for use in future breeding programs is certainly important. It has been recognised as such in Australia and in other countries. Gene banks, or seed collections, particularly for the major crops, are in existence in Australia and are expanding. The Australian Agricultural Council has under consideration ways and means of improving existing collections and establishing new ones. However, these matters are completely unrelated to plant variety rights.
One of the most common complaints is that a plant variety rights scheme may lead to takeovers of Australian seed firms by multinational chemical companies. There is no denying that take-over bids can occur in any business activity, including the seed industry. There is nothing unusual about that in a free enterprise system. I am confident,

however, that if any takeovers should occur in the Australian seed industry, they will not be as a direct result of plant variety rights legislation.
Safeguards are provided for in this Bill against monopoly control that may not be in the public interest. These include powers for the registration authority to have control over licences and to ensure reasonable supplies of varieties at reasonable prices. As I have already said, species will be included only with the agreement of the Australian Agricultural Council.
Because of the need to encourage a greater understanding of the intentions of a plant variety rights scheme, the Government has decided only to introduce this Bill at the present time, and not to proceed with it further in the Parliament until the Budget session. This will allow several months for interested people and organisations to study the details of the Bi Il, and will in turn lead to more informed public discussion and understanding.
It should be pointed out that in introducing the Bill, the Commonwealth is primarily carrying out the wishes of the States, as expressed in Agricultural Council. The legislation, as it now stands, accords with what has been envisaged by the Council. The Council will discuss the legislation in detail at its next meetil).g in August, by which time it should also have before it the views of interested parties. I believe the Bill opens up prospects for encouraging development of small plant breeding firms in Australia, and therefore, an increase in the number of new plant varieties available, and improvements in the efficiency of Australian plant industries. I commend the Bill to the House.
Mr Kerin--Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek your indulgence to address a few short questions to the Minister.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)-The honourable member has my indulgence to make a brief statement.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa)-~As the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) has already said, there has been considerable and significant controversy in the community about the question of plant variety rights. J welcome his statement that the legislation will lay on the table for quite a while and that it will not be discussed until the Budget session. In a few places the word 'unanimous' may have slipped out of the Minister's second reading speech. Can the Minister inform us whether the unanimous agreement of the States is still required before the Government proceeds with the legislation.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.

2132 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

INCOME TAX LAWS AMENDMENT

property where the supply authority meters con-

BILL 1981

sumption. The dt<9u,ction will be available only

Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first where the cOlJ,neQtion or upgrading is, at least in

time.

part, to be used for business purposes in the pro-

duction of assessable income.

Second Reading

Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.36)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill, in terms both of its size and the range of matters it covers, may well be described as an omnibus measure to amend the income tax law. Three of the measures will give effect to policies foreshadowed in the policy speech of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) for the last election. These are: An immediate deduction for capital expenditure on the connection of a business property to mains electricity; a concessional deduction for the cost of insulating a taxpayer's first home; and an immediate deduction for capital expenditure on storage facilities for petroleum fuel. Also included are provisions to give effect to the decision, announced by me late last year, that tourist buses may qualify for the investment allowance with effect from 1 January 1976. The Bill

In its present form the Bill would apply to connections or upgradings effected under contracts entered into on or after 1 October 1980. In the light of representations to the effect that this would disadvantage people in rural areas who,
after having contracted for supply may have to
wait a considerable period for the connection to be made, the Government has now decided that
the concession should be available for connection and upgrading costs incurred on or after 1 October 1980, no matter when contracts were entered into. I shall be proposing amendments to
this effect when the Bill is in Committee. I want to add that the Government is aware that some may
see scope in the concession for the inflation of
costs so as to benefit the utilities that supply electricity. I give notice now that any action of this kind could very well place the continued availability of the deduction in serious jeopardy.

also contains further amendments to the gift provisions of the income tax law, including some that will give effect to the 1980-81 Budget decision to allow deductions for gifts to certain overseas aid organisations.
Last, but by no means least in importance, the Bill proposes amendments designed to provide a counter to various forms of tax avoidance. Trust stripping, expenditure recoupment schemes and exploitation of trading stock transfer provisions and of the tax-exempt status of certain bodies are
the avoidance areas covered. Extensive details of most of these changes have already been announced and, relying on that and on the detailed explanations contained in an explanatory memorandum that will be circulated to honourable members, I propose in this introductory speech to limit myself to the key points.

Home Insulation Costs
This concession will provide tax assistance to people who take steps that have an effect of reducing energy consumption. It is proposed that an income tax deduction will be allowed for amounts paid by a resident taxpayer for insulating a first home. Amounts paid by a taxpayer for thermal in-
sulation materials, and for the cost of their installation in a dwelling, are to be an allowable deduction if the dwelling is the sole or principal
residence of the taxpayer in Australia. It is a further condition of the deduction that the taxpayer or, in the case of married couples, the taxpayer or his or her spouse, has not previously owned another dwelling in Australia that he or she used as a home. The deduction will be available for insulating a dwelling purchased by the taxpayer on or after 1 Octob~r 1980 as well as a

Cost of Connection to Mains Electricity
In this respect the Government is aiming to provide assistance to persons who, particularly in remote areas of Australia, face the often heavy cost of obtaining the facility of a mains electricity

dwelling constructed by the taxpayer where constuction started on or after that date. Amounts expended by eligible taxpayers for the insulation of extensions to their dwellings will qualify for the newdeduction under corresponding conditions.

supply. Capital expenditure on connecting mains electricity, or upgrading an existing connection, to

Fuel Storage Facilities

a property on which a business is carried on is to The third election policy initiative covered by

qualify for deduction in the year in which the the Bill relates to the capital cost of storage facili-

expenditure is incurred. Qualifying expenditure ties for petroleum-based liquid or gaseous fuel.

will be the capital costs incurred by an owner of The Bill will authorise a deduction, by way of a

the property, or by a lessee or sharefarmer, in 100 per cent' depreciation allowance, in the in-

bringing the mains electricity to the point on the come year in which the facilities are first used or

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2133

installed ready for use to produce assessable ina scheme to authorise deductions for gifts to cer-

come. The allowance wilPapply to plant in tain public funds maintained for the relief of per-

Australia used wholly and exclUsively to store fuel sons in deVeloping countries. That proposal,

held for use in a business as fuel or as trading stock which has been most warmly received, was an-

for disposal. Ancillary plant used wholly and exnounced in the 1980-81 Budget Speech. It was

clusively to convey fuel in and out of storage or to supplemented by a ministerial statement on 18

measure the amount of fuel stored will qualify. So September 1980 which listed 22 organisations that

too will the cost of installation of eligible plant are to qualify for the concession, with effect from

qualify. Storage facilities for crude oil and other that date. The proposed arrangements will ac-

fuels being held for further processing will not commodate the decisions announced in that state-

qualify for the allowance nor will rail, road or ment and, as well, will make provision for further

shipping tankers, pipelines or containers for use in additions to the list of eligible organisations and

the transport of fuel. Expenditure will qualify for funds.

the allowance if it is incurred under a contract entered into on or after 1 October 1980 or, if the expenditure is on facilities constructed by the taxpayer, if construction commenced after that date. Facilities that a taxpayer acquired second hand on or after 1 October 1980 will qualify if used by the taxpayer at a site other than where they were
situated at that date.

Under the legislative scheme proposed in the Bill, gifts made to a public fund established by an organisation approved for purposes of the scheme by the Minister for Foreign Affairs may qualify for deduction. It will be necessary that the Treasurer be satisfied that a particular fund is for the relief of persons in a country that is certified by the Minister for Foreign Affairs to be a

developing country. A further requirement is that

Tourist Buses
Honourable members will recall that, late last year, legislation was enacted to give effect to the Government's decision to remove the specific exclusion from the income tax investment allowance of plant for use in connection with amusement or recreation. When introducing that legislation, which applies from 1 October 1980, I announced the Government's further decision to permit tourist buses to qualify for the investment

the Treasurer-by notice published in the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette-declare the fund to be an eligible fund for purposes of the scheme. Generally, gifts to an eligible fund will be deductible from the date of the Gazette declaring its eligibility. Transitional arrangements will apply so that gifts made to a fund maintained by one of the 22 organisations nominated in the ministerial statement may qualify for deduction when made after 18 September 1980.

allowance as from 1 January 1976, the date of Other amendments will mean that gifts to the

commencement of the allowance. Measures to International Disaster Emergencies Committee

achieve that result are in this Bill. By these African relief appeal will qualify for deduction

measures the exclusion that applied for the period when made after 30 June 1980. Further amend-

between 1 January 1976 and 30 September 1980 ments will ensure that deductions are available

of plant for use in connection with amusement or for gifts to the IDEC Kampuchean relief appeal

recreation will be treated as not having applied in made after 30 June 1980 when the present author-

relation to tourist buses. Buses brought within the isation of deductions was to have terminated. The

scope of the investment allowance by this amendBill will also authorise deductions for gifts to the

ment will, of course, remain subject to the general Herbert Vere Evatt Memorial Foundation made

requirements of the investment allowance proafter 16 January 1981 and for gifts made after 23

visions. For example, the general exclusion from December 1980 to a public fund that is estab-

the allowance of cars and other light vehicles will lished and maintained exclusively for the purpose

mean that buses designed to carry fewer than nine of providing religious instruction in government

passengers will continue to be excluded, as will schools in Australia. This later amendment places

buses of any size that are hired out on a 'driveon a general basis a right of deduction now con-

yourself' basis.

tained in the law in respect of a limited range of

bodies.

Gifts
Amendments under this head will extend the existing gift provisions of the income tax law which confer deductions for gifts of the value of $2 or more to specified funds, authorities or institutions in Australia. One extension will introduce

Tax Avoidance
I turn now to remaining provisions of the Bill designed to deal with a variety of income tax avoidance practices. With one qualification that I shall specify later, the amendments have all been foreshadowed in announcements I made last year

2134 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

on 5 March, 24 June and 4 August and on 30 January this year. With the introduction of this Bill, all proposals for action against specific schemes of tax avoidance foreshadowed in announcements I have made will have b~n given legislative form. I also expect that, before the House rises for the winter recess, new general anti-avoidance provisions will be brought before it for consideration.
Section 36A Schemes The Bill proposes the amendments foreshadowed in my statement of 30 January 1981. These are designed to provide a counter to tax avoidance schemes that set out to exploit the special provisions of section 36A of the income tax law that apply to changes in interests in trading stock, such as changes that occur on the formation of a partnership. This exploitation takes place under arrangements whereby a person who has, for example, some cattle about to be sold or a crop ready to be harvested, enters into a partnership with a company controlled by the promoter of the scheme. The cattle or the ~rop, as the case may be, is transferred to the partnership for an amount roughly equivalent to market value. However, a special right of election available under section 36A is used so that the property is treated for tax purposes as having been transferred at the substantially lower tax value at which it would have been brought to account if the transfer had not taken place. The net result is that the former owner realises an amount close to market value of the property, but is taxed only on the substantially lower value. The amendments proposed will make an election under the section ineffective where the person who disposes of an interest in relevant property receives consideration in respect of the disposal that is substantially more than the amount that might reasonably have been expected if the property had been valued at the low tax value applicable as a result of the election. The consequence of the ineffectiveness of an election in these circumstances will be that the person will be treated as having disposed of the property at its market value. Transfers made in ordinary family or commercial dealing are specifically excluded from the scope of the amendments. These amendments will apply generally to changes in ownership or interests occurring after 30 January 1981. However, consistent with action taken previously by the Government to debar the carry-forward of paper losses resulting from avoidance schemes, the Bill will ban the carryforward from one year to another of such tax

losses resulting from earlier section 36A schemes, with first effect forJh~ income year 1980-81.
Trust Stripping Schemes Changes that I outlined on 5 March 1980 to deal with variants of the trust stripping arrangements against which remedial legislation was enacted early in 1979 are the next matter covered by the Bill. These arrangements, which sought to free from tax altogether the trading profits and other income of trusts, commonly entailed a specially introduced nominal beneficiary being made presently entitled to income of the trust that was to be stripped. By this means, the trustee was relieved of any tax liability in respect of the trust income. The arrangements were at the same time designed so that not only did the special beneficiary escape tax, but the family from which the income was diverted received the benefit of it in atax-free capital form.
The 1979 amendments are contained in section 100A of the Income Tax Assessment Act and operate to treat income to which a beneficiary is nominally made presently entitled under reimbursement arrangements of this type as income of the trust estate to which no beneficiary is presently entitled. The trustee is thus liable to be taxed on the income at the maximum rate of personal income tax, which for 1980-81 is 60 per cent. The variants of the trust-stripping arrangements with which this Bill deals exploit the exclusion from the 1979 amendments of income of a trust estate to which a beneficiary becomes presently entitled in the capacity of a trustee cif another trust estate. That exclusion was intended to ensure that section 100A would apply only in relation to the last link in a chain of distributions through interposed trusts, thereby removing any possibility of double taxation on income as it passed through the chain.
The amendments now proposed will continue the scheme of applying section lOOA to the last nominal beneficiary only, but in a way that aims to prevent the exploitation that has been experienced. For this purpose, the exclusion from section lOOA of income to which a trusteebeneficiary becomes presently entitled is to be limited to so much of that income as is passed on by the trustee as income to which a beneficiary of that trust estate is in turn presently entitled. Further amendments will deny deductions for losses or outgoings incurred under arrangements to which the section applies. This will prevent the section being frustrated through such amounts being available for write-off against other income of the nominal beneficiaries. The amendments

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2135

will apply generally to trust income paid to, or ap1979-80 of no less than $1l1m. The additional

plied for the benefit of, a,'beneficiary after 5 amendments will also have effect from 24 Sep-

March 1980 and to losses or outgoings incurred tember 1978. In pursuance of that, I refer to the

after that date.

clear and unambiguous warning given by the

Expenditure Recoupment Schemes

Government at that time. They, and the amendments specifically outlined in my statement of 4

Legislation against expenditure recoupment August 1980, will ensure that the ban on the

schemes already exists. It was foreshadowed on 24 carry-forward from one year to another of paper

September 1978 and now applies to a range of losses created under tax avoidance schemes, and

losses and outgoings. Broadly, the legislation which at present applies to expenditure recoupapplies to deny a deduction where the specifically ment arrangements, will apply similarly in respect

designated loss or outgoing is incurred under an of all the latest variants.

arrangement whereby the taxpayer or an associ-

ate obtains a benefit the amount or value of

which, together with the tax advantage sought,

Exempt Bodies

effectively recoups the claimed loss or outgoing. In my statement of 4 August 1980 I foreshadowed action to extend the provisions to deal with variants of the recoupment type schemes that had by then been encountered. These involve paper losses generated in producing or marketing films, in operating gold mines, in purchasing consumable supplies and in carrying out market research. The amendments in respect of these variants are to apply with respect to losses or outgoings incurred after 24 September 1978. The decision to do this follows the clear warning given on that day and repeated subsequently.

In a statement on 24 June 1980, I foreshadowed legislation on tax avoidance through attempts to exploit the tax-exempt status of various entities. As I said at the time, two earlier warnings about the abuse of the privileged status of tax-exempt bodies had gone unheeded, and there was clear evidence that substantial revenue losses were accruing through the use of these bodies as vehicles for diverting taxable income from individuals and companies. I outlined in my statement examples of the kinds of schemes being employed. I do not think it is necessary to describe them in detail again now.

I now make public that more recent infor-

mation coming from returns of income for 1979-80 indicates that, before my announcement on 4 August 1980, still further schemes of the expenditure recoupment type had been implemented. As in the case of the schemes referred to in that announcement it would appear that promoters of the further schemes had chosen to ignore the Government's repeated warnings. In the light of the information now available, and of the clear government commitment to put an end to expenditure recoupment schemes, the Bill pro-

Broadly, however, the schemes involved the diversion of income from a person who would otherwise be liable to tax on it to a body that has no tax liability. The exempt body was required to pay to the person from whom the income was diverted, or to an associate of that person, a tax free consideration equal to the greater part of the diverted income. As a fee for its participation it retained a small amount of the income for its own benefit.

poses extensions of the existing legislation ad-

ditional to those I have already announced. These latest identified variants against which remedial action is now proposed involve paper losses generated in acquiring a licence under a copyright existing in computer software; by way of commission for collecting assessable income; by way of a fee in relation to the growing, care and supervision of trees; by way of an amount paid in relation to the enhancement of the value of shares held as trading stock; and by way of a fee in relation to the procuring of master sound recordings.

As mentioned in my statement, the legislation will operate where under a tax avoidance agreement entered into after 24 June 1980 an exempt body provides consideration for property giving rise to diverted income and the consideration is substantially more than the amount that, in the circumstances, would be paid by a taxable public company. The income derived by the exempt body in these circumstances, without deduction of losses or outgoings incurred under or in connection with the tax avoidance agreement, will be subject to tax at the maximum rate of personal

Honourable members would be interested to tax. These measures will apply only to income de-

know that one of these schemes--that built on rived by exempt bodies from participation in the

commissions for collecting assessable income--- particular tax avoidance schemes. Their ordinary

generated identified claims for deductions for income will continue to be exempt from tax.

213'6 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Customs Amendment Bill

Finally, the last, and bulkiest, ,section of the Bill an examination of the recommendations. There

contains a number of formal amendments, incorhas been substantial progress already towards im-

porating changes in drafting style. These will replementation of those recommendations., Other

sult in the adoption, in references to other prolegislative recommendations did not relate to the

visions of the Income Tax Assessment Act, of a Customs Act. Some required action by the

'forward referencing' style. Before C9ncluding, I governments of the States and the Northern Ter-

mention that legislation in pursuance of the ritory. These amendments give effect to the

Government's commitment to provide tax incenGovernment's decisions on those of the Royal

tives-for investmentin Australian films is at an adCommission's recommendations which are con-

vanced stage and will be -brought before the sidered by the Government to require action by

House before the winter recess. I commend the way of amendment to the Customs Act.

Bill to the House.

The Royal Commission recommended that re-

Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) sponsibility for narcotics control under the Cus-

adjourned.

toms Act in situations beyond the Customs barrier

INCOME TAX (DIVERTED INCOME) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first

should be transferred from the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs to the Australian Federal Police. This recommendation has been implemented by an Administrative Direction and

time.

Administrative Arrangements Order. This Bill

Second Reading Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.56) -I move:

contains provisions to give clear legislative authority for the division of powers and functions. The division particlarly affects the seizure of goods and their custody, claims for recovery of seized

That the Bill be now read a second time.

goods, avenues of redress and the final disposal of

This Bill is closely related to measures contained any seized goods which become condemned to the in the Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill 1981, Commonwealth. The proposed amendments are about which I have just spoken. By reason of contained in clauses 3,26, 33, 34, 36 and 38.

those measures income tax is to be charged on income diverted to an exempt body under a tax avoidance arrangement entered into after 24 June 1980. The overall design of the legislation is to counteract the exploitation, for tax avoidance purposes, of the privileged status of tax exempt bodies. This Bill will formally impose tax on the diverted income. The rate of tax of 60 per cent proposed by the Bill is the same as that payable by a trustee of a trust estate on accumulating trust income and is equal to the maximum rate of personaltax. I commend the Bill to the House.

Clause 25 is proposed to implement the recommendation of the Royal Commission that a person seeking to clear goods through Customs might be required to disclose and prove his identity or the identity of the owner of the goods. This measure is designed to facilitate the apprehension of those importers of illicit narcotic drugs who address the drugs to ficticious persons for collection by anonymous agents. The Royal' Commission also recommended that the Customs control over ships and aircraft at sea or in air space within three nautical miles of the Australian coast should

Debate (on, motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
CUSTOMS AMENDMENT BILL 1981

extend to the area within 12 nautical miles of the coast. This is consistent with international law and convention. The Bill implements that recommendation-in clauses 12,24 and 29. However,

Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first the Bill provides that the limitation to the area

time.

within 12 nautical miles will apply only to foreign

Second Reading

ships and aircraft. Customs control over Australian ships and aircraft will be exercisable to the

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business full extent consistent, with international law and

and Consumer Affairs) (3.58)-1 move:

convention.

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The Bill also proposes a number 01 amend-

The principal purpose of this Bill is to amend the ments of a more general nature. These amend-

Customs Act to give effect to a number of recments flow from a continuing process of review

ommendations of the Australian Royal and modernising of the Customs Act. All

Commission of Inquiry into Drugs. The Roy\ll imported goods become subject to Customs con-

C-ommission made a large number of recommentrol on importation. They remain subject to this

dations. In many cases only administrative action control until they are released by Customs. The

was recommended or was found to be required on control is essential to the Customs barrier against

Customs Amendment Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2137

prohibited imports such as narcotics or quaranfor ships, aircraft and their cargo to be reported to

tinable goods. It is also essential to Customs duty Customs after arriving from overseas.

collection role. The control usually is exercised. through a system of documentary checks. These necessarily are supplemented by physical examination of a proportion of the imports.

Last year the Customs Act was amended to provide a means.for dealing with refugee boats or other illegally imported vessels. Clause 26 now proposes new sections to supplement those

the Customs Act imposes responsibilities on those who are in possession of goods which are subject to Customs control. They are required to keep the goods safely and to produce them or account for them when so required by Customs. The Customs Act now recognises the passing of Customs entries as the principal authority for dealing with imported goods. When the entry is endorsed as passed the entry document remains in the possession of the Customs. It has been necess-

powers. New section 207 will permit the speedy disposal of a seized vessel that is.too unseaworthy to be maintained by Customs. Customs will be able to dispose of the vessel even though it has not been condemned to the Commonwealth. This will reduce the costs now incurred in keeping such vessels. New section 208B provides that a person with an interest in the vessel has a right to take proceedings to recover the proceeds of any sale of the vessel or the value of any destroyed vessel.

ary to develop administrative procedures for a New section 208E allows conditions to be

written authority to be given to the person in posimposed on the sale or disposal of ships or aircraft,

session of the goods. The authority allows the perwhich have been condemned to the Common-

son, usually a shipping company or an airline, to wealth. By clause 30 they may again be forfeited if

deliver the goods for the purposes for which they the conditions are not complied with.

have been entered; for example, for warehousing Customs Tariff Proposals are introduced into

or for home consumption.

the Parliament from time to time following

It is proposed to give legislative effect to that practice by replacing the passing of entry by the giving of an authority to deliver the goods. Clause 9 proposes that delivery authorities may be as
prescribed by regulation. Almost half of the clauses of the Bill are consequential on these changes. The delivery authority will usually be

Government decisions to alter the customs duty on imported goods. These Proposals are usually incorporated into a Customs Tariff Amendment
Bill or a Customs Tariff Validation Bill. Clause 28 proposes to amend section 226 to extend the validity period of Customs Tariff Proposals from six months to 12 months.

given On the basis of an examination of commerThe proposed extension of the life of the Pro-

cial documents -furnished by the owner of the posals will reduce the number of Customs Tariff

goods, or his agent. However, intelligence may be Bills. This will not diminish in any way the auth-

received from other sources suggesting that narority of Parliament to scrutinise Customs Tariff

cotics may be concealed in the goods or thaUhe changes.

goods are not properly described in the documents. Provision is made, therefore, to permit an authority to be suspended in order to allow a physical examination of the goods.

Provision is made in clause 35 to allow Customs Tariff Notices to have up to six months retrospective effect, except where the proposed alteration would increase the duty payable. The Bill rep-

It is now an offence to move, alter or interfere with goods which are subject to Customs control. This offence is too limited in its present terms.

resents a desirable advance towards a modernised Customs Act and will assist effective Customs administration. 1commend the Bill to the House.

The employee who improperly moves the goods Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown)

will be liable. The principals, who have the readjourned.

sponsibility to keep the goods securely, are not liable for their failure to implement and oversight effective systems for that purpose. Accordingly, clause 5 now proposes that principals should be li-

EXCISE AMENDMENT BILL 1981

Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first

time.

.

able for the acts of employees involved in the unauthorised movement of goods which are subject to Customs control. A defence is provided to protect those principals who do take reasonable pre-

Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.6)-1 move:

cautions and exercise due diligence to ensure That the Bill be now read a second time.

proper compliance with the Customs Act. Clause The purpose of this Bill is to amend section 114

13 proposes an amendment to section 64 to imthof the Excise Act 1901 to extend the validity

orise regulations to prescribe the time and manner period of Excise Tariff Proposals from six months

2138 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Bill

to 12 months. This amendment is being proposed as a consequence of the Customs Amendment Bill 1981. That Bill similarly proposes an extension to the validity period of Customs Tariff Proposals. Excise Tariff Proposals are introduced into the Parliament from time to time following a Government decision to alter excise duty. It has been the practice to incorporate the Tariff Proposals into an Excise Tariff Amendment Bill. These are normally introduced late in a parliamentary sitting. When an Excise Tariff Amendment Bill is unable to achieve passage prior to six months after a proposal is introduced, it has also been the practice to validate that proposal by an Excise Tariff Validation Bill. This proposed amendment will have the effect of reducing the number of Excise Tariff Bills. It will not, however, diminish in any way, the authority of the Parliament to scrutinise excise tariff changes as they occur. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned. TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE AUTHORITY

NATIONAL HEALTH (PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS)
AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill returned from the Senate with amendments.
Ordered that the amendments be considered in committee forthwith.
In Committee
Consideration of Senate's amendments.
Senate's amendments-
Page 4, clause 4, lines 22-23, leave out "(not being intervals of more than 12 months)".
Page 4, clause 4, at the end of proposed section 98BA add the following sub-section:
"(4) The Tribunal shall ensure that its findings resulting from its second or any subsequent inquiry, and the reason for them, are issued not later than 12 months after the date on which the Tribunal issued its findings resulting from its first jnq~iry or from the last inquiry held by it, as the case maybe..
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (4.12)-1 move:
That the amendments be agreed to.

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report of the Temporary Assistance Authority on certain parts for hearing aids.
CENSUS AND STATISTICS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading Consideration resumed from 6 May, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Upon which Mr Willis had moved by way of amendment:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House is of the opinion that the Bill is deficient in that it fails to give effect to the recommendation of the Australian Law Reform Commission's Report "Privacy and the census" that identified census information should be held in Archives with access forbidden for 75 years, except for strictly limited access for purposes of medical research'.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr MacKellar) read a third time.

The National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Bill 1981, which was passed by this House on Thursday of last week, provided that the proposed Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal would, at intervals of not more than 12 months, hold an inquiry into the rate of remuneration paid to chemists for the supply of pharmaceutical benefits. Our colleagues in another place queried whether holding an inquiry meant immediately handing down the findings flowing from that inquiry. Accordingly, our colleagues have amended this Bill to change the emphasis from holding an inquiry at no more than 12monthly intervals to making it mandatory to hand down the findings of an inquiry into remuneration at no more than 12-monthly intervals.
The Government supports the amendment passed by the Senate as it puts beyond any doubt the Government's intention that no more than 12 months should elapse between reviews of chemists' remuneration, including the publication of the results of those reviews. I reiterate for the benefits of honourable members that has it has always been of concern to me that under the present joint committee frameworks inquiries tended to be prolonged to the detriment of chemists. 1 commend the amendments to the Committee.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (4.l3)-1 think the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) will now recognise that the combination of vacillation and hasty legislation equals confusion. The fact that the biggest proportion of yesterday's proceedings

Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2139

in the Senate was devoted to dealing with the the persistence for an even broader amendment.

problems that arose from the National Health We certainly support the claryifying amendment

(Pharmaceutical Benefits) Bill confirms the redoing this in the spirit in which we have tried to

marks I have just made. I stress again, as I stressed support this legislation throughout. I think it is

in the second reading debate, that some of the most desirable that we get this Bill through as

problems with this Bill could have been avoided if quickly as possible. There has been much delay in

there had been adequate time for discussion coming to a decision to provide for a means of ad-

within both parties-not simply the Opposition judicating on pharmacists' remuneration. There-

but, quite clearly from yesterday's debate, within fore, we support this amendment as we believe it

the Government.

clarifies the Bill on a crucial point. We give it our

We on this side of the Committee are disapsupport.

pointed that the Government was not able to Question resolved in the affirmative.

accept the further amendment to permit the proposed Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration

Resolution reported; report adopted.

Tribunal, if it so desired, to have a power to make retrospective judgments in its determinations. However, we were pleased that in the debate that took place in the Senate certain points were

CUSTOMS AMENDMENT (TENDERS) BILL 1981
Second Reading

clarified. The amendment we are now discussing Debate resumed from 30 April, on motion by makes it quite clear that there will never be a gap MrMoore:

greater than 12 months between determinations. That the Bill be now read a second time.

Of course, it is open to the Tribunal to meet within shorter periods. We also understand from the discussion that past costs can clearly be taken into account by the Tribunal in its determinations. As I said, we are disappointed that the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) was not prepared to permit another amendment. It seems that he was extraordinarily stubborn not to allow that amendment. At the moment, a kind of machismo seems to have gripped the Government. The only expla-

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill, the Customs Securities (Penalties) Bill 1981, and the Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Bill 1981, as they are related measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.

nation for the extraordinary behaviour in the last Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian

couple of days of the Easter Island man and his Robinson) -Is it the wish of the House to have a

side-kick, the Treasurer (Mr Howard), is that general debate covering these three measures?

somehow they felt that their political machismo There being no objection, I will allow that course

was being undermined. It seems to me that on this to be followed.

legislation the Minister, after much vacillation, has simply been stubborn. We could have got a somewhat better result if he had been more sympathetic to the amendment relating to a retrospective element in the determination.

Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (4.16) -The Customs Amendment (Tenders) Bill 1981 and cognate Bills give effect to one of the decisions made last year by the Government on the assistance arrangements to be afforded the cloth-

However, we are glad that the debate in the ing and footwear industries. The principal Bill,

Senate made clear something which was not made the Customs Amendment (Tenders) Bill 1981,

clear in this House in the short time we had the provides for a scheme to call for and deal with

Bill before us, that is, that as part of the trantenders for import quotas on a range of textile,

sitional arrangements retrospective considerclothing and footwear products. The Bill includes

ations will enter into the first determination. As I provisions requiring successful tenderers to give

understand it, the Tribunal when making its first an undertaking to utilise fully this quota and to

determination this year will under clause 10 (2) provide a security to Customs in respect of pen-

be able to employ considerations retrospective to alties which may become payable for a breach of

1 May 1980.

such undertakings. The other two Bills-the

We support the clarifying amendment which has just been moved by the Minister. It probably simply spells out something that was implicit in

minor Bills-provide for the imposition of penalties for breach of undertakings and for failure to provide securities.

the Bill. No doubt this is a suitable accommoI should like to indicate at the outset that the

dation of some of the difficulties seen by the Opposition does not oppose any of these three

senators. Indeed, it may have bought off some of Bills. However, I indicate also that the Opposition

2140 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Bill

is not entirely satisfied with the assistance arrangements in respect of the textiles, clothing and footwear industries which have been adopted by the Government, and of which these three Bills form an important part.
I
Levels and forms of industry assistance are now among the most important economic issues facing Australia. The Opposition shares the view expressed in the report of the Crawford Study Group on Structural Adjustment which recommended that levels of protection afforded Australian industry should be reduced in the long term. However, we do not believe that sudden or dramatic reductions in protection are warranted, particularly at a time of high unemployment such as presently exists in Australia. While the rate of unemployment is at least 6 per cent of the work force, there is no logic in reducing protection so as to throw even more people out of work. I am sure that even this heartless Government would agree with those sentiments.

this Government there is market growth over the

period.

W j;

The Opposition recognises that the main benefit of a base quota allocation is stability for most of the importing industry. We recognise also that sale of quota maximises the efficiency of the importing sector and at the same time the auction system ensures that the maximum feasible revenue is gained by the Government rather than by private profiteers. While recognising that there is a trade-off between stability and the benefits of quota sale, it nevertheless seems unfortunate that the profits to be gained by those enjoying base quota allocations will always be greater than those to be gained under sale quota, assuming, of course, that the duty rate bids for sale quota reflect the high, effective rates of protection which import quotas convey. The duty rate on base quota is to be fixed at 50 per cent, whereas sale quota could well involve rates two or even three times this level.

The Opposition's commitment to the textiles, clothing and footwear industries is based on the realisation that the continued employment of about 120,000 Australians in these industries is essential. Many of these jobs are provided in regional centres with few alternative job opportunities. Many of the jobs are held by workers who lack the skills appropriate to alternative areas of industry. To reduce employment even more dramatically than is already occurring is not to achieve a restructing of industry. Rather it is to create more massive unemployment and to concentrate it in certain regions. We cannot countenance that as a proposition.
Having acknowledged the need at this time to maintain protection levels, it is also important to determine which are the most appropriate forms of assistance. We in the Opposition happen to believe that import quotas are appropriate in the case of certain industries, and the textiles, clothing and footwear industries are among these. It is perfectly clear that only quotas can provide the needed degree of certainty to the industry to enable it confidently to invest in plant which will help it produce a more competitive product in the future.
These Bills provide for the administration of import quotas on a two-tiered basis. Most of the quota is to be allocated to bona fide importers who have been involved in importing in recent years. However, a small proportion is to be sold by tender. Because the basic quota is to be fixed for the next seven years, the amount to be sold by tender will increase, assuming that even under

The sale by tender system will reflect the real protection afforded by the imposition of import quotas. It appears to the Opposition that the profits to be gained by this system should accrue to General Revenue as they would under a tariff system rather than to a privileged group of importers. Indeed, it is possible that, through strong bidding for sale quotas by base quota holders, these profits could be unfairly maximised.
These opportunities for profiteering should be overcome. As a minimum measure, the rate of duty on base quota should be reconsidered annually and adjusted in line with the trend of prices revealed by the tender system. The differential between base and sale quota duty rates should never be allowed to become excessive, if indeed it should be allowed to prevail at all. The recent and continuing revaluation of the Australian dollar upwards is causing an increasing disparity between the free on board price of imports and the price of locally produced products. In these circumstances, windfall profits are likely to be made by base quota holders. The Opposition is of the opinion that this should not be allowed to continue.
Indeed, this is only one area of concern to the Opposition. This problem is paralleled by the need to ensure that the/price levels on the Australian market are the lowest possible in respect of locally produced goods. This requires a greater degree of planning in the industry. The Opposition has long been of the view that complex and interrelated industries such as textiles, clothing and footwear should be given closer attention by

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2141

government. It is not good enough to give an industry a level of protection which is possibly the highest in our history and then pretend that we can leave the rest to the market. History proves that market forces are not effective in this area.
We believe the Government has its head in the sand when it comes to the management of the industrial sector of the enconomy. On the one hand, at enormous cost it quite properly protects the private sector from the full impact of a free market environment but, on the other hand, it pretends to deregulate industry by irresponsible actions to remove proper and beneficial interventions such as price justification. We know, of course, what has happened to the Prices Justification Tribunal in the last few days. The Opposition believes that industry-specific policies are needed for industries such as these and that these policies should be appropriately devised and managed by industry authorities established for the purpose.
In addition to these general concerns about the administration of assistance arrangements for the textile, clothing and footwear industries, we have some particular concerns with the provisions of these Bills. We are particularly concerned that the arrangements for quotas do not allow a small number of large importers to tie up the market. Small firms must not be unreasonably excluded, and competition should be maintained. In this respect we hope that due consideration will be given by the Government to the call by Mr Clive Rodger of the Apparel Manufacturers Association of New South Wales that the security required under the legislation not be too high so as to be an overburden on small firms.
The Opposition has also been concerned that the right to buy and sell quotas is not abused and exploited by firms which are not bona fide importers. We understand that the officers of the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs will have stronger powers under the legislation in this respect. We are very happy about that. However, it is always essential that adequate staff is applied to these tasks. We call on the Government to ensure that its manic determination to bash the public sector does not result in costly losses in this area. In conclusion, I reiterate that the Opposition supports the Bills as a desirable improvement of the import quota system, notwithstanding its concern that there are a number of areas of the Government's assistance arrangements which are poorly conceived.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (4.26)-1 will be extremely brief. The honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) has made most of the points that one would want to make in discussing

the Customs Amendment (Tenders) Bill. I have had brought to my attention the circumstance of a particular importer who is disadvantaged as a result of the measures being discussed here today. I do not want to go into the matter in detail. This person has had a growing business and, because of the nature of the way in which quotas are set, the quota which he will be allocated, as I understand it, will be insufficient for him to continue his business at the level which it has now reached. Therefore, he will be faced with restricting or downgrading the level of his business undertaking.
I think this is an unfortunate consequence. Of course, the answer which will be given is that he will be able to tender for an extra quota. But, of courS", being a very small businessman it is unlikel~ that he will be as successful in that operation as other larger operators. I just want to bring this matter to the attention of the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore). I have mentioned to him that I would like a letter from the man concerned incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
Manufacturers Importers Wholesalers
P,O. Box 630 Fremantle Western Australia 6160 Telephone National (09) 3356405, International 61 9 335 6405 Bankers Commonwealth Trading Bank of Australia 88 High Street Fremantle Western Australia 6160
Mr John Dawkins Ref: to Clothing quotas
25 February 1981 Dear Sir,
Further to our discussion regarding looking into the possibility of increasing the amount of clothing we would need to import to retain a viable business.
As I explained to you, with the new quota system being introduced as of 1st January 1981. If our quota is based on our base performance for the two year period determined by the Federal Government, this would mean to us a complete loss of our wholesale business.
We have been importing clothing for more than five years, our total imports during this time have been small due to the lack of assistance given to us from Customs Tariff during this time. We were informed that certain items were dutiable, and as such did not import certain types of clothing such as rayon Batik. We were informed during 1975 to 1978 that all handicraft clothing must be made from natural materials such as cotton. We have now come to realise that Batik rayon is not dutiable, and we could have been importing rayon Batik without paying the duty as told before.
We have had difficulty finding suitable cotton material, and as such, were forced to import lower quantities than we had wanted at this time. During the last eighteen months, our imports of clothing have increased 1000 per cent, giving us the opportunity to develop our wholesale business.
We now employ one shop assistant plus my wife and myself, and were looking at employing more staff as our business

2142 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Bill

grew. If we are hit with quotas based on our base performance for the period determined by Federal Government, this would mean an end to our business as such.
During the five years I have been in business, we have worked seven days a week, sometimes a twenty hour day just to build our business to what it is today. I feel totally dissolutioned that overnight all the work we have put into our business can be undone through no fault of our own, just at a time when we can slow down to a 6 day week, 10 hour day.
We have built up a good clientel for our clothing during the last eighteen months, and now see everything we have worked for ending, just at a time when we should be receiving the reward we have worked for.
I have enclosed a list detailing clothing imported during the base performance determined by Federal Government, and sincerly hope you will look into this problem for me.
I sincerly hope you are able to help us in this matter, because without your help I do not know what we will do.
We have been informed that quotas will be made available for sale through auction. This will favour the large business that can afford large sums of money, and again enable them to control clothing prices without fear from small operators.
I feel this is another example of the small business going under to the benefit of the-large retail chain stores. I would like to ask what hope in this country has the small businessman when this unfair balance of power can put small operators out of business because they cannot front up with large amounts of money just to stay in business.
I only wish to be offered the chance to build up a business I understand, and at the same time offer employment to those that are willing to work.
I would like to thank you for taking the time to read this letter, and trust you will endeavour to help me in any way you are able.
Thanking you, Yours faithfully, PETER HOLDSWORTH
ITEMS IMPORTED DURING BASE PERFORMANCE
Cat. 1034 H/craft woven shirt, blouse-80/83074-325 units
Cat. 104 Woven coats-80/85285-94 units Cat. 107 Pants, jeans, overalls-80/87764-60 units Cat. 1094 H/craft ladies swimware---80/79643-200 units Cat. 113 Other outerware inc tracksuits, knitted pajamas, slacksuits, skirts, woven pajamas.-80/84555-138 units Cat. 113H Same as above---80/87199-1165 units Cat. 125 Bed linnen inc quilts etc-80/87199-$AI76:43 Cat. 110 Dresses, gowns, adult night dress and shirts-80/79142-7 units Cat. 103 Woven shirts & blouse-80/82653-1 unit.
PETER HOLDSWORTH Proprietor
Mr DAWKINS-I hope the Minister will give the matter his attention.
Question resolved in the affimative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.

CUSTOMS SECURITIES (PENALTIES) ~ILL 1981
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 30 April, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
CUSTOMS UNDERTAKINGS (PENALTIES) BILL 1981
Second Reading Consideration resumed from 30 April, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
STATES GRANTS (SCHOOLS ASSISTANCE) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading Debate resumed from 30 April, on motion by MrFife:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill and the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two measures? There being no objection I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (4.30)-The prime purpose of the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Bill and the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2143

that we are debating today is to adjust payments takes the opportunity to move amendments to

to schools and to tertiary institutions to take into these two Bills. I have an amendment in relation

account cost increases which have occurred in reto the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amend-

lation to certain items since those grants were ment Bill and a further amendment in relation to

introduced. The Bills particularly relate to cost intheStates Grants (Tertiary Education Assist-

creases last year and this year. As well as that, the ance) Amendment Bill. In relation to the motion

opportunity has been taken to include a number that the States Grants (Schools Assistance)

of other amendments to the funding arrangements Amendment Bill be read a second time, I move:

for schools and tertiary institutions. These are not That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substi-- of any contentious nature. For instance, some of tuting the following words:

them are consequent upon some amalgamations which have taken place between colleges of ad-

'whilst not denying the Bill a second reading, the House condemns the reduction in the activities of the Schools

vanced education and a university and a CAE in Tasmania. A rearrangement of funds is necessary

Commission as announced in the Review of Commonwealth Functions in that:

as a result. In the States Grants (Schools Assistance)

(1) the contraction of the information collection and dissemination activities of the Commission constitutes an obstacle to the debate on education policy

Amendment Bill, the opportunity has been taken by the Government to put into effect some of the promises which were made by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) prior to the last election. I

and will limit accountability for education expenditure, and
(2) the withdrawal of the administrative functions of the Commission at the State level will limit and downgrade the services the Commission provides

must say that, because of the abandonment of so

particularly to the non-government sector'.

many election promises, it is a very rare event indeed to have an opportunity to discuss the fulfilment of some. Here we have an instance where action is being taken to commence the process of implementing these election undertakings. Of course, we know, as the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) has indicated on previous occasions, that eduction funding is considered annually. So, we may well have in 12 months time some abandonment of these promises as well. At least we

As I indicated, I will move an amendment in relation to the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill. Whilst I do not formally move it now, I indicate that the text of that amendment will be:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not denying the Bill a second reading, the House condemns the ill-considered and grossly inequitable changes to the funding, organisation and financing of

should be thankful for the fact that this Government is, in fact, moving on this occasion to implement promises.

students in tertiary education as announced in the Review of Commonwealth Functions, in that:
(1) the re-introduction of fees is not only a breach of an election undertaking but will grossly disadvantage

The first relates to the undertaking to provide. $25m over three years in the form of capital assistance for non-government schools for them to provide new places. This legislation provides the first

students with limited means and will compromise Australia's research effort; (2) the gutting of the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme will confirm tertiary education as the preserve of the rich; and

instalment of that $25m-that is, $7.4m for this

(3) the heavy-handed threat in the review to 30 colleges

year-in pursuit of that objective. The next Government undertaking which is put into effect by this legislation is to compress the current six levels under which non-government schools are

of advanced education is based on the wholly false premise that the consolidation of single purpose colleges will result in cost savings in spite of the Tertiary Education Commission's advice to the contrary'.

described into three. On this occasion levels two and three are joined. The same subsidy arrangements will apply to those former levels. There is also a new program of assistance for the education of the severely handicapped both in institutions and in their own homes. This is a very welcome initiative.

I take this opportunity to move one amendment and to foreshadow another because, whilst the Bills before us do bestow certain benefits in relation to education in this country, they pale into insignificance in terms of the damage that is being done to education throughout Australia as a result of the Government's decisions flowing from the

Finally, the Government has ta~en the opporReview of Commonwealth Functions. It is extra-

tunity to commence the implemeiltation of its ordinarily ironic that we should be debating these

progralh"to provide support for part time nonBills, which are supposed to be beneficial to edu-

profit ethnic schools which are providing supcation, at the same time as we have before us the

plementary courses in community language and results of the continuing assault that this Govern-

cultural education. I emphasise that the Oppoment is waging against education. The decisions

sition does not intend to oppose these Bills, but it which have been announced-I will go through

2144 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

them in some detail in a moment-simply repthe universities, particularly the staff at universi-

resent a continuing part of the Government's reties, are highly resentful of the introduction of

sentment of an education system which is open to these fees.

all, free to all and which provides a quality of education which we all should be aiming for. In fact, this Government has not been interested in maintaining the high level of education in this country. It has been concerned to restrict access, particularly at the tertiary level. It has been concerned to attack the level of research undertaken in tertiary institutions and it has been concerned to downgrade the activities of the Schools Commission, which has transformed school education

I want to read out two communications which I have received in the last couple of days. I suspect that this is the beginning of a barrage of com" plaints which all members of parliament will receive as a result of this grossly ill-considered decision. The first cortununication comes from the Monash University StaffAssociation and it states:
. . . urges immediate reconsideration of proposal to introduce fees for later degrees and to close Educational Research and Development Committee. Later degree students

in this country not only in the government sector make productive contributions to research and to main-

but also in the non-government sector.

tenance of professional standards. The consequences of enactment of these proposals will be maximum damage to the

I mention briefly the decisions which have been nation's human capital for minimal financial savings.

made in the context of education as a result of the Lynch committee and to comment on the ways in which these decisions will seriously damage education in this country. In the first instance the Government has decided to re-impose fees for those students undertaking second or higher degrees in universities and colleges of advanced education. The fees will apply to those students who will enroll for the first time in 1982. The Government has decided that the fees should not apply to 'recognised double degree and diploma combinations. It has also decided that the fees will not be paid by those students in receipt of Commonwealth Government and university postgraduate awards. The scale of fees has not been announced because the Government has said that the level of fees will be set in the Budget context. The Government has said that there will be a reduction in the amount of funding to the colleges and universities as a result of its decision on the Tertiary Education Commission report to take account of the fee income which the universities and colleges might expect from the imposition of these fees.

In saying that the Monash University Staff Association simply affirms the remarks which I and the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) were making yesterday in another debate on a related matter. The Department of Economics of the University of Wollongong has also opposed the reintroduction of fees for second and higher degree students without a substantial expansion and upgrading of the Commonwealth Post-Graduate Award Scheme. It goes on to complain: about the way in which the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme will be tightened. I will come back to that in a moment. These complaints are not coming particularly from the students concerned, they are corning from the staff association in one instance and the academics from the Department of Economics in the other instance. The reason they are complaining is that they know the value of the contribution post-graduate students make to the research effort in universities and therefore to the research effort throughout Australia.
The other aspect about the introduction of these fees is that it is a clear breach of a pre-

I think the important pomt to remember about this is that this is just a repeat of a proposal which was first foreshadowed by this Government in 1976. An identical proposition was put up at that time but not proceeded with. The reason it was not proceeded with was the Minister at the time,

election commitment given by the current Minister for Education, Mr Fife. In October of last year he said:
There continues to be speculation about Government plans to reintroduce fees for tertiary education. I have given an assurance publicly and I repeat that assurance, that no pro-

Senator Carrick, indicated quite clearly that the -posaIs are being considered by the Government for the.poss-

costs of raising the fee income would probably ible reintroduction oftertiary fees.

.

exceed the revenue which was collected. That To any fair-minded person, that simple statement

task has been given to the universities and colrepresented a commitment not to reintroduce fees

leges. It is something they have not sought and at the tertiary level. On this occasion the Govern-

they do not want. This is clear from the fact that ment has reintroduced fees, although only for

the Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee in post-graduate and second degree students. Clearly

1976 strongly opposed the introduction of these it is an absolute abrogation of that undertaking

fees. It has on this occasion also indicated that it is which was given by the Minister for Education

a great mistake on the part of the Government to last year. I want the House and everybody in Aus-

impose them. There are already indications that tralia to note what the Minister has done and to

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2145

take that on board because, when presenting the report of the Lynch committee, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) solemnly declared that it was not the Government's intention to reintroduce fees at the undergraduate level. What has to be remembered is that this is just another worthless Liberal Party, Liberal Government undertaking. It is just as worthless as the one that the Minister gave in October last year. What we are seeing now is the thin end of the wedge in regard to the wholesale reintroduction of fees at all levels in tertiary education. In answer to a question from me on 25 March this year, Mr Fife clearly said: that the matter of fees was something which had to be taken into account in the annual budgetary considerations. So it is quite clear that this is the decision for this year. The decision is not to reimpose fees at the undergraduate level next year, but it is no guarantee that they will not be introduced at some stage in the very near future. Therefore I think we have to continue to emphasise the damage that the reintroduction of fees could make and would make if we had a rein-
troduction at the undergraduate level.

able to afford fees unless they are amongst the

most able students who are lucky enough to be in

receipt of post-graduate awards of one kind or

another.

'

I think the point is that the Government, obviously, thinks that it will receive a fair amount of revenue as a result of the introduction of this measure. But inquiries and calculations that I have made show the Government is likely to receive not more than one per cent of the total amount which the Commonwealth spends on tertiary education as a result of the imposition of these fees. Not all post-graduate students will pay, but in addition many of those students who will be forced to pay will be discouraged from enrolling and, therefore, the Government will not receive fees from them. So, in return for imposing a measure damaging to Australia's research effort, highly disruptive to university education as a whole and highly disruptive to the administration of universities~these fees cannot be collected for nothing, as all that will be raised in the form of revenue is about one per cent of the amount that it currently spends on tertiary education.

I want to refer briefly to a survey which has just been completed at the Macquarie University; a university, by the way, which happens to be in the electorate of the Treasurer (Mr Howard). This is a preliminary paper. The survey was conducted only in the last couple of weeks. It indicated that 40 per cent of students would defer or withdraw from undergraduate education if they were forced to pay fees of even a fairly nominal amount of $300 a year. A survey was done in 1976 for the Education Research and Development Committee. That survey was supplemented by other surveys. What has come out of the Macquarie University survey in the last couple of weeks indicates that the resistance to paying fees is very much greater than was thought to be the case at that time. If fees of $1,000 had been imposed.on law students this year half of those students, who one would expect to go into professions with fairly high incomes after graduation, would not have enrolled in law school.

I refer quickly to the proposals that the Government has in mind in relation to the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme and loans. I do not want to go into all the ways in which TEAS has declined over the last few years; but we know that a declining number of people are receiving TEAS benefits and, particularly, that a declining number of people are receiving the maximum benefit. I did go into this matter in some detail in an earlier debate in this House. We cannot look at the loans scheme in isolation from TEAS, because the Government has stated clearly that from the time it introduces the student loans scheme it will set the benefits in relation to TEAS i.n the knowledge that extra supplementary assistance will be available through the loans scheme. There is absolutely no doubt as to what that means. The Government will either freeze the TEAS benefits or reduce them in order to force more and more people to take out loans to support themselves through tertiary education.

The Government has to recognise that the imposition of fees does provide a direct and severe deterrent to people to continue with their tertiary education. The fact that the Government is, at this time, imposing fees for post-graduate students and for second degree students means that this will severely disadvantage the most needy of those students. Clearly, the only assistance available in the form of post-graduate awards is awarded on the basis of merit and not on the basis of need. Therefore, students who are quite successful and
who can make a positive contribution will not be

This is at odds with a recommendation from the committee which the Government set up to inquire into the student loans scheme and which reported in 1977. That committee, the Butcher committee, said at the time that any loans scheme ought to be introduced purely as a supplement to the existing system of tertiary education assistance, that is, it did not say that a loans scheme should replace a tertiary allowance or even replace it in part. It said that there was a case for the introduction of a loans scheme on a supplementary basis for students who were unable to support

2146 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

themselves entirely on the existing level of TEAS. That is not what the Government is saying on this occasion. It is forecasting that TEAS will be gutted. It will be available to fewer and fewer people. Clearly it will be available at a lower level of benefit than is the case at the moment. That will compel students to take out loans in order to pay their basic living costs.
There will be great resistance, particularly from students with poorer backgrounds, to incurring debts at this time of their lives. They are being asked to incur a debt at the age of 18 or 19 which they would pay back upon graduation. It is the Government's theory that once they graduate and obtain a job they ought to repay to society some of the investment which society has made in their education. It is a grossly unfair system in practise.
I refer again to the Macquarie University's survey made in the last couple of weeks. Four hundred and eleven students were asked how they predicted their ability to repay the loan. Only 6 per. cent said that they would certainly be able to repay it, 25 per cent said that most likely they would be able to repay it and something like two-thirds said either that it was unlikely that they would be able to repay the loan or that they would not be able to repay that loan. If that is what they thought, they would not take out a loan in the first place.
The reason they doubt their ability to repay the loan is that these students are aware of the high level of graduate unemployment that exists in this country. They are aware also of the fact that once they graduate in their early twenties that will be just the time when they will incur other debts for houses or cars or whatever. They do not want the extra burden of repaying the cost of having to support themselves through their university or college course. Repayment may be possible for those people who float straight into highly remunerative occupations upon graduation, but that will not be the experience of most gratuates. The people who will be most in need of extra support will be least likely to be attracted to the loans schemes.
I urge the Government to reconsider this matter. It is certainly not a cost saving device. In the short term it will cost the Government more as it makes available the funds for the loans scheme. It is true that over time some of the money will be repaid. The Government.expects that it will save, presumably by gutting the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme. But at the same time, this year and next year it will certainly cost the Government more. I suggest that the Government carefully reconsider the question of introducing a student loans scheme. It will discourage people

from entering tertiary education. I desperately hope that it is not .,the intention of the Government to discourgepeople from going on to higher education. Already we have appalling falling levels of participation in higher secondary and post secondary education in Australia. What we really ought to be attempting to do is increase the number of young people who are participating in education, not providing further serious impediments to their continued participation in education.
I refer to one other matter which relates to the area of schools education, that is, the quite absurd decision of the Government to close down the Curriculum Development Centre. The Curriculum Development Centre was established by~-
Mr Ruddock-If the States want it they can contribute.
Mr DAWKINS-The honourable member for Dundas says that the States can contribute. I am sure the States are going to be terribly enthusiastic about making all kinds of contributions to the Commonwealth from now on.
Mr Ruddock-----oIf it is useful they will be enthusiastic. .'
Mr DAWKINSWhat the honourable member for Dundas has to remember is that the States now know that the Commonwealth has withheld from them $70m which it could have made avaihtble for this and other purposes. They are not going to be enthusiastic. They are not going to be the slightest bit enthusiastic about taking over on a voluntary basis functions which are quite clearly national functions, Federal Government functions, and have been at least since the inception of the Curriculum Development Centre.
The decision in respect of the Curriculum Development Centre is not a huge matter of national importance, but it does highlight very clearly the absurdity of many of the decisions in the education area which were made by the Government as a result of the Lynch committee. The Government has just spent $200,000 on refurbishing premises for the Curriculum Development Centre in Lyneham. It was only on 18 March, something like six weeks ago, that the current Minister for Education opened those new premises. He said that he was very pleased to have been invited to perform the official opening of the new premises. He then went on:
In the five years since its establishment the Curriculum Development Centre has undertaken a formidable array of projects which have resulted in an enrichment of the fabric of Australian education.
He further said:

States Grants -(Schools Assistance) Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2147

Perhaps the highlight of the Centre's efforts was the release last year of the discussion paper entitled 'Core Curriculum for Australian Schools' which has been acclaimed both in Australia and internationally as an important contribution to this aspect of the education debate.
He went on:
I am sure that when public reaction to the paper has been assessed and analysed a refreshing approach to curriculum through a core curriculum concept will result.
This exercise is, however, by no means an isolated undertaking. In co-operation with the State education agencies, the Curriculum Development Centre has produced a most impressive array of curriculum materials of national importance.
Through its work the Centre has demonstrated to Australian educators, and others involved in education, the importance of on-going curriculum development, as well as the value of having identifiable areas of specific curriculum focus, as our education system strives to keep pace with rapid social change.
That is what the Minister thought just six weeks ago when he went over to turn the key at the CDC premises in Lyneham. He is to go back in a couple of weeks time to put up the shutters. That is a most deplorable turn-around. I would like to know what it is that has possessed the Minister to have such a complete reversal of attitude in just sixweeks.
I take the point of the honourable member for Dundas. I certainly hope the States will contribute to the costs of continuing the CDC although not because I think it is their obligation to do so. I do not think it is. This is a national task which costs the Commonwealth only about $2.5m a year. It is not an expensive undertaking, and already the States are making a contribution of just under $lm to the cost of running the place anyway. It is just a stupid decision of the Commonwealth. I hope that the States will come to the party and keep the centre going, though I might say that the chances of the States responding in that way would be much greater if the Commonwealth would turn round and hand over the $70m which, in my opinion, it deceitfully withheld the other week from the States.
I wish to raise one other matter and I refer to the quite short-sighted decision of the Government to restrict the activities of the Schools Commission. The Schools Commission has been making an invaluable contribution to the education debate in this country by the provision of information and the dissemination of that information. Through the activities of the Schools Commission we in this place and others around Australia have been able to make a more informed contribution to the education debate and have been more aware of the amount and direction of education expenditure in this country. The Government's decision to contract that activity is most unfortunate and undemocratic and will result in serious

problems for government and non-government schools.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Is the amendment seconded?
Dr Jenkins-I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak later.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Before I call the honourable member for Wentworth, I remind the House that although the honourable member has had extensive experience in another parliament this is his maiden speech in this Parliament. I request all honourable members to extend to him the normal courtesies.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (5.0)-1 support the Bills before the House, but before speaking in particular on the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Bill 1981 I seek the House's indulgence for a moment. I want to take this opportunity to thank the people of the Wentworth division for electing me as their representative in this historic House and also those hundreds of members and supporters of the Liberal Party who in the period from my pre-selection as candidate in March to my election as a member in April worked so hard in the campaign. I will strive to justify the trust that they have placed in me.
The division of Wentworth is a Liberal Party stronghold in the eastern suburbs of Sydney. As some members of the Opposition frequently noted during the recent by-election, Wentworth has never been held by the Australian Labor Party, although nowadays, as a result of boundary changes, it has some booths where the Labor Party wins the support of a majority of voters. It is my intention as well as my duty to serve them all, regardless of party allegiance.
The division of Wentworth has always been well represented in this House by members who have played a major role in the national life of the country. One need only mention the three members who preceded me: Sir Eric Harrison, who in his 25 years in this House served in many ministeries before becoming Australian High Commissioner in London; Leslie Bury, C.M.G., who also held a variety of portfolios with distinction; and Robert Ellicott, now the Honourable Mr Justice Ellicott of the Federal Court.
Robert Ellicott, my immediate predecessor, set a standard that I can only hope to emulate. He has left a legacy which speaks for itself. I am referring not only to his great reputation for integrity but also to the variety of measures for which he was responsible. He established the Federal Court, the office of Ombudsman, the National Institute of

2148 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

Sport, Art Bank, the National Women's Advisory In 1977 the Schools Commission expanded and

Council, to mention only a few. He introduced tax re-formed its SpecialEducation Advisory Group

incentives for film makers, he completed the purand decided to undertake the detailed national

chase of Cocos (Keeling) Islands, and he study which is the basis of this legislation. This

introduced self-government to Norfolk Island. As year the Commonwealth Government has already

a local member and not as a Minister Mr Ellicott committed $17.8m for the Special Education

established the Inner City Legal Services Centre Program and now this Bill commits a further $2m

in Oxford Street in the electorate of Wentworth. I for the severely handicapped. Recent Common-

have mentioned these illustrations of his achievewealth commitments, the Schonell survey and

ments only to indicate the loss to this Parliament now this Bill represent the beginning of a sig-

which his elevation to the Bench represents. Hownificant new deal for the severely handicapped,

ever, it may be that Robert Ellicott has not yet and I congratulate the Minister for Education

really resigned from politics. So intermeshed now (Mr Fife) on it.

are legislation and litigation, parliament and the judiciary, that as Mr Justice Ellicott he will, I am sure, continue to playa major role in the public life of this country.

I turn now to a potentially more controversial part of the Bill, that concerned with funding ethnic schools-the multiculturalist theme of the Bill. This grew out of the report prepared by the

Turning now to the measures before the House, Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs

I am grateful for the opportunity to make my called Review of Multicultural and Migrant Edu-

maiden speech in this chamber on the States cation of September 1980. So we are in an area

Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Bill, where there has been increasing debate. We hear

not only because it was introduced by an old colwarnings that multiculturalism is being carried

league and friend from the Parliament of New too far, that it will produce a backlash, that earlier

South Wales but also because in one package it generations of ethnic migrants for nearly 200

expresses so much of the philosophy of the Libyears were assimilated into Australian society

eral Party. The Bill expresses the Liberal Party's without hearing the word 'ethnic', let alone

real commitment to freedom of choice in eduhaving special ethnic institutes, programs, and so

cation, the importance it attaches to the rights of on. We are being warned that multiculturalism is

minority ethnic cultures in the Australian combecoming a growth industry exploited by oppor-

munity and its concern to assist the severely tunist, pseudo-idealistic bureaucracies that will in

handicapped among us.

the phrase of one commentator-himself an eth-

I will start with the third theme of the Bill and the clauses which provide for the introduction of a new scheme to encourage the development of educational programs for those victims of life's genetic lottery or of other afflictions-the severely handicapped children in institutions or homes. This measure represents the adoption of the 1979 Queensland study 'A Survey of Special Education in Australia' prepared for the Schools Com-

nic migrant, if one must use these termstransform a decent, well-governed Australia into a racist cauldron. One must note such l;,rarnings when they come from sincere and incelligent critics. Obviously if carried to extremes multiculturalism would destroy our national cohesion and identity. I have no doubt these critics will be against this aspect of the Bill before us, yet I do not believe the criticisms are justified.

mission by the Fred and Eleanor Schonell EduEthnic community schools, part time and

cation Research Centre in the University of operating after regular school hours and at week-

Queensland. That survey estimated-one can ends, have spread across Australia. There are

only estimate-that there are about 108,000 about 600 such schools in which about 100,000

handicapped Australian children and adolescents. students are taught. They are voluntary organis-

These are children who are blind or visually ations and are larely self-financing, although they

handicapped, deaf or partly deaf, physically receive some State government and some foreign

handicapped and suffering, for example, from embassy support. They are here to stay. They

cerebral palsy or spina bifida and those severely or specialise in ethnic languages and cultures and

mildly mentally handicapped. For generations they help cushion the student's transition from

voluntary organisations and the State educational the country of origin to Australian life. They re-

authorities have had or have assumed the reduce the traumas of assimilation. Probably every

sponsibility for assisting parents in the education member in this chamber has been to scores of

of these children. In recent years the Commonnaturalisation and citizenship ceremonies where

wealth has accepted its share of responsibility in speeches have been delivered stressing that the

this field both in research and in the funding of taking of Australian citizenship involves the re-

programs.

nunciation of any other citizenship but not of any

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2149

ethnic heritage. This Bill and these ethnic schools expert on either side to prove anything. Mean-

do no more than encourageJhe retention of those while parents are voting with their feet in favour

heritages-a practice and method that has in any of independent schools. In my electorate, which

case been maintained, although not on current contains some very famous government high

scales, for generations without any government schools, about half the students attend indepen-

assistance by the German, Jewish, Greek and dent schools; the waiting lists for these schools are

Italian communities in Australia. Nevertheless, it growing and there is talk of closing down at least

is the case that there has been some dissatisone high school-a measure to which I am com-

faction, even among sympathisers, with the pletelyopposed.

schools. The 'Review of Multicultural and Migrant Education' reports that the quality of education given in these schools is not uniformly good, that some of the teachers are not adequately qualified, that much of the teaching material is unsatisfactory and that many of the premises used are makeshift. Above all, public authorities really know very little, with any certainty, about the
schools.

The solution to the government school problem lies primarily with State governments, State de .. partments of education and the state school teachers. The crisis will not pass until they take the steps to restore educational standards to the place they used to have in government schools. In my view this involves a range of policies from renewed emphasis on the three Rs to the restoration of serious and respected public examinations. If

The Bill, in accordance with the recommenthat happens-the sooner it happens the

dations of the review referred to aims to improve better-I believe the move to independent schools

this situation. It provides for financial assistance will be less pronounced. Yet, from the point of

to approved programs. In other words, it will give view of Commonwealth involvement in edu-

money to the schools-up to $30 a child-but not cation, the issue is not only one of educational

without strings. The money will go only to apstandards-fundamental as that is-but also of

proved courses. This excludes instruction that is parents' freedom to choose between different

predominantly political or religious. One further kinds of schools, government or independent. We

consequence is that in the process of examining see today, as I have said, an expansion not only of

courses for the purposes of giving approval, a traditional independent schools but also of more

good deal more information will be obtained innovative or experimental ones. There would be

about the schools. I believe this information will even more if we adopted some version of the

enhance the standing of these voluntary voucher system for the choice of schools. But be

enterprises. In short the schools deserve support that as it may, the freedom of choice which

for three reasons: They are an outstanding parents now enjoy would be quite impossible

example of the voluntary principle, they reduce without financial assistance from government of

the shocks and traumas of assimilation into Austhe kind provided for in this Bill.

tralian society and they contribute to the maintenance of the linguistic and cultural inheritance of Australians. I am glad to be able to support this
part of the Bill.

One might sometimes be forgiven for believing that this is now, after all these years, a bipartisan policy shared by government and opposition but in fact we know that the Opposition, or at least

The third theme of this Bill concerns Comstrong elements in it, does not yet really believe in

monwealth assistance to government and to parents' freedom of choice and the legitimacy of

independent schools. It seems to me that two of both independent and government schools. One

the great problems of the day in the field of public has only to remember the reaction of the Oppo-

education are, firstly, to arrest the disappointing sition to the razor gang's common sense proposals

erosion of confidence in government schools aristo return a variety of government functions to the

ing out of what parents perceive as a fall in stanprivate sectora reaction that in some cases

dards of literacy, numeracy and discipline in seemed about to cause seizures, if not hysterical

government schools despite the investment of fits, so great is the horror of the private sector, in-

massive sums of money in them and; secondly, to cluding the private educational sector, to the

cope with the consequent rising public demand socialist mind. I believe there really is no true

for the services of independent schools, whether basic consensus on this question of freedom of

church or secular, traditional or experimental, so choice in education. It is still an issue that illus-

that real freedom of choice between different trates the philosophic differences between the

kinds of education continues to be possible. The Liberal Party and the Labor Party. I congratulate

arguments about literacy and numeracy in the Minister on this aspect of the Bill. Taken

government schools continue without agreement together, the three themes of the Bill illustrate

being in sight. No doubt one can always find some compassion for the handicapped, concern for the

2150 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

welfare of ethnic minorities and a determination to maintain real freedom in one of parents' most important choices-the education of their children. In my view, the Bill can stand as a simple symbol of the policies of the Liberal Party and this Government for the 1980s.
It has been a strange experience for me to be listened to in comparative polite silence after some 10 to 11 years in the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales. I now look forward to later debates in this famous chamber when I should not expect, or wish, for such quietness. Nevertheless, 1 thank the House for its courtesy.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (5.16)-1 would like to convey my congratulations to the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman) on making his maiden speech. It is quite fitting that he should make it in an area on which State parliaments base so much discussion-the area of education. I also welcome him to that growing circle of former members of State parliaments who have entered Federal Parliament. However, I must warn him that if he expects his State colleagues, even of the same parliamentary persuasion, always to look upon him with admiration, he will be sadly disillusioned.
Mr Barry Jones-It happens on our side.
Dr JENKINS-It does happen on our side. I am afraid events of recent days will reduce the honourable member's popularity. As has been said by the honourable member for Wentworth and the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins), members of this House do not oppose the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Bill or the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill. In fact, they honour Government undertakings and, after all, that is a rare event in this House in recent times. So we can but approve them. I draw the attention of the House to the statement by the Minister for education (Mr Fife) about the Government's policy on education. On page 1862 of Hansard of 30 April, he is recorded as having said:
This is in conformity with the Government's resolve to ensure equality of opportunity and freedom of choice for all Australian school children and their parents.
I will go back to that statement later. I must admit that with regard to the schools assistance legislation I did have sympathy for the point of view put by the honourable member for Wentworth regarding the program to assist non-profit part time ethnic schools. These schools are well established in our communities and they do require assistance. Variations in standards are involved and I am pleased to see that this extra assistance will be paid to those schools where the-children are

undertaking approved supplementary community language and cult~ral education programs, because here there issoine degree of accountability. So, whilst I support these particular part time ethnic schools, I am concerned about the contribution that is made to multicultural education. It seems to me that although those schools satisfy the requirements of that one group in preserving the language, culture and knowledge of history of that group-a very laudable objective-they are still not breaking down the barriers between the culture of that group and those of other groups. Australia is now rich in ethnic people and ethnic culture. I would like to see the opportunity for multicultural exchange. This is not provided for in our schools at the moment in any effective form. The attempt in South Australia, with its program in a number of primary schools, does give some sort of lead but it has not gone very far.
I now move to the other program, which is to develop education programs for severely handicapped children. We are told the Bill makes provision for the introduction of a new scheme. What is the scheme and how will it operate? It will cost $19.3m but what is its objective and how will it be carried out? Just as an objective, it is acceptable. But are we not sensible enough in this Federal Parliament to. be told how it is to operate, what accountability there will be and what its objectives are? How far would it go? The Preston Institute of Technology had the Education Program for Infants and Children which dealt with Down's syndrome children. This was started under a special grant from the Department of Social Security. It was an early education program which began with babies affected by Down's syndrome in their first year of life. It was eminently successful an~ because of its success it .drew numbers beyond those approved for the pilot scheme. The effect snowballed and about three months ago the Institute thought it would not be financed beyond 30 June. Only recently has it been told it will be
allowed to carryon.
What is its future? What is the future for similar schemes under this education program for severely handicapped children, or does it not apply to those schemes at all? It seems to me that it is programs such as those for the severely handicapped which we should support. We are given insufficient information concerning them and the Government's objectives. I think the Minister ought to take some time to explain the objectives of that program to us. I come back to equality of opportunity and freedom of choice. 1 have a telegram from N. Robinson, the Secretary of the Preston Institute of Technology Association of Professional Staff. It states:

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2151

General meeting of academic staff Preston Institute con-

cerned at introduction of fees for ,post-graduate and continu-

ing education. This will cause haroship to students and lead to

shortage of Australian specialists 'eSpecially in technological

and business areas.

'

bit, cut back on the number of places available to students. In 1974 the maximum Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowance was 75.4 per cent of the Henderson poverty line. Today it is

When the Whitlam Government started massive involvement of Federal funds in education programs it seemed to start at both ends. One may have questioned why it started first with the tertiary area and the abolition of tertiary fees. The fact is that at that stage tertiary education was elitist and exclusive. Qnlyaverysmall percentage of people wefeable to break through the barrier of fees and the expenses of attending a tertiary institution. Some of us were able to do it by working during the day and studying at night, but there were very few indeed and it was done under very

61.7 per cent. If we look at the cutoff point for means testing for the allowance we see that the cutoff point declined from 100.1 per cent of the average male wage in 1974 to 80.1 per cent today. The student income cutoff point dropped in real terms from 28.3 per cent of the average male wage in the previous financial year to 12.8 per cent. These cuts make it harder for children of working class families, mature age students and people living in country areas to enter tertiary education. So much for equality of education and freedom of choice in education!

difficult circumstances.

My colleague the honourable member for

In the early 1970s tertiary institutions expanded and they were freed of fees. There is now a deliberate attempt to return these institutions to their former exclusive and elitist state. This introduction of fees for second and postgraduate degrees is an example of this. It will affect those who come from poorer economic circumstances far more than any others. Surely we will not be told by members of the Government that a primary degree is the end of tertiary education. Surely anyone looking for expertise in the technological, scientific and business fields would say that the first degree just lays the base for expertise. Why should it be forced upon those who

Fremantle has already referred to student loans. It is impossible to expect students to carry out their courses, after obtaining loans and be hit by repayments at the time when, if they are from working class backgrounds they are already struggling because they have not been in the work force for so many years. It is no solution at all. I speak from experience of that situation, although it was many years ago. My colleague from Fremantle would say: 'Anyone with science and medical qualifications is one of those who gets into the high income group as soon as he hits the work force'. Well, it is still a battle if such a person has to pay back student loans.

wish to continue their education to improve their Let me return to the area of primary and

skills, which are needed in so many fields in secondary education and the question of the

Australia, that they must be able to afford to supSchools Commission. We were disappointed that

port themselves and pay fees? Not only have the involvement of the Schools Commission in

there been cutbacks in this area but also there has program administration and information collec-

been the question of the facilities which are availtion in the States is to be reduced. The State

able for tertiary education. The Tertiary Eduoffices are pretty vestigial already. Further cut-

cation Commission pointed out:

backs in their involvement will mean a further

The situation is a serious one . . . Despite the fact lack of, or indeed the absence of, information that total student load has levelled off, there is a backlog of dewhich gives us any degree of accountability of

mand for teaching space . . . There are a number of examples of overcrowding, the use of unsuitable temporary accommodation and substandard facilities which require replacement as a matter of urgency.
That appears on page 7, volume 2 of the TEC report. It is further stated on page 9 of that volume:
. . . that the capacity of universities and colleges to meet their teaching and research commitments will be seriously impaired unless there is an increase in the funds for capital works above the level available in 1980.

programs in schools whether government or nongovernment, primary or secondary. We cannot afford this. The introduction of the Schools Commission provided us with a source of information to enable us to judge just how adequately or inadequately the programs were working. Here we intend to cut it back further. We will cut out special support for educational research. We have. reachedthestage-wherewe can afford to cut out

In this House we hear so much about natural reinvol'vement in educational research.

sources, their development and how that will I have heard many comments that the schools

build up the country. Surely the greatest natural program has been a failure regarding literacy. I

resources in Australia are human resources-the must admit that sometimes when I see the spelling

development of their skills and abilities. The overof some tertiary graduates I am inclined to believe

all effect of the cuts in this area will be to reduce it, but the fact is that those schools programs have

staff numbers, raise the size of classes and, bit by not been a failure. Today a much higher number

2152 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

of people, through those programs, can communicapital grants for new places in non--government

cate, whether verbally or by writing. No one can schools throughout Australia. I will concentrate

deny that. Literacy has improved. The sort of on the problem facing the non-government school

campaign that has been conducted to suggest that system in Australia. ] am a little tired of hearing

the position is worsening is ridiculous and only speakers opposite talk about the disadvantages

inspired to return us to the good old days of the suffered by lower income groups in Australia in

master and servant situation as far as education is the education system as though this disadvantage

concerned.

related entirely to the State school system. The

I now turn to the question of the Curriculum Development Centre. We were told that if it is abolished it will provide a saving of money to Federal revenue. Once more the gun has been held at the States to agree to contribute 50 per cent of the operating costs. What purpose does this serve? There will be a disappearance of a centre that has served a real purpose in curriculum development. If there is concern for literacy surely this is one area to which particular attention should be paid.

bulk of the Catholic education system is directed towards providing education for the disadvantaged, lower income earning groups of this nation. It is arrant nonsense for honourable members opposite to suggest that to give any taxpayers' funds to the Catholic education system is to look after people who are privileged. The reality is that the Catholic education system operates at a resource level of only 70 per cent of the level available to the average State schooL The Karmel Ilgures on resource allocation indicate that the Catholic edu-

Whilst as members of the Opposition we do not cation system suffers a 30 per cent disadvantage.

oppose these Bills, we have our reservations about The bulk of the system provides education facili-

the Government's so-called attitude to equality of ties for the lower income earning groups in our so-

opportunity and freedom of choice. Financial reciety. It is about time the Opposition stopped sug-

straints restrict those opportunities and the freegesting that the Government's provision of

dom for children who, if they come from the assistance to this section of the education system

lower wage earning group, are already disadvanis providing something to a privileged and advan-

taged through the facilities that are available to taged section of the community. That is nonsense.

them in the home. I trust that at some stage

members of the Parliament will be able to sit Let me detail the manner in which the non-

down and talk about the sorts of national objecState education sytem, in particular the Catholic

tives in education that are needed to potentiate education system, has been subjected to a sig-

the human resources which are the best natural nificant degree of disadvantage. Figures demon-

resources this country has.

strating the point I am making are recorded in the

Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (5.34)-I am glad to have the opportunity to congratulate the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman) on his maiden speech in this House. I am glad that iLwas on such an important topic as education. I believe his contribution to the debate was in keeping with the usual high standards that the Australian community has learnt to expect from the honourable member for Wentworth. T attended university with him in Sydney. I then worked with him in the late 1950s on the staff of a magazine called the Observer which ultimately merged with the Bulletin. The honourable member for Wentworth then became a most distinguished editor of the Bulletin magazine. I was very glad to work with him as the financial editor of that magazine for some years. I am overjoyed to see him as a member of this place and to hear the quality of the contribution that he has made to the debate on this important subject of education.

Schools Commission report for the triennium 1982-84 which was released last month. I draw the attention of the House to the fact that there has been a growth in the non-State system in recent times. There is no doubt about it. As a result of this Government's activities, there has been an increase in the number of enrolments and proportion of enrolments in the non-government primary school area following a degree of assistance given by this Government to that section of the education system. 1 point out that the recovery in that proportion, which is now 20 per cent of all enrolments, took place after a substantial fall in the number of enrolments in non-government schools which was generated under the Labor Government. In 1972, in the term of the previous coalition Government, the proportion of students who attended non-government schools in Australia at the primary level was 20 per cent. That is exactly the same as it was last year. In other words, there was a fall under Labor and

I will now deal in detail with the burden of the there has now been a recovery. We have restored

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment a degree of choice in education which was being

Bill, particularly the Government's commitment diminished by the policies of the Labor Govern-

to provide over three years a total of $25m for ment. I think that point should be made.

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2153

There has also been a significant increase in the resources available in the State system .and no doubt some increase inthose available to the nonState system in terms of the number of teachers. For example, in the time span I have just mentioned, from 1972 to 1980, there was an increase in the number of State school teachers of 35 per cent. The increase in the number of nongovernment school teachers was only 31 per cent. The State system, which it is alleged this Government has knocked down, has increased its number of teachers at a faster rate than 4as the non-State system even though the proportion of students attending school ,in the two systems is exactly the same now as it was in 1972. To pretend that this Government's policies have massively disadvantaged the State system as against the non-State system is evidently nonsensicaL
Let us look at what will happen in the future, There is no doubt that all the projections indicate a growing distaste within the community for the styles of some State schools and State school teachers. There is an increasing desire, evident in the projections, by people to exercise a greater freedom of choice to use other systems. In the S9hools Commission report the lower projection for the non-government primary school enrolments, which last year accounted for about 20 per cent of all enrolments, is an increase to 21.7 per cent by 1984. The higher projection is an increase to as much as 23.8 per cent, which means that the State schools would suffer an off-setting reduction. At the secondary level the same sort of trend is expected. In 1980 26.4 per cent of students attended non-government secondary schools. The lower projection is an increase to 27.3 per cent by 1984. The higher projection is an increase to 28.5 per cent, with off-setting reductions, of course, in the State school system.
Many people might ask: 'Why are people expressing this choice?' It could well be held that the more the people of Australia see of the activities of some teachers' federations around this country the more concerned they become about the level and quality of teaching and the attitudes of teachers in the State school system. The House probably does not need reminding that the New South Wales'Teachers Federation got solidly behind the producers of the recently controversial homosexual kit prepared which they hoped would be distributed in New South Wales schools. The Teachers Federation got so much behind it that it threatened to sue the Federal Government if the money for the kit was withdrawn. Of course, as a result, the Federal Government, regrettably, had to provide that money. This occurred despite the fact that approval for the provision of that money

was obtained by deceit. It is important to note that the Teachers Federation took a strong position requiring the Federal Government to provide the money for that homosexual kit even though approval for the money was obtained in a deceptive manner.
Let me dramatise further the disadvantage that the non-State school system has. I refer to student-teacher ratios. Once again, the position is evident from the Schools Commission report. The latest figures available are those in 1979. In government schools in the primary sector the student-teacher ratio was 20.3 per cent compared with 24.4 per cent in the Catholic school system. That indicates a massive disadvantage in the Catholic school system. Yet there are continual objections from honourable members opposite to our attempts to eliminate that disadvantage. The States are responsible for the State school system. We believe that we have an obligation to provide freedom of choice and equality of opportunity through the non-State system. Quite frankly, I would much rather the subsidies which at present are paid for each child under this Government's policy than the old system which relied much more heavily on a substantial taxation deduction. Under the old system the richer a person was the bigger deduction he got for having a child at a non-State schooL That system did not provide enough assistance to the Catholic education system in particular, which, as I have already outlined, caters to a large degree for the underprivileged and lower income groups in our community.
The disadvantage which I outlined in the primary school system also obtains in the secondary school system. In 1979 government schools had a pupil-teacher ratio of 12.3 to 1 but in Catholic schools on average there were 17 pupils per teacher. This trend is evident in the total staffpupil ratios in the government school systems too. In particular, I think it is worth pointing out the differences in the ways in which the various States run their education systems. It intrigues me when I hear many honourable members opposite and members of the New South Wales Parliament endeavouring to attack the Federal Government for a situation which is far from perfect in the New South Wales education system when in fact the Federal Government is obliged to adopt an even-handed approach across Australia, unless the States agree that it should not do so. Yet when we look at the New South Wales education system we find that its achievement levels under the Karme1 targets are way behind those of other States, particularly Victoria.

2154 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

In 1919 the student-staff ratio in New South In the few minutes available to me I want to say

Wales was 13.4 pupils per staff member and in briefly that there has been a lot of discussion on

Victoria the figure was only 10.9. Why are there the question of whether or not tertiary education

these massive differences? For example, why is should be free. Many honourable members have

the New South Wales student-staff ratio of 13.4 so received a lot of correspondence on this matter.

much worse than those in Tasmania, Victoria, Certainly criticisms have bee~ levelled at the

South Australia, and so on? It seems to me that it question of whether or not a second degree should

bears a direct relationship to the manner in which be provided at the expense of the taxpayer or at

the New South Wales Education Department the expense of the person seeking the degree.

runs its school system. Whether or not that EduMany people in my electorate are in the blue col-

cation Department is competent is a matter for lar worker category. Their prospects of sending a

the State education authorities. But it is a matter child to university, as I understand it, are some-

for us that for the past few years the New South thing like seven times less than the prospects of a

Wales education authorities have mucked around professional family sending a child to university.

with the allocations by the Federal Government Yet these blue collar workers are required to pro-

to education in New South Wales State schools. I vide through their taxation the means by which

am only too well aware of this situation. There is a the professional people of Australia perpetuate

disastrous need for a third high school in my electhemselves through their children by sending

torate. Over the past four years the Federal those children to university. It seems to me to be

Government has provided enough funding for this immoral and improper that the working people of

high school to have been built, heaven knows how Australia, with this seven to one imbalance,

many times over, but the high school has not been should be required to pontribute to the funds of

built for the very simple reason that the State people attending university when there has been

Government of New South Wales has diverted an no increase whatsoever in the prospects of chil-

average of $6.5m a year out of our capital funding dren of blue collar families attending university

to New South Wales for schools and into the resince this new free tertiary eduction system com-

current funding area. It is entitled to do that. I remenced. I believe that that is demonstrated in the

gret that it is entitled to do that, and I point out to Williams report. .

the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) that I have raised this matter several times in the past. I would be most grateful if the Federal Government could look into this matter as closely as possible.

The best thing for us to do would be to wipe out this system, whereby we are perpetuating a professional class at the expense of the worker, and restore a system of means tested scholarships and then open exhibitions for particularly bright chil-

It seems totally wrong and unfortunate that in a State such as New South Wales, which is cryi)1g out for additional capital facilities for new school buildings, particularly in rapidly developing areas such as mine, the federal money allocated for this purpose can be diverted into recurrent spending. Basically, it means that this money can be diverted into placating the demands of an aggressive and hungry Teachers Federation in New South Wales which would rather see the money spent on teachers' salaries-in other words, increasing the number of teachers-than on increasing the facilities which are so desperately needed in developing areas such as mine. When we have a choice between reducing class sizes and providing enough schools in deVeloping areas, surely our first priority should be to provide enough schools in developing areas. It is quite evi-

dren to ensure that the children of working people can go to uoiversity. In particular, we should use the savings from the money being wasted because it is being spread far and wide at the moment to increase the living and other allowances.available to people in the poo~er income groups seeking to go to university. In this way we would do something positive to diminish that savage inbalance. I hope the Government will take that proposition on board. I believe it would be much more democratic than the present system, which works so much to the disadvantage of most of the people of Australia. Nonetheless, I strongly support the present Government's activities in the education area. I commend the Minister for his outstanding contribution in this area. He certainly has been of major support to me in my electorate and to the education systems of Australia.

dent that that priority is not supported by the Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (5.51)-1 com-

New South Wales Government. Not only has it mence by taking up the point put by the honour-

diverted $6.5m over the last four years out of its able member for Macarthur (Mr Baume), which

capital allocation from the Federal Government was based on a half truth. I agree with one half of

and into its recurrent spending but, I understand, that truth. There is, as he said, a 'savage imbal-

it also plans to do so next year.

ance' between the participation rates in tertiary

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2155

education of the children of blue collar workers education participation rates lead to significant

and children from the professional classes. My contractions in job opportunities, demands for

own electorate of Lalor illustrates that very services and demands for educational facilities.

clearly. In a sense, when the honourable member said that we ought to prevent that 'Robin Hood in reverse' situation where the parents of poor children subsidise the children of the rich he was really assuming that nothing can happen or will happen in the whole base of our education system to increase the participation rates of working class children. That seems to be based on a pessimism or fatalism about the future of tertiary education with which I would not want to agree.

Let me illustrate this point: The 1976 census showed that in the electorate of Kooyong 6.92 per cent of the total popUlation had a degree or graduate diploma; in the electorate of Lalor 0.54 per cent; and in the electorate of Mallee 0.98 per cent. If we look for the number of students at universities or CAEs expressed as a percentage of people aged 17 to 24 the figure in Kooyong is 46.05 per cent, in Lalor 10.74 per cent and in Mallee 4.5 per cent. For every person in Lalor with a degree or

I support the amendment moved by the graduate diploma there are two in Mallee and 13

honourable member for Fremantle (Mr in Kooyong. The census figures do not distinguish

Dawkins) and will concentrate my remarks on between universities and CAE students, between

the States Grants (Tertiary Education) Amendpass and honour students or between full time and

ment Bill. It is not adequately grasped how much part time students. If full time university students

access to universities and colleges of advanced had been isolated in this group, there would have

education is confined to particular segments of been a far wider discrepancy. Lalor and Mallee

Australian society. and specific geographical rehave educational profiles like Mississippi,

gions. For example, in the Melbourne metropoliKooyong like California.

tan area the provision of tertiary educational facilities is almost exclusively found in the centre, the north-east and south-east, with grossly inadequate provisions in the north-west and west. This is not confined to Melbourne. We could find a similar situation in comparable areas of Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane and other large cities. Rural areas are similarly disadvantaged.

My electorate of Lalor is part of an educationally disadvantaged area, that is, Melbourne's western suburbs with 520,000 people comprising 19 per cent of the metropolitan population but, because of the particular demographic profile of the area, containing an atypically high numberperhaps 23 per cent or 24 per cent-of Melbourne's children. Melbourne has three

I have done some work in comparing eduuniversities-the University of Melbourne,

cational participation rates in three Victorian fedMonash University and La Trobe University-

eral electoral districts-my own electorate of with, in 1979, a total enrolment of 38,562

Lalor, which is an industrial area to the west of students, and 19 colleges of advanced education

the city, with a heavy migrant concentration; the with 45,950 students, both figures including full

electorate of Kooyong, a residential area in the time and part time students. Only one tertiary

inner eastern suburbs; and the electorate of educational institution is located in the western

Mallee in the north-west of Victoria, running up suburbs. H is the Footscray Institute of

to the South Australian and New South Wales Technology-I never lose an opportunity to point

border. Education participation rates have an out the excellent work that the institute is doing-

enormous cyclical influence in determining the with 2,580 students, only 3.05 per cent of Mel-

type of community which emerges. For example, bourne's total enrolments.

without a significant number of tertiary students it is unlikely that there will be many bookshops in an area. Without bookshops people are likely to devote their free time to television. Children are unlikely to be stimulated by books and may lose any desire to go on to higher education. They are less likely to participate in theatre, live music, and soon.

So, the west starts off with 23 per cent of Melbourne's young people and finishes up with 3 per cent of the enrolments at tertiary institutions. It is true that the Deakin University established at Geelong with 4,400 students has some students from Melbourne's west. The tragedy is that the report of the Victorian fourth university committee in 1971 concluded that there was insufficient de-

There is a cyclical process by which high edumand in the western suburbs to support a univer-

cation participation leads on to a wide range of sity and recommended that priority be given to a

skills, occupations or wages, leading on in turn to fourth university in Melbourne's eastern region.

a broad demand for services, a larger range of serThat seemed to exhibit a depressing circularity in

vice employment, more educational institutions argument. In other words, it is said: 'If there is no

which, in turn, leads on to high educational parinstitution, there is no demand; if there is no de-

ticipation. So the cycle goes on. Conversely, low mand, there is no need for an institution. Where

2156 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

then is there a demand? Where there is already a high level of demand.' So the already existing structure of demand is reinforced and little is done to increase the possibilities of people in the west of Melbourne. J seek leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard Question on Notice No. 43 and the very interesting answer given on 4 December 1980 by the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) under the heading 'Secondary and Tertiary Education'.

Leave granted.

The question and answer read as follows-

Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Education, upon
notice, on 26 November 1980:

(1) Is he able to say whether, in Australian secondary education, there is (a) a high drop-out rate of45 percent between
Years 10 and 12, (b) differing retention rates between Government, Roman Catholic and independent schools, (c) a variation in retention rates at year 12 between State systems,
e.g. 32.4 per cent in NSW and 24.3 per cent in Victoria, (d) a declining proportion of students proceeding from Year 12 to higher education of 54.6 per cent in 1974 and 48.7 per cent in
1977, and (e) a variation in urban educational participation compared to rural participation; if so, what estimates have been made of the percentage of young people aged between 17 and 24 years who would have the intellectual capacity to
benefit from tertiary education in Australia.

(2) Is he also able to say what proportion of Australians in
the 17 to 24 years age group are actually undergoing tertiary education compared to those in (a) the United States of America, (b) Canada, (c) Japan, (d) Switzerland, (e) Norway, (f) Denmark, (g) Sweden, (h) France and (j) the USSR.

Mr Fife-- The answer to the honourable member's questionis as follows:

(1) (a) Enrolments in Australian schools in Year 12 in 1979 were 39.6 per cent of those in Year 10 in 1977. This implies an apparent drop-out rate of 60.4 per cent between Years 10 and 12. It is an apparent, rather than true rate, because the
method of calculation does not explicitly take account of net changes to the school popUlation due to migration, nor of those students who spend more than one year in the same grade.

(b) the apparent retention rates from the first secondary year (Year 7 or Year 8) to Year 12 vary between the types of
schools specified. In 1979 the respective apparent retention rates to Year 12 were:

Government schools-28.9 per cent Catholic schools-44.1 per cent
Other Non-Government schools 87.1 per cent

Note that the above apparent retention rates are affected by transfers between types of schools, as well as by those factors mentioned in (a) above.

(c) there is variation in apparent retention rates between State systems. In 1979 the respective apparent State system retention rates to Year 12 were:

New South Wales

Victoria(a)

Queensland

South Australia

Western Australia

Tasmania(b) .

Northern Territory

.

Australian Capital Territory

% 39.9 23.1 31.1 30.8 28.4 24.8
22.7 70.5

(a) Excludes students in the Tertiary Orientation Program in Technical Schools.
(b) It is possible to obtain the Higher School Certificate either at the end of Year 11 or at the end of Year 12,
(d) of those students enrolled in Year 12 in 1973,54.5 per cent proCeeded to universities and colleges of advanced education in 1974. The corresponding proportion in relation to 1976-1977 was 48.7 per cent. It should be noted however that over this period enrolments in Technical and Further Education institutions were rising rapidly. Statistics on the proportion of Year 12 students proceeding directly on to Technical and Further Education are not available.
(e) there does appear to be a variation in urban educational participation compared to rural participation. Research studies indicate a greater retention rate to Year 12 exists in metropolitan and other urban areas than in rural areas. Once matriculation level is reached, however, the proportion which make the transition to higher education is about as high for country as for metropolitan students.
No estimates have been made of the percentage of young people aged between 17 and 24 years who would have the intellectual capacity to benefit from tertiary education in Australia.
(2) The proportion of 17 to 24 year old Australians undergoing tertiary education compared to other countries is shown in the table below. The proportions are estimates based on the latest available Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) data. Comparable data for the USSR are not available. Care should be,exercised when interpreting this data. In particular the OECD statistics for Australia and the other countries listed refer only to full time students in higher education (i.e. excluding TAFE). Other factors to be considered are differences in education systems, the emphasis placed on part time education in some of the countries listed (for example, Australia), and deficiencies in the scope and coverage of the statistics. A description of how the education systems in each country are classified is contained in 'Classification of Education Systems-Summary Volume' OECD Paris 1975.
TERTIARY PARTICIPATION RATES(a)

Country

17 to 24 yearolds

Per

cent

Australia (1976) . . . . .

8.1

United States of America (1976)

23.4

Canada (1970)

13.1

Japan (1976)

16.8

Switzerland (1976)

6.0

Norway (1976)

7.5

Denmark (1976)

8.9

Sweden (1975)

7.1

France (1976)

9.8

(a) 17 to 24 year old persons enrolled full time in tertiary education as proportions of the 17 to 24 year old persons in the population.
Source: Based on data contained in 'Educational Statistics in OECD Member Countries'-proposed second edition of 'Educational Statistics Yearbook' ED(79)21 Annex, Paris 9 November 1979.
Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the Minister. There is one point in this answer that I want to point out. I asked, amongst other things:
. . . what estimates have been made of the percentage of young people aged between 17 and 24 years who would have

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

7 May 1981' REPRESENTATIVES 2157

the intellectual capacity to benefit from tertiary education in Australia.
There was an uncharacteristically bleak answer from the Minister for Education. His words were:
No estimates have been made of the percentage of young people aged between 17 and 24 years who :vould have the i~ tellectual capacity to benefit from terttary educatIOn In Australia.
In other words, we do not know the degree of intellectual wastage. We do not know where it is found and we do not propose to find out. That was an extremely depressing answer from the Minister.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr BARRY JONES--As I was saying before the suspensionof the sitting for dinner, on 4 December 1980 the Minister for Education gave an extremely interesting answer to a question about secondary and tertiary education. He provided some very depressing figures about the degree of wastage, that is the drop out in secondary schools from the year 7 or year 8, to year 12. There is an enormous variation in the degree of drop-outs between the three school systems. The retention rate in government schools was 28.9 per cent. In Catholic schools it was 44.1 per cent and in other non-government schools it was 87.1 per cent. In other words, more than 70 per cent of government school pupils drop out. In Catholic schools over 50 per cent drop out and in the nonGovernment schools-the so-called private schools-only 13 per cent drop out. There we see a perpetuation of the stratification of Australian society due to poverty in education.
Mr Kent-There is a class difference.
Mr BARRY JONES-There is a very strong class difference, and poverty in education is largely inherited. In the 1960s education was a very big issue in Australia. Part of the process of de-Whitlamisation since 1975 has been a turning away from education, a kind of complacent sense that we had gone as far as we could go in Australia. As I said in another debate last night, in 1980 the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development economic survey on Australia showed out that this country ranked fourteenth of 23 nations listed for educational retention rates for young people aged between 15 years and 19 years. The Williams report on Education, Training and Employment confirmed:
while 60 per cent of our 15-19 age group are in the labor force comparable figures are 24 per cent in Japan and 28 per cent in theU.S.A.
We have the paradoxical situation in Australia of the highest youth unemployment in the advanced world and also the highest youth employment. The reason that it is possible to have both figures

is that we have a very much lower participation rate at the tertiary education level. Although some attempt has been made as far as Technical and Further Education is concerned to increase the actual numbers involved, it is very far from being the equivalent of full time education.
Mr Kent-It will be worse when the Government introduces fees. Universities will be only for the rich then.
Mr BARRY JONES-If the Government introduces fees, of course, the situation will become far worse. Why have we slipped so far behind other technologically advanced nations in education? We are afflicted by a combination of ignorance, apathy and self-satisfaction-a dangerous mixture. What is the explanation for our low participation rates? I can think of three possiblities. First, Australians may be smarter than everybody else and our natural gifts do not need formal education for them to mature. The second possibility is that we are dumber than the people of comparable nations and education could not really help. Third-I suspect this is the correct answer-we are culturally so isolated and so lacking in vitality that we fail to understand that the educational revolution, aborted here, is still going on elsewhere and as a result we are slipping behind. The Williams report made it clear that there is a yawning gap between those who receive tertiary education and graduate to professional employment and those who leave school with minimal and unmarketable qualifications, with skills that are appropriate only for the contracting number of routine and repetitive jobs. The question that this nation and this Parliament have to face is: How can working class people be given access to education which maximises their skills and leads to satisfactory personal and vocational outcomes?
Mr Kent-Charge them fees.
Mr BARRY JONES-The Government's answer and the razor gang's answer is to charge them fees. The school is an excellent sorting machine. It classifies people and sets them apart. Just as cattle and sheep are branded, so school leaves its brand or caste mark for life. Few succeed in washing or shaking it off. If a person attends a poor school and lives in a poverty stricken social environment--
Mr Jacobi-He is fixed for life.
Mr BARRY JONES-He is fixed for life. The school system will do relatively little to overcome these disadvantages. If one is disadvantaged, school will tend to extend those disabilities through life. Cultural poverty seems to be inherited and it is extremely difficult to shake off.

2158 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill

It is an irony that as we approach the goal in some income. In fact it is quite the reverse. While con-

areas or a satisfactory class-pupil ratio in convensumption is the standard measure of outer life, on

tionally equipped classrooms-a goal that has which we place so much emphasis, creativity and

been pursued by all parties for some time-this expression remain the key to inner life. The

goal may recede, turn into a mirage and prove abincreasing tendency towards division of labour

solutely irrelevant. The crippling effects of eduand the fragmentation of knowledge forces many

cational and cultural poverty are causes of and people to seek fulfilment outside work, by active

consequences of unequal access to power. The participation in sport, gardening, hobbies or the
middle and upper classes have access to inforarts, Or to suppress self-expression through

mation and power but the working class does not. increased dependence on alcohol, drugs, spectator

H existing economic, social or educational systems sport and television. As the American education

create or reinforce information poverty, then in writer, James Coleman argued, life used to be

an increasingly information~based society the deexperience-rich and stimulus poor; now it is

gree of disability suffered by the poor must grow experience-poor and stimulus rich. Culture is

wider with every additional year of unequal outoften perceived as an optional extra, reserved for

comes in education. While this disparity exists it the highly educated-the icing on the cake. Four

will be impossible to bring about a political redisthousand years of human history before the In-

tibution of power and existing hegemonic strucdustrial Revolution demonstrates how creativity

tures must continue. The 'skill mix' shifts each and work were integrated and that the urge to

year to the disadvantage of the poor. Language make appears to be universal. Some nations have

ability was less relevant when migrants were had long traditions of intense personal partici-

employed as labourers or process workers in facpation in specific cultural forms-for example,

tories, but with higher personal skills being pottery, calligraphy and writing poetry in Japan;

required in sophisticated service employment, a music in Hungary; and soccer in Latin America.

poor command of English will disqualify many In addition, creativity has often been associated

migrants from work. It is true that the States with a happy and vigorous old age.

Grants (Schools Assistance) Act does make some attempt to improve access to multicultural facilities, but there is a strong element of tokenism in it-not intended necessarily by the Minister for Education-but I believe that is what the effect will be.

In working class education, highly specific training-for example, in typing and shorthand, dressmaking, cooking, woodworking and metalworking-does not necessarily guarantee employ-
ment, income or personal development. Indeed, the reverse is true. The idea that a young man's

I conclude by pointing out that there are prospects could be ensured by putting a spanner basically two kinds of educational experiences in his hand, pushing him out the door and watchpeople need to cope with life. There is the eduing him go on to fame and fortune is now anach-

cation that assists the development of the inner ronistic, dating from the time when people were

life, the personality and there is education to described by their function, as 'hands'. I say to the

strengthen the outer life. Education for inner life Minister that the extent of unrecognised and

covers personal growth, creativity, independent untapped talent in the working class in Australia

thought and evaluation, the generation of psychic remains the great unknown in Australian edu-

income, and aesthetic factors. Education for outer cation. Very often we are inclined to take the patlife covers economic relations, employment, conronising view that there is nothing we can do

sumption pattern, tool using, income generation about it, that it is futile to try to expect people in

and group responses. In Australia middle class working class areas to be able to aspire to a higher education puts a very heavy emphasis on personal degree of participation in education. We tend to

development. I regret to say that in working class get that recurrent cycle---

areas-we have heard these expressions from

many Ministers, not from the Minister for EduMr Jacohi-They get locked in.

cation but certainly from the Prime Minister (Mr
Malcolm Fraser) and the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) there is a tremendous emphasis that all that is needed in working class education are qualifications for income earning.

Mr BARRY JONES-They get locked in, with low expectations. Because there are low expectations there appear to be low demands. Because there are low demands poor provisions are made. That is a tragedy and the social wastage

I think that the emphasis on personal developthat is involved in Australia is not in this nation's

ment in middle class education in teaching interest. I urge that before the Minister comes

languages, the arts and literature, does not inhibit back with his next Bill he asks the Schools Com-

employment prospects or the capacity to generate mission to examine the principles on which it is

States Grants (Tertiary Education) Bill

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2159

operating to make sure that educational participation is truly democratic and pluralist.
Amendment negatived. Original question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time. Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed.
That the Bill be now read a third time.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (8.13)-1 indicate that whilst we are not dividing on the Opposition's amendments to this Bill and the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill, this is not to be taken as any diminution of our opposition to the changes that have been recommended and the decisions that have been taken in relation to the Lynch committee's report.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived. Original question resolved in the affirmative. ' Bill read a second time. Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Fife) read a third time.
REVIEW OF COMMONWEALTH FUNCTIONS
Ministerial Statement' Debate resumed from 30 April, on the following paper presented by Mr Malcolm Fraser:
Review of Commonwealth Functions-Ministerial Statement, 30 April 1981.
and on motion by Mr Sinclair:

Bill read a third time.

That the House take note of the paper.

STATES GRANTS (TERTIARY EDUCATION ASSISTANCE) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 30 April, on motion by MrFife:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (8.16)-Whilst this Bill was debated cognately with the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Bill I formally move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not denying the Bill a second reading, the House condemns the ill-considered and grossly inequitable changes to the funding, organisation and financing of students in tertiary education as announced in the Review of Commonwealth Functions, in that:
(l) the re-introduction of fees is not only a breach of an election undertaking but will grossly disadvantage students with limited means and will compromise Australia's research effort;
(2) the gutting of the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme will confirm tertiary education as the preserve of the rich, and
(3) the heavy handed threat in the review to 30 Colleges of Advanced Education is based on the wholly false premise that the consolidation of single purpose colleges will result in cost savings in spite of the Tertiary Education Commission's advice to the contrary'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie) - Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Barry Jones-I second the amendment.

Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (8.17)-Last week the people of Australia witnessed some of the most reprehensible actions yet taken by the Fraser Government. Given this Government's ccntinuing shameful record, I put to the House that that is, indeed, a mouthful. Nevertheless, I stand by it. I think the actions of last week really add to the total shame of this Government. Last week the Government cut, slashed, shaved, revised, eliminated and sold off. These were the themes of last week. Since Australia is, by any standard, one of the world's most prosperous and most affluent countries and certainly one of the major trading powers, one can only ask why. Have we gone crazy; has the manic obsession of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) with deficits and with getting his own way pushed him past the point of reason? Affluence has changed Australia, at least under this Government. We were once a country of adventurous and radical people deeply concerned with social rights. We have changed to a conservative country, more deeply concerned with preserving the standard of living of the haves, with great regard for the have-nots both in and out of Australia. Under this Government, overseas aid to developing countries, to countries in our area, the Third World countries with a shamefully low standard of living has almost disappeared. I instance the cutting off of aid to Vietnam. Surely we owe the Vietnamese people some assistance. This has not been so under this Government.

2160 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

I want to come back to the new health care prohave us believe that everyone in Australia must be

posals. The changes to the health scheme anprepared to make sacrifices for the good of the

nounced last week and the recommendations of economy; that we all have to pull our belts in a

the Lynch razor gang together amount to little little, including you, Mr Deputy Speaker, which

other than a second Budget and can be regarded might be a decent problem.

only as a part of an overall move by this Government to opt out completely of its responsibility to the States and to the Australian people. No longer is this Government prepared even to pretend that

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dohie)-I trust that is not a reflection on the Chair?

it is providing services to the Australian people in Mr JOHN BROWN-No, sir, only on the

return for their taxes. It now intends simply to expansion of your personality. We all have to pull

collect the taxes and tell the people to look to in our belts a little, even me. To use the Prime

State governments or to private enterprise to proMinister's much quoted expression, life was not

vide the services. All this has been done in the meant to be easy for any of us. I wonder what the

name of smaller government. The Prime Minister vast majority of low and middle income earners ih

has embraced the term 'smaller government' as this country feel when they see wealthy pro-

his philosophy and quotesit as if it were holy writ. fessionals all around them employing smart ac-

What is this smaller government that the Prime countants to develop schemes by which they can

Minister is always talking about? The Governavoid paying taxes or when they read in the

ment's total expenditure on the public sector has papers about people such as Mr Robert Holmes

been running at 38.8 per cent of total government a'Court cooly paying out $800,000 for a racehorse

outlays. The great inroads into this figure and the at the recent yearling sales. Obviously life was not

much heralded cuts in government expenditure meant to be easy for that type of privileged per-

produced by the razor gang will reduce governsonl When the Government with its much-

ment spending in the public sector by all of 0.4 per vaunted cuts has been able to shave a minuscule

cent, when it is running at 38.8 per cent. I remind part of government expenditure, it is strange that

honourable members that during the period of the people such as Robert Holmes a'Court, who can

Whitlam Government which was widely criticised pay more than half a million dollars for a race-

by the then Opposition for encouraging big horse, can manage, as he has in the last few years,

government and for letting growth in the Public to amass a total of $59m tax free because the

Service run wild, total government expenditure in Government will not close the loopholes or will

the public sector was only 36 per cent, less than not introduce some form of tax on wealthy people

this Government's expenditure even after the such as him who are leaving the working class of

effects of the razor gang have been taken into Australia to pick up the tab for the Government's

account. So much for this Government's rhetoric expenses.

about small government.

There was another strange manifestation in

But there was a strange manifestation this Sydney last week. The Lend Lease corporation

week. I am sure honourable members can recall sold Australia Square, a rather prominent build-

that when tax indexation was introduced it was ing in the middle of our city, for a nice tax free

presented by the Prime Minister as a means of profit of $50m. I wonder what the taxpayers earn-

keeping government honest and small, to stop its ing $9,000 or $10,000 a year think about that

spending rising in line with the inflation fed when they are asked to dip their hand into their

expansion of Commonwealth Government inpocket every week. If the razor gang wanted to do

come tax collection. By abolishing tax indexation something why did it not do something in that

the Prime Minister has cynically abandoned any area? It is not the Holmes a'Courts of this world

notion of small government. But to do so in the who will be disadvantaged by the Government's

same week as the razor gang reported is simply an dismantling of the health scheme or by cuts

insult to common sense. It is a ludicrous state of imposed by the razor gang. Those who bear the

affairs.

brunt of the Government's policies will be those

What the Government did last week in reneging on its responsibility for health care and in cutting government services is just a continuation

people struggling to raise a family on a low wage and who are now forced to find several hundred extra dollars a year to pay for health insurance.

of its general philosophy of creating an even wider Perhaps we might thin k of hard working public

division between the wealthy and those who have servants whose jobs have been placed in jeopardy

to bear the burden for the wealthy-the low and by a Government whim. It is easy enough to deal

middle income earners. The Prime Minister, like a savage blows against these people with the stroke

latter day Otto Niemeyer, might I suggest, would of a pen. This Government ignores the human

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2161

suffering which these changes will entail. What the likelihood of increased health contributions.

the cuts in the Public Service mean is this: Not He said that that would be a matter for the States

only are 17,000 jobs under threat but also public to determine. In this, as in everything else, the

servants, those people who serve the public, will Government is ignoring its part in causing the

have less time to spend on their tasks. They will problem and is pushing the responsibility for the

have less research back-up, less training and deinevitable cost increases on to the States. The

velopment and so we will have a less able, a less Feds committed the crime and they are simply

open, a less informed, a less innovative and a less using the States as scapegoats. Who is going to

compassionate administration. Is this really a step benefit from the changes to the health scheme?

forward for society in Australia in 1981? Could Certainly not the State governments and certainly

members of the Government really justify that as not individual Australians. Those who will benefit

a step forward? Is this what the Prime Minister from the Government's action will be the share-

wants? Does he want a situation in which the holders of the health insurance schemes, who will

more affluent we become the more selfish we reap a bonanza from a vastly expanded member-

become?

ship, the owners of private hospitals and the doc-

If we look at the changes to the health scheme as an example of the hardships the Government is imposing on ordinary people we find that there has been a return to the pre-Medibank dark ages of the 1960s. I am sure that the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt), who is at the table, would

tors. The high income earners of our society will be the beneficiaries, not the men and women struggling to bring up children on low incomes in places such as the western suburbs of Sydney, which I represent, or the western suburbs of Melbourne.

not be proud to be the present Minister for Health. I am sure that he is happy he is now the Minister for Transport and does not have to preside over these sorts of health cuts. In the 1960s the people were forced into health schemes or else ran the risk of facing huge hospital bills if they were unlucky enough to become ill. Is that the way that life runs in Australia in 1981 ? Should life be a lottery for people who are too poor or whose income is so low that paying into a health insurance fund becomes a hardship? Do these people have to live life like a lottery hoping that they or their kids will not get sick?
To make matters worse the Government has slashed its overall funding of health care, forcing the States to find the necessary finance to keep their hospitals from closing. The people of New South Wales, which happens to be your State, and my State, Mr Deputy Speaker, are probably more

Health. care is just one area where ordinary people will suffer. If we look at the Lynch report we can see many more areas where suffering will occur. The Government claims. that in making the cuts that it has set out in the Lynch committee's report it has merely. trimmed off those services which were not an appropriate field of government activity. What will happen instead, though, is that huge gaps will now be created in services such as nutrition research, preventive medicine and education innovation simply because government is the only body interested in those areas. Private enterprise just will not fill those gaps. The Government pulls out of those fields because there is no profit to be made in them. Inevitably, private enterprise will not fill those gaps. The big sufferers are the public and the country as a whole.

fortunate than: others in this respect because they at least have a sympathetic State government and a Premier who refuses to bow to the pressure placed upon him by the Federal Government to impose a second income tax. Nevertheless, money for health care has to come from somewhere and New South Wales will have to find some $150m extra this year in order to meet its health commitments. Obviously, hospital fees will have to rise dramatically and, in fact, it was announced today that hospital bed costs will rise from $50 to $80 a day in New South Wales. This increase will be passed on to individuals in the form of greatly increased health insurance contribution rates.

The Lynch report has advocated the elimination of 17,000 Public Service jobs. The Government claims that this will be achieved largely through natural wastage. People who leave the Public Service simply will not be replaced. This is all very well. However, the people whQ leave will be those who have the brightest prospects in private enterprise. It is precisely those people who have represented the cream of the Public Service who will be most tempted to leave a service where morale is low and rewards poor to seek brighter opportunities elsewhere. This will leave a dispirited Public Service lacking in talent, overworked and unable to cope with the demands of

I read an article in the Sydney Sun Herald over those they should be serving-members of the

the weekend in which I noticed that the Minister public. Already government departmep.ts are

for Health (Mr MacKellar) was questioned about finding it difficult to cope with inadequate staffing

2162 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

levels, morale within the Public Service is generally low and the public is forced to endure delays in its dealings with government offices. The effect of even greater staff cuts will be devastating.

In the few moments left to me I would like to refer to a problem within my own electorate. In 1973 the then Whitlam Government purchased a block of land in Parrmatta at a cost of something like $5m with the intention of building a Commonwealth office building on that site. The rationale behind that was not just the housing of public servants in a building owned by the Government, by the people, but the many social benefits inherent in it. Anybody with a knowledge of town planning believes that to get the public servants away from the centre of Sydney and out into the areas where they live is a social advantage. They are saved from the problems of travelling for an hour a day and the cost of transport, and from the inherent problems of clogged roads and overutilised trains in which they travel to the city.

The building started by the Whitlam Govern-

ment included some very necessary community

facilities which are very much need in my city. As

soon as this Government came to power in

January 1976 building was stopped and the plan

was shelved. Since then the project has

languished. A few months ago I was optimistic be-

cause the Minister for Industry and Commerce

(Sir Phillip Lynch) visited Parramatta and

encouraged us to believe that the Government

might be about to make a decision to build. How-

ever, no decision has in the Lynch report

tyheattbfeuenndms hadave~abnedeInncoutticfeodr

government buildings already started in Adelaide

and Townsville. Also, in one bland statement it

was stated that surplus Commonwealth land

would be sold, and I fear that that might be the

prospect for the land in Parramatta. Obviously,

the Government would get a big profit because

the land is now worth about $20m. I dare say that

land in Parramatta is under great threat.

Mr Burr-What does Tom Vren think?

Mr JOHN BROWN-Someone mentioned the honourable member for Reid. I add also that I have noticed that the Glebe Estate is now on offer to the New South Wales Government. I hope that that Government will take over the Estate. The purchase of the Glebe Estate was one of the great achievements of the Whitlam Government. This area of old homes was bought, the houses were restored, and the traditional residents of Glebe have been able to stay there. It would be a dreadful tragedy if this land were passed over to private enterprise.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie) -Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr McLEAN (Perth) (8.32)-1 support the statement by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) outlining the Government's Review of Commonwealth Functions. The Opposition has adopted a very curious position on the Government's expenditure reduction policy. It seems to want to have a bob each way. It spent all of the last election campaign criticising us for being a party of big government expenditure and high taxes. It was certainly curious to hear the socialists criticise the Government on those grounds. In fact, the socialist party almost won the last election by criticising the Liberal Party for being the big government, high tax party. On philosophical grounds at least, that was a curious position for Opposition members to adopt. Therefore, it is also curious that they should now criticise the Government for trying to redress the imbalance by moving towards smaller government and lower taxes-the very things they seemed to espouse during the last campaign.
The situation is even more curious when we read of the socialist party's own position regarding the public sector and taxation. Its position seems to depend on whether it is in government or opposition and whether it is approaching an election. For example, last week the Leader Opposition (Mr Hayden) severely criticised the Government for reducing the Government sector in order to allow the more productive private sector to expand. Yet in 1975, when the Leader of the Opposition was Treasurer, he said:
We expect that as the expansion of public sector activity is restrained, the opportunities for private sector expansion will improve.
When in opposition, and well removed from any election, the Leader of the Opposition said when talking about the desirability of getting lower taxes in Australia:
This sort of approach strikes directly at the democratic socialist notion that equality and equity can only be assured by a stronger public sector.
In 1978, also far removed from any election, the shadow Treasurer said that a future Labor government would:
. . . face a mammoth task in rebuilding the public sector and an equally mammoth task in convincing the electorate that it should pay a higher level of tax to enable us to do so.
It seems to me that the ALP is all over the place on this issue. It has different views at different times and seems to be guided more by votes and political expediency than by high principle. If the Labor Party is noW suggesting that we should

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2163

have tax cuts but no expenditure cuts then it basically is advocating its old economic policies of massive deficit blowouts, to be financed either by printing more money and causing inflation, or by going into massive debt, causing interest rate hikes and placing future generations of Australians in debt because we, the present generation, decided to live beyond our means.
The basic reason for the present cuts is to reduce the overall public sector borrowing requirement which has been a major cause of the interest rate rises in Australia. The fact remains that governments have to either tax or axe if they are to have responsible Budgets. If that is not done government expenditure rises. Any government expenditure increase that is not financed either by taxes or borrowings simply leads to more inflation. The ALP still clings to the old economic doctrines in accusing this Government of increasing unemployment to control inflation. The shadow Treasurer said this very recently when commenting on the latest consumer price index increase. The Leader of the Opposition still seems to share that belief. Yet in 1975 the Leader of the Opposition, the then Treasurer, said:
Today it is inflation itself which is the central policy problem. More inflation simply leads to more unemployment.

unemployment. It tried to explain its poor economic performance in terms of depressed international economic conditions rather than in terms of its own domestic mismanagement. At the present time, with depressed international conditions, the policies of this Government of expenditure restraint and reduced deficits have led to a situation where almost every economic indicator available shows that we in Australia now have a stronger economy than almost any other country in the industrialised world.
Employment levels over the past two years~ years of government expenditure restraint~have risen substantially. Labour force figures released this week show that total employment rose by 146,900 in the year to March 1981 and by 328,500 in the last two years, with the overall position of schoolleavers improving strongly. Certainly, unemployment is still too high, but at least we are making some progress on this very pressing problem. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) today issued some more figures which state the unemployment situation in April. He said:
. . . preliminary unemployment estimates released today by the Australian Bureau of Statistics were the best figures since the monthly surveys were introduced in February 1978.
The Minister further stated:

Once again, there is no consistency in ALP economic policy. It just happens to be convenient from, time to time for it to change its policies to meet the political demands of the moment. This Government has been criticised for being harsh. People have said that the razor gang decisions will cause more unemployment. I think that the Press comment in this regard has been most interesting. Many editorials have criticised the Government for not going far enough, but they have agreed that the nation would be better off for the trend established by these cuts. The Australian Financial Review last Friday stated that there will not be wholesale redundancy of public servants. It made the point that the staff reductions of about 17,000 people would be achieved by, to use its own terms, natural wastage, resignation, retirements and lower recruitment.
To suggest that decreasing government expenditure will increase unemployment ignores the fact that such expenditure is financed by taxes. Higher taxes simply mean that people have less to spend and therefore businesses have less to sell and must reduce their costs and levels of operation, including their levels of employment. The Labor Party obviously has forgotten its own experience in government, when record increases in government expenditure led to record increases in

. . . the estimated total of . . . people unemployed and looking for full time work was the lowest April figure recorded.
To suggest, therefore, that in economic terms expenditure cuts are both heartless and incorrect policy completely ignores not only economic sense but also the facts of recent economic history, both in Australia and overseas. Surely the latest employment figures and the soundness of our major economic indicators suggest not an abandoning of our policies of expenditure restraint but a strengthening of these policies as outlined in the Prime Minister's speech. I cannot see how these results indicate a harsh policy or one lacking compassion. There was no mention of hitting the needy in the welfare area, and neither should there be any mention of that. Surely this policy is the only one which offers a humane, longer term approach to our major economic and social problems: It has already led to better economic performance and to more employment. What is harsh about that? What is harsh about increasing the capacity of the Government, through these cuts, to increase its manoeuvrability by giving it the option of moving towards a combination of lower taxes and/or a concentration of more resources on the really needy sections of society? This is a flexibility which the Government did not have before these cuts were announced.

2164 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

These cuts have proved that the capacity of the Government to move in these directions can be increased without in any way placing increased burdens on the welfare sector.
I believe the Government can do much more in this direction. For example, we should now decide not to proceed with the construction of a neW and permanent parliament house and, similarly, we should look at some of the more extravagant fringe benefits enjoyed by members of this Parliament. In this context I want to stress to the House the importance of the present public perception of members and senators of all parties. I think some cynicism and scepticism about elected representatives is a good and healthy thing but my own contact with my electorate indicates that there is a belief-rightly or wrongly, it does not matter-that we as the elected representatives confer benefits upon ourselves quickly, generously, unobtrusively and with unanimity but, at the same time, expect others in the public sector to accept restraints and cuts. I believe it is important that the cuts involve an equal bearing of the sacrifice by all sections of the public sector, including ourselves. If this program of public sector cuts, which I support~ is to have credibility and gain the degree of public acceptance we require, we should apply to ourselves the same standards we apply to others in the community.
I want to refer to the new parliament house which, at present, is expected to cost in excess of $300m at current prices. Certainly that figure will grow. Within my own party I have long been opposed to the construction of this building. I believe it is now appropriate, given the Government's report of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, to restate this view because, after all, it took some 350 decisions of the so-called razor gang to save something like $560m of taxpayers' funds. With one decision not to proceed with the new parliament house we could effect savings equal to 40 per cent of that total amount achieved by the razor gang. When the decision to proceed with the new parliament house was made it was said that it would provide the nation with a sense of national identity, a sense of national pride, that it would be a memorial to parliamentary democracy, and so forth. Very lavish phrases and many superlatives were thrown about. I reject that proposition on several grounds. Firstly, the integrity of parliamentary democracy or the achieving of a sense of national pride does not depend on bricks and mortar-it depends on what happens inside that building; it depends on the quality of government and the dignity of the members of parliament who sit within that building.

The second point I make relates to some of the other major projects in the Australian Capital Territory which are being shelved at the moment, such as the national museum. The point is that most of my constituents in Perth, and most residents of Western Australia, because of our isolation and the present structure of air fares in this country, are denied the opportunity to visit and see these so-called national buildings which their taxes have helped to build. I sometimes think that some of these things, such as the National Art Gallery and national museums, ought to be built in some of the more populous centres of this country.
The third point I make in regard to the new parliament house is that the building we occupy now is an historic building and with some minor additions, and some changes to our present Standing Orders, it could certainly suit our foreseeable needs. As I said earlier, I extend my argument in this regard to include also certain fringe benefits enjoyed by members of parliament, particularly those benefits which have no real influence on how well we do our jobs. I mention the need to restrict members' fringe benefits not because they constitute major public expenditure savings; they do not. It is not a matter of dollars and cents. I raise the matter because some action ought to be taken in those areas if we, as members of parliament, wish to apply expenditure restraints in other areas of the public sector and in so doing maintain credibility and some degree of public acceptance for these expenditure cuts.
I support the concept embraced in the statement by the Prime Minister last Thursday. It is in accord with every major strand of economic thinking by respectable bodies overseas. Within Australia there have been many comments in support of this strategy. I would like to quote from the latest monthly publication of ANZ Bank Business Indicators. That publication said:
The outstanding feature of the Australian economy is the lift now occurring in private sector demand and in total employment.
It goes on to explain rises in consumption expenditure and the massive increases in private investment expenditure in Australia, and then states:
This expansion by the private sector should lift the flow of revenue to Government. At the same time it should also obviate the need for direct Government involvement in stimulating economic activity . . . In particular, the growth in private sector economic activity should provide scope for some reduction in the growth of Government spending without adversely affecting total economic activity. Considering present and expected growth in total investment expenditure, it would be desirable for the Government to lessen its demands in order to maintain an economic environment conducive to further abatement in the rate ofinflation.

Review o/Commonwealth Functions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2165

On economic grounds, responsible management grounds and compassionate grounds I believe the decisions of this committee of review announced last Thursday are responsible and in the best long term interests of this country.

Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (8.47)-This debate is in response to the statement of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to Parliament last Thursday on the Review of Commonwealth Functions. We are told that this review had as its aims the streamlining and fining down of Commonwealth operations, partly by withdrawing from functions more appropriately handled by the States or private enterprise and partly by rationalising the functions which properly belong to the Commonwealth. The Prime Minister went on further to say that the aim of the review in the wider perspective was to establish the conditions under which there can be increased opportunities for all and better care for those in need. To complete the scenario of the results of the review's findings, one needs to read to the end of page 3 of
the statement.

If one did not know our Prime Minister and those who support him, or at least sit behind him, one would think that those who sit on the Government benches really had the interests of all Australians at heart. But we know differently. What has been written in this review is fairy story stuff and is unworthy of being espoused by this Government. T~e speech writers who prepared the scenario should be writing for Disneyland or the Hanna-Barbera organisation, because they are writing about matters affecting Australians of which their political masters could not care less.

The Government has expressed the view that

there should be small government and increased

activity taken up by the private sector with the

object of creating employment opportuni~ies.and

of giving people a greater say over theu lives.

Hence we have seen a series of attacks on the

Public' Service and the public sector by this

Government over recent months, culminating in

the decision to reduce public services as outlined

in the review document. In so doing, the Govern-

ment. is taking a typical Milton Friedman attitude.

Friedman holds that such services are relentlessly

in conflict with liberty and that the market

accords to the individual the sovereignty of

vchicoeisc,e~uwrthaielrseaosrthime psatiartse,thaast

it enlarges choice. By

its its

serac-

ceptance of a large Public Service and a protective

role for the state, democracy commits itself to an

irreversible descent into totalitarianism and com-

munism. Professor Friedman is firm about this

prospect, and has stated:

If we continue our present trend and our free society is replaced by a col1ective society, the intel1ectuals who have done so much to drive us down this path will not be the ones who run the society; the prison, the insane asylum, or the graveyard would be their fate . . . or shaH we have the wisdom and the courage to change our course, to learn from experience, and to benefit from a rebirth of freedom.
Obviously Government members have been made disciples of Milton Friedman's theories because what they are proposing has a marked similarity. The Government had best beware as there are grave disadvantages in being associated with a policy that will not work. It should be noted that this arch exponent of monetarism, Professor Friedman, has already been forced to disassociate himself from Israel and Chile where he was once celebrated as a prophet. The Friedman policy in Britain has so far produced only high inflation, deep internal stagnation, the highest unemployment since the Great Depression and some indication that he would like to be detached from these policies as well. I believe the Government is misreading both the economic signs and the political signs in taking the actions outlined in the review and by reducing the public sector community involvement. The policies of smaller government espoused by the Thatcher and Reagan administration have not worked and will not work.
The attack which we see on the public sector at the present time is a generalised attack. Education, urban services and other conventional functions of government as well as assistance to the sick, public housing funding, assistance to the unemployed and the unemployable and other government enterprises are all under attack. We are told that people must be left free to choose. The divesting of government activities to private enterprise is supposed to create a greater freedom of choice, more employment, economic growth and a better life for all. In putting forward such theories, of course, the Government is pretending that the giant financial institutions and multinational corporations do not exist. These corporations control and govern the world economynot governments. These corporations have the power to set prices and to create employment or unemployment, whichever suits their need, from country to country. They influence extensively the taste of consumers and, similarly, they organise their supplies of raw materials. With all of this influence these corporations erode the power of the market.
Does anyone suggest that corporations such as the Bank of America, Shell, IBM, Philips, Exxon and Esso do not have a great influence on the finances and market forces of Australia? It is because of these influences that the Government's

2166 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review of Commonwealth Functions

policies will not work. The disbandment of the Prices Justification Tribunal will make it even more difficult to control any excesses. It needs to be remembered that the abolition of the Prices Justification Tribunal will not be welcomed by the rural industry also. Inquiries into stevedoring, woolbroking charges, spare parts and fuel prices all save primary producers a lot of money. The National Farmers Federation recently said that PJT recommendations meant a $43.5m saving on fuel prices for primary producers alone.
I will now turn my attention to some of the more specific matters outlined in the Review of Commonwealth Functions. One of the hardest hit areas is that of education. In that area we have seen monetary reductions over a wide range of activities. The first item is to restrict the opportunity for persons over 19 years of age to receive a Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowance while doing their Higher School Certificate through the Adult Secondary Education Assistance Scheme. This is a miserly decision as not more than 2,000 persons throughout Australia took advantage of the scheme during 1980. Many of the people who were unable to complete their HSC during their school life saw this as the only opportunity to better themselves in later life. Similarly, the decision to introduce fees for students undertaking second degree or diploma courses in universities and colleges of advanced education is obviously only the thin edge of the wedge for the eventual reintroduction of fees for all1evels of courses.
Over a period of many years this country has established a proud record in the availability of free education which has enabled all persons, including young people, irrespective of their financial background, the opportunity of education so that they can procure a better standard of living for themselves and their families. Education must never be linked to the financial standing of individuals. The restriction of payment of TEAS allowances to those persons required to live away from home by reason of geography or home conditions means that the only students eligible will be those from country locations. At the present time the scheme is a -joke as the majority of students receiving the allowance come from country locations. Because of the fact that their families usually operate under income splitting schemes this allows them to be satisfactorily means tested so that they receive the benefit.
The supposed rationalisation of colleges of advanced education will do nothing but reduce the effectiveness of these colleges. In New South Wales those hit the hardest are those located in the heavily populated areas where the need is

greatest. The Milperra College of Advanced Education, which is within my electorate, is one of those affected. The population of the region served by this college is as large as that of South Australia. It is the only college in the southwestern region of Sydney-the fastest growing metropolitan area in any part of Australia. The college has 800 students, 62 on the academic staff and 62 non-academic staff. The college conducts a great many courses including those concerned with teacher education, multicultural education, career education, social welfare and the arts. Should that college be amalgamated, it would deprive access to tertiary education to 20 per cent of those students because of travel problems. It may be of interest to note that few of the colleges of advanced education in the country were affected. For instance, the Northern Rivers College of Advanced Education, which is in the electorate of the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony), has not been the subject of any cuts of the razor gang. Tf one has seen this college one would say that it should be the first to be affected. So much for rationale and fairness!
Another area to suffer from the Government's decision is Aboriginal affairs. The cruel reductions by the Government have seen the percentage of the national Budget spent on the recovery of Aboriginal Australians reduced from 0.9 per cent in 1974-75 to 0.6 per cent in 19S0-SJ-a reduction of over 30 per cent in the six years of this Fraser Government. The hopes concerning the lives of these, our fellow Australians, have been dashed once again-just after their hopes had been raised in the early 1970s by a caring and sympathetic Labor Government. It makes the policy of self determination impossible because they are being denied the resources necessary for management. This is not good enough for the Aboriginal men, women and children who should be treated as equal partners in the development of our great country.
The 44 pages of the Prime Minister's statement made no commitment to the future but instead showed that the Government had opted out of significant areas of government responsibility. It has no mandate from the people for doing so. I suggest that the Australian people will not support the supposed free enterprise government for much longer because they will come to realise between now and the next election that this Government has abrogated its responsibilities to others rather than pursuing a course of providing incentives and assistance to those in our coummunity who are most in need of them. In those important areas of education, health, job-creation, pensioner

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2167

benefits, housing and urban transportation, the Australia decide what type of government they

Government has failed the people of Australia.

want.

The Government's cynical exercise of cutting back on necessary welfare areas so that it can give some rebates in direct taxation payments in 1982-83-just prior to the next election-whilst increasing indirect taxes, will not be accepted by the Australian electorate because this Government has lost its credibility. The big difference between members sitting on this side of the House and those on the Government side is that we care about people. We care about their quality of life, the type of world that they live in and the type of world that their children will grow up in. We be-
lieve the benefits derived from the resources of this great country should be shared amongst the people of Australia. We have always held to those principles in the past and will hold to them in the future because we belong to a party of principle. We believe only governments can ensure that people receive their rightful share of a country's
wealth and that they are cared for in time of need. We do not believe the private sector can ensure
those things.

Mr BURR (Wilmot) (9.1)-J was intrigued by the speech of the honourable member for Banks (Mr Mountford). He implied throughout his speech that the Federal Government and, I assume, the State governments should increase their spending for various types of public enterprise. I suppose to the electors in the electorate of Banks and other electorates held by Labor representatives that might seem to be terribly attractive. Nowhere in the speech by the honourable member for Banks or, for that matter in speeches by other Opposition members, was the correlation made that increases in public spending also mean increases in taxes. Governments can spend only the moneys they take from the people in taxes. If the Australian Labor Parly advocates that governments should increase expenditure, for what ever reason they are also saying that they should take more money in taxes so that they can
spend it. If the Labor Party is the party of principle and honesty it claims to be why do not its members tell the people that if they are to spend more money they will also take more from them

The private sector friends of this Government in taxes? If they are going to be honest, they have

do not have a good record in corporate responsito admit that.

bility or public service. In fact, the opposite is the
case. Hardly a day goes past without one of its corporate colleagues being arraigned for corporate crime. Today's Sydney Morning Herald records the fact that a friend of this Government and, I understand, a former Treasurer of the Country Party, Harry M, Miller, is to go for trial on 22 charges for breaches of the Crimes Act or

Let us refer to some of the things that the Australian Labor Party would do if it were given the opportunity to govern. I refer to what the Labor Party said at its conference held in Adelaide in July 1979. It said:
Labor is committed by its Platform to 'an expanded interventionist role by Government, and a responsible development of the public sector to satisfy social needs and provide

the Securities Industry Act following the collapse employment'.

of the theatre booking agency, Computicket What the Labor Party is advocating and what it

Australia Pty Ltd.

was charged to carry out by that conference in

Mr Scholes-He was appointed to a number of boards by this Government. .

Adelaide, rather than a reduction in the size of government and the taxes that are taken by government from the people, is an expansion of

Mr MOUNTFORD-That is correct. He was appointed to those boards by this Government. These friends of the Government put our former bushrangers to shame. Yet it is to these people ,that the Government is saying that we should entrust our future. I have no doubt that the. un-

the role of government to involve itself in the private lives of individuals throughout Australia. In order to do that it was also charged to take more taxes from the people. It was committed to do that by the conference in Adelaide. It will do it in a number of ways.

principled activities of this Government will be I cannot go through all the motions passed at

fairly judged. by the people of Australia at the the Adelaide conference but I will inform the

next election when a Labor government, people of Australia about some of them. Let us

dedicated to improving the quality of life for Auslook at the Labor Party's health policy for a start.

tralians, will be elected. The people of Australia The most discredited policy that was

will not forget the way in which this Government implemented by the Labor Government during

has deceived them by its constant breaking of the years 1972 to 1975 without doubt was the

election promises since it took office in 1975. This Medibank policy. It cost this country more than it

Government of deceit and deception, which now could possibly afford. It pushed health costs

lies in tatters, should resign and let the people of through the roof. We are still paying the price of

2168 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

that policy. This Government, through announcecountry can well do without? The taxpayers can-

ments made last week by the Minister for Health not afford to keep those public servants in their

(Mr MacKellar) has finally decided to bite the cushy jobs. I wonder whether my friends in the

bullet and break down the final vestiges of that Opposition have studied some of the statements

Medibank policy. All I can say is that it is five made by a former respected member in this place,

years too late. What would the Labor Party do if Mr Clyde Cameron. Do they know what his com-

it got back into office? Again I refer to its conferments were about feathet-bedded public ser-

ence in Adelaide in 1979. It was stated:

vants? They are defying that respected former

The new ALP Platform states that 'A Federal Labor Government will introduce a universal health scheme to be financed by an income related contribution . . .'

member of this House and saying that we should continue to feather-bed them. I do not believe we should. I do not think the Australian community

It is proposed to return to its discredited policies of 1972 to 1975 and reintroduce Medibank. It could not be afforded by the people of Australia then and it cannot be afforded by them now. The Labor Party is proposing to impose such tax burdens on this country as cannot possibly be afforded. I can only assume that I have hit a very raw nerve with Opposition members who are trying to interject. I leave it to my friends in the Opposition to contemplate the truth of what I am telling them at this stage. Let us pass on from the Labor Party's health policy. What else would it do if it were given the opportunity of governing? I return to the Adelaide conference. Let us look at the Labor Party's policy on oil and mineral exploration. What would it do? At the conference it was stated:
Labor will establish an Australian Hydrocarbon corporation, a GQvernment owned fully-integrated oil company.

can afford to do so any more.
I ask why we are reducing the Public Service by only 17,000 people. Why are we not looking further into the statutory corporations? The report of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations suggested that there are 260 statutory corporations employing about two-thirds of the public servants in this country. Why has not more been done to reduce the number of employees of those statutory corporationsin the light of that Senate Committee report? It highlighted the dead wood and the inefficiency within those statutory corporations. More should have been done to weed out the dead wood in that element of the Public Service. I have mentioned previously that whilst I believe that the report that has been brought down by the Government is a good report, and it is heading in the right direction, it simply does not go far enough. The honourable member for Burke (Dr

It was proposing to spend $l,OOOm, based on estiTheophanous), who has migrated from Greece, is

mates at that time, in socialising all our oil and trying to interject. Perhaps his former country is

mineral exploration. Can this country accept socialised but we do not want socialisation in this

socialised exploitation of our mineral wealth at a country.

time when the Australian people are demanding tax cuts? It is simply not possible. What it illustrates is that the Labor Party has not learnt its lessons of 1972 to 1975. It is intent on expanding the role of government in the community and charging more in taxes to do so. This Government, on the other hand, is intent on reducing the role of government in the community and, as a consequence, reducing the taxation burden on the Australian community.

The report is a direct response to the Coombs report presented in this chamber by the Whitlam Government. The Coombs report suggested a whole range of measures through various departments socialising all the activities throughout the Australian commercial world. It suggested ways of doing that. The Whitlam Government mercilessly pursued the suggestions made in the Coombs report. The report we have before us reverses the trend that was' put in train by the

There is only one thing wrong with the report of the Review of Commonwealth Functions presently being debated, that is that it does not go far enough. The report proposes very good poli-

Coombs report. There is only one thing wrong with this action of the GOVernment and that is that it is five years too late. We should have done this in 1976 when we first took office.

cies on the part of this Government, but it must be There are still further things which I believe the

on ly a starting point for other things to follow at a Government should do. We should be cutting

later stage. The report presented by the Prime back further on our Public Service. I cannot

Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) proposes that understand why in this.report there is a notation

there be a reduction of 17,000 public servants. against the Department of the Prime Minister and

Why only J7,000? Why not get rid of a whole lot Cabinet which states: 'The staff interchange

of dead wood in the Public Service and, more parprogram will be expanded'. Does it mean that

ticularly, in the statutory corporations that this staff will be transferred from the Department of

Review ofCommonwea It h Functions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2169

the Prime Minister and Cabinet or does it mean I think this Government should go a little

that staff will be transferred into that further. I strongly recommend that the Govern-

Department?

ment divest itself of more involvement with statu-

Mr Scholes-What do you think?

tory corporations and other areas of public enterprise. I cannot justify government inter-

Mr BURR-I do not know. If it means that staff are to be transferred into the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet I would strongly oppose that. I do not believe that Department should be expanded beyond its present size.

vention or involvement in any form of commercial practice or activity. I do not need to go any further than to instance Trans-Australia Airlines. TAA has been shown to be grossly inefficient--far less efficient than its private enterprise competitor. The Government has taken a decision to turn

I wish to deal with a few other areas where I believe the Government should also have cut back further. I cannot justify the continuance of the Industrial Relations Bureau. I believe it should have been scrapped and we should have reverted to the former Industrial Inspectorate. The Industrial Relations Bureau has not justified its continued existence in the light of criticisms that have been directed at it not only by the trade union movement but also by employers and all others in the

TAA into a private company. I disagree with the Government in that I believe that the .shares in TAA should not be offered either in majority or in total to public subscription. I do not believe it is the role of the Government to maintain an interest, let alQne,a controlling interest, in a commercial enterprise such as TAA. When the company is established I strongly urge the Government to offer all the shares for private SUbscription.

field of industrial relations. I strongly urge the Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.16}--One of the

Government at the earliest possible opportunity things that I noticed about the speech of the

to scrap the Industrial Relations Bureau and to go honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr) was

back to the former Industrial Inspectorate.

his generalisations-broad sweeping statements.

I believe the Government should have done far more to cut back on the irresponsible spending by the State governments. We have reached a stage where spending by State government is very much in the limelight. The present Federal Government cannot be expected to cut back its expenditure and, in the process of so doing, reduce the burden on the taxpayers of Australia while the State governments continue to spend taxpayers' money in an irresponsible and cavalier fashion. That cannot be done. If there is to be a reduction in taxpayers' charges and a reduction in the role and the involvement of the Government then the States also have to play their part. We cannot justify State Premiers simply screaming poverty when they come to Canberra, expecting the Federal Government to bail them out of their economic problems, and then' charging back to their home States and spending taxpayers' money irresponsibly on the basis that they have not been charged

He said that there were 2,000 statutory authorities; that half of them should be done away with. Members of this Parliament, irrespective 'of on which side of the House they sit, usually know their own areas and their own electorates best. If the honourable member knows of Commonwealth services in his electorate then he should name which of those services he considers should be discontinued. If his State is receiving government assistance then he should stand-up and name those areas of assistance that he thinks are exorbitant. The facts are that the last three years he has spent half his time in the office of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) trying to get greater levels of government assistance for his electorate and his State--
Mr Burr-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I would be grateful if the honourable member for Corio would give me another 15 minutes to outline--

with raising that money from the taxpayers. This Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order!

raises two propositions. Either the State governDoes the honourable member for Wilmot have a

ments must be more responsive to the directions point of order?

of the Federal Government's policy proposals, in cutting back the size of theit involvement and their Public Service, or they must take far more responsibility in raising their revenue by way of taxes. The Premiers cannot have the best of both worlds simply by coming to Canberra, screaming

Mr Burr-Mr Deputy Speaker, I beg your pardon. At an appropriate time 1 will claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I suggest that the honourable member wait for an appropriate time.

poverty, wanting more inoney and then going Mr SCHOLES-Every honourable member in

back to their home States and spending it in a this House kIiows oUhe successful efforts which

totally irresponsible manner.

were made to get freight equalisation and other

, ,.

2170 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

benefits for Tasmania. I am sure that the apple growers and potato growers of New South Wales are complaining about these measures because Tasmania is undercutting the New South Wales market with the help of Commonwealth subsidies. I am not disagreeing with that but I suggest to the honourable member that when he asks for subsidies he should not get up in,this Parliament and say that they are not proper and appropriate.
The report of the Review of Commonwealth Functions reveals some strange bedfellows. I do not think the, report is a sound one. There are to be cuts in government expenditure but I doubt whether many wool growers.,-certainly the' representatives of'tnc' wool growers-will consider that the Government is taking a step forward by getting rid of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. When the Authority was run by private enterprise it was inefficient and costly and did not do the job expected of it by the wool growers. Under its existing management it is efficient and profitable. Now the Government steps in to bring b~ck inefficiency in the name of private companies. If the Government can make a quid it does no~ matter who suffers.
Honourable members-all heard the talk about this great new health scheme. rhe user 'paysthat is the principle we are talking about.'Who is the user of a health scheme? What are his economic circumstances, especially if he is a low income earner living from ,hand to mouth, not a pensioner but a low income earner with a family?
Mr Hyde-You can help the poor people. .
'Mr ,SCHOLES-I am not talking abput the poor people either; I am talking about the ordinary people who live in the conununity, the Australians whom some honou,rable members opposite ought to consider sometimes. I am talking about a.family with a child who has a disability; who cannot eat certain foods, who has to have regular hospitalisation, who has to have dialysis treatment or many of the other,treatments which are extraordinarily expensive in our society. What does the Government say? If that family is unlucky enough and .cares enough to want to do something abQut that child then the Government says that the user should pay! The ,misfortune of ill health is not s~mething that we choose ourselves. It is not an afHiction, and it is certainly not a sign of some evil thing that we have done to ourselves or our children. It is something that hap~ pens to us. The user pays-wha~ utter rot! The user pays idea is an easy way out for p~ople who want to avoid their responsibilities to their fellow human beings. In the field of health the Government has abdi~ted totally its responsibilities to its

fellow human beings. It has no' heart, no care, and no responsibility.
It is all right for the Prime Minister, he talked today about unnecessary subsidies. Ask him to come into this Parliament and list the subsidies he gets on his own property. In many instances they are greater than the costs for the sick. But the user pays! In the field of health the community has a responsibility to itself t~ ensure that those people who have need of treatment are entitled to get that treatment at the most reasonable cost possible. To criticise the situation of payment for health services on the basis of ability to pay is to talk about abandoning the sick because their ability to pay is the lowest of any section of the community. The previous speaker, the honourable member for Wilmot, made it a virtue that the poor should not get treatment because they cannot pay. Within 12 months it will cost $700 to $900 a year to be adequately covered by a scheme. That is the cost that the Government is about to infiiqt on the average family in Australia. Not too many families, large families especially, 'will be able to 'afford the cost. When the Government inflicts that charge onthose families it whould just remember that many will not be able to afford it. They will not be adequately covered.
What is a public hospital to do when the father of that family has a massive coronary, arrives at the hospital door, does not have adequate medical cover and does not meet the criteria for being disadvantaged? Does it say to him when he needs open ,heart surgery and intensive care treatment: 'lam sorry. Take him home and arrange for the cheapest funeral' you can afford'? The medical costs involved to save the father, the breadwinner, of such a fiunily are between $10,000 and $20,000. The user pays! Perhaps we should say that the family should sell the house, as people do in America, the free enterprise way. Not on your life.-Most Australians disagree with the Governmerit's proposals on health. It is a coward's castle. <;learly, the Government is running away from its responsibilities as a national governme~t.
I want to speak also about a number of other matters. Firstly, I will deal with some specific matters in the areas for which I have responsibilityon the Opposition benches.
"~r BarnJo~es-The Australian Capital Territory:
M~ SCHOLES-The Australian Capital Tertitory and Defence, and I speak also as a member of the national parliament. I make just one' point. Someone here tonight spoke about getting rid of l'arliament House as a cost saving factor. In the

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2171

last couple of days the Government has been talkin five years. We should remember that the people

ing about government borrowings being one of the are paying more taxes and the Government is

causes of high interest rates. It is not much more spending more as a percentage of gross domestic

than a year ago that the Prime Minister and the product than the average spent during the three

Treasurer (Mr Howard), who are now talking years of the Labor Government. Let us not kid

about the evils of government borrowings, were ourselves about small government or saving tax-

going to the State governments and encouraging payers' money. The Government is spending tax-

them to take up loan funds for infrastructure borpayers' money as hard as it can go. What the

rowings. If people want to know the most irresGovernment is doing with it, of course, is paying

ponsible action that has taken place in the finanoff the big contributors to its parties' funds. Utah

cial world in this country in the last three years, at got a $120m dividend for a donation to the two

the behest of this Commonwealth Government, it political parties that govern this country, and

is over $300m of borrowings for an international there has been plenty more of that.

trade centre in Melbourne which is one of the greatest white elephants in this country's history. It is a monument to the incompetence and irresponsibility of the Victorian Government, and a monument to the double standards of the Prime Minister and the Treasurer, who encouraged and advocated those borrowings. They now come in to this House and tell us that it was evil.

I have about three minutes left to speak and I want to use that time to discuss a couple of things, including the area of defence, which notably was left alone. Whilst a number of teachers colleges, an early childhood development centre, and a couple of Catholic teachers colleges in Melbourne have gone, an organisation that this Parliament through one of its committees indicated was a

May I make a contrast with those borrowings. waste of public funds, is to continue. I did not

A small amount of money was borrowed to hear the honourable member for Perth (Mr

establish the Belconnen Mall in Canberra, which McLean) mention this, but it was stated in a re-

was set up under separate management. The port to this Parliament that the Australian De-

Commonwealth contributed $lm. The Mall curfence Academy was a waste of public funds. Of

rently has an estimated value approaching $54m. course, the Academy is sacrosanct because it is the

It has a debt situation of around $40m. This year Prime Minister's favourite project. It is like the

its profits on running equalled the original Com707s. It does not matter what they cost, the Prime

monwealth investment. It is providing for the Minister wants them, therefore the country must

community in which it is established considerable need them, and the taxpayer must be glad to pay

infrastructure in the form of playgrounds and for them. It is a waste of public funds, no more

other recreational facilities which a community and no less, but it is still in the Government's - -

would expect from its local government body, if Canberra had one-it does not. The Mall is providing those things at no cost to the responsible

Mr McLean-What about the new Parliament House?

government, being the Commonwealth GovernMr SCHOLES-I said that the honourable

ment. If it is sold, over a very short period there member had mentioned that.

will be a profit to the Treasury of in excess of $20m if it is sold at anything like its market value. Who gets the benefit of that $20m?
Mr Hyde-The taxpayer.

Mr McLean-Do you agree with it. Mr SCHOLES-No, I do not agree with any of the Government's cuts. The Government is moving to close the Defence Printing Establish-

Mr SCHOLES-The taxpayer, my foot. It will ment. It is also moving to close the Bendigo Ord-

go into providing more subsidies to people like nance Factory, although there is some charade

Malcolm Fraser. That is where it will go. Governabout sale to private enterprise. I suppose that

ment members do not seriously think that their since the Government did not tell the honourable

Government is in the business of benefiting the member for Bendigo (Mr Bouchier), it had to put

taxpayer. The Government has transferred up some sort of charade, but the fact is that the

$4,OOOm of taxpayers' funds from communityGovernment is going to close it. The charade is

based operations, operations which would northat within a year the Defence Printing Establish-

mally be of value to the lower middle income ment will be transferred to the Australian

earner-in other words, the 70 per cent of AusGovernment Publishing Service. But the report

tralians who earn their living by means of manual on the Department of Administrative Services

or other forms of labour-mainly to overseas says that the functions of the Government Print-

companies. But the biggest and the wealthiest ing Office will be disposed of to private enterprise

people in this Commonwealth have been the immediately, except for those essential require-

beneficiaries of $4,000m of resources transferred ments of Hansard and immediate Government

2172 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review o/Commonwealth Functions

Printing. The Defence Printing Establishment carries out at a high technological level a considerable amount of sensitive and important printing, which is necessary for the armed forces of this country. It is to be sold off so that someone can make a quick buck. Damn the armed forces and damn the requirements they might have for accurate and secure printing! The Government has no worries at all about the people who work there.
The Government must have a friend in Melbourne who is prepared to make a big donation and who wants quickly a printing works or some section of a printing works. For any government to sell off any essential defence establishment as a cost saving exercise is a repudiation of its responsibilities for national security and defence preparedness; and that is exactly what is happening in this instance. The Defence Printing Establishment provides a highly confidential printing service for the Department of Defence. The Government is saying that its printing requirements should go out to private contractors. Honourable members ought to read what the Prime Minister said in the Review of Commonwealth Functions because the Defence work is not being transferred to the Government Printer. The Government Printer's functions are being sold to private enterprise, and that is' all there is to it.
There is only one thing that can be said with regard to Canberra. Canberra is completely defenceless in the face of a ruthless and exploitive Federal Government. It is about time the Government gave the people of Canberra, whether they want it or not, the responsibility of making their own decisions with regard to their own money. The Government talks about letting people make decisions on how to spend their money yet in Canberra it has a principality with an absentee prince and an authority which it is paying but which has no decision-making power at all. It is a disgrace to any democratic society and it is a disgrace to this Parliament that that situation continues.
Mr HYDE (Moore) (9.31)-The observation I must make to the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) is that a loud voice and assertion is no substitute for argument. If the Opposition is going to insist that all these things which the Review of Commonwealth Functions mentions can be retained in the public sector and that they will necessarily be more efficient and so on and so forth, I point out that it is as incumbent on the Opposition to provide argument as it is on us. The report of the co-called razor gang is something of a watershed. To understand that we need to understand some recent history. Ever since 1975 the Liberal Party has talked of small government. In 1980 we introduced what was the biggest

Budget in real terms in Australia's history. That was followed by an election which the Australian Labor Party came close to winning, although it was still appreciably short of the majority of public opinion; but it achieved that result by costing the Liberal Party's promises. The interesting thing about the election is that during the latter part of it the Labor Party spent its time--
Mr McLean-Criticising the Government.
Mr HYDE-The Labor Party spent its time criticising us about big government. It seemed to win some votes on that. Socialism is normally defined as the public ownership and control of the means of production, distribution and exchange.
Mr Kent-There's nothing wrong with that either if it is--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order!
Mr HYDE-Just pipe down a second and let me complete the argument; it will demonstrate to the honourable member that we are both in a fairly inconsistent position. Since that time, in terms of small government, the rhetoric from this side of the House has been excellent. The Governor-General's Speech was clearly a speech in favour of small government. On behalf of the Government the Governor-General said:
My Government will give particular attention to encouraging the growth of the private sector and to increasing the freedom of choice of taxpayers in spending their own incomes. It will be an important policy objective to continue to restrain public expenditure so as to provide scope for reducing the burden oftaxation.
We read a similar recommendation in the speech of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to the South Australian Liberal Party. I will not read that speech as honourable members can look it up. The Tuesday before last in this House the Prime Minister said:
The Government's direction has always been that individ-
uals are the best judges of how to spend their own earnings,
that the disadvantaged and the needy must be provided for, that the tax burden must be reduced, that employment must be increased, that freedom ofchoice must be paramount.
I agree with all those things, and I agree with them very strongly indeed. Small government requires two things: It requires a small public sector and it requires small regulations of the private sector. The two areas we have to get out of are these: The public controlling of the society, because we own it and take all the decisions; and we have to get out of the business of telling all the individuals in the society how they will spend their money and, as a result, how they will occupy their time. Last Thursday'S statement was a very important first step in the right direction.
Mr Kent-It was a disgrace.

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2173

Mr HYDE-The honourable member is welease and that those people will be able to find em-

come to his opinion because he wishes to go in an ployment, thus earning much more than can on

opposite direction. It is a different point of view, the unemployment benefit in much more satisfy-

which is consistent with the philosophy that we ing circumstances.

have espoused over some time. The Razor Gang report is closing the gap between that rhetoric, which I think is excellent, and our performance.

Mr McLean-The unions do not represent them.

That is why it is a watershed. It is a very importMr HYDE-No. As the honourable member

ant step in the right direction. The announced for Perth has pointed out, the unions do not rep-

cuts are not big but they will close that gap. Let us resent the unemployed. The public sector should

look at what some of our critics have said since make room for the more productive private sec-

last Thursday. I shall quote from what the Leader tor. If taxes are lowered, private citizens will

of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) said at page 1880 choose what to buy and where to invest. Only a

of Hansard. I hope that in being selective I am not very conceited person would claim to know each

doing him an injustice. He said that the cuts were: citizen's well-being better than he knows it him-

. . . nothing less than a massive liquidation sale of self. That is why the choice of what to buy and

national assets and public confidence . . .

where to invest should be a decision for individ-

He said further:
. . . condems the Australian people to even more hardship and distress
He went on:
. . . this wholesale slaughter of national responsibilities.
They are separate quotes but I am trying to give the House the tenor of the argument. He continued:
This review is a policy for more unemploym.ent.
The honourable member for Oxley is quite wrong in his assessment. The Australian private sector is now expanding rapidly by Australian standards. The non-farm growth is around 4 per cent per annum. By Australian standards that is high.
Mr McLean-And internationally.

uals in the private sector. If public sector borrowings are lower, private enterprise can raise more capital to invest in any of a multitude of opportunities. If, on the whole, the private sector spends and invests more wisely, productivity, employment and wealth will rise more rapidly than if big brother makes all those decisions. This is, in fact, the record.
In the mid-1970s, with a rapidly expanding public sector, employment fell. In the late 1970s and in 1980, with more slowly expanding public sector, employment rose-just as one would expect it to. Why did it rise? It rose because the marginal dollar was better occupied. That is why employment was able to rise during that time.
Let us look at another group of critics. The Government's critics are inconsistent. There are

Mr HYDE-Well, it is high by international those who say that the cuts are cosmetic, that they

standards unless perhaps we look at some of those are not real and that the Government is not really

countries to our north which have much better making cuts. I will concede that some of the

trade policies than we have. That is why I did not 300-odd items do not amount to much. But others

go into the international area. The non-farm are significant. Consider the sale of surplus Com-

growth is certainly high by many international monwealth land. Why should that public asset be

standards, including those of the Organisation for tied up doing nothing? The Government's print-

Economic Co-operation and Development. The ing and publishing services are to go to the private

resources to permit that expansion have to come sector as will cleaning and food provision services.

from somewhere. The public sector is in compeSurely these are things that the private sector is

tition with the private sector for capital and for singularly skilled at doing. The abandonment of

manpower. To permit that expansion some of the the Prices Justification Tribunal will take the PJT

capital and some of the people must come from off the back of industry and allow price to deter-

overseas, but we are unlikely to be able to accept mine who does what, with the buyers and the pro-

or attract either in the area of immigration or viders allocating their resources to maximising the

foreign investment the quantities necessary to benefit to both. The decision regarding the Can-

provide for all the private sector development berra Commercial Development Authority was a

that we have before us. Australians currently unfirst class decision as was the decision in relation

employed could fill some of the need if only the to rent and price control in the Australian Capital

award wage system would permit them to work Territory. The decision in relation to shopping

for wages matched by price with the additional hours is also a first class decision. Why does the

goods and services they produce. Sadly for the unshopper have to be told when she can buy her

employed, I see little sign that wage demands will goods? The Australian Labor Party made much

2174 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

of making Canberra a social laboratory for socialism. There is no reason why Canberra cannot be a social laboratory for free enterprise.
The next group of critics are those who assert that the Government will not carry the cuts through. They say that the proposals are real and important but the Government will not have the courage to see them through. Only time will tell that. I expect that there will be some backsliding on some of the items. I do not think that it is reasonable for any group of men to have picked all those items accurately to the point that they have foreseen every difficulty. I accept that; that will not worry me. What will worry me is if another list is not presented at Budget time, that the process is not ongoing, that we cannot look to more cuts in more significant areas. It will not worry me if a few of the items fall by the wayside because of unforseen circumstances.
The last group of critics suggest that the cuts are too small. I certainly think that the cuts are too small. We have further to go. But bear in mind that this is a very significant turn-around in direction. For the first time. I can say that government is not getting big more slowly, but is actually getting smaller. That makes the cuts very important indeed. Where do we go from here? I suggest that we look at introducing university fees for people wanting to obtain first degrees. For the life of me, I do not understand why people who come from relatively low income areas, such as Lockridge in my electorate, should pay for the education of people who, almost entirely, come from very high income families. That does not seem to be justice to me. Why should not those who have access to an education that allows them to earn much higher lifetime incomes pay for that education so that it is not a burden on those who earn low lifetime incomes. They could obtain money for the fees through a student loans scheme and pay it back over a lifetime in amounts geared to their incomes. This does not have to be a hardship for anybody. It will allow the poor people to enter the system.
The isolated patients travel accommodation assistance scheme is impossible to administer fairly because of its complexities. It is too complicated for the Government to administer. The new Parliament House and the proposed Defence Force Academy should also be cut from Government expenditure. We could make this present Parliament House big enough by changing the Standing Orders so that we did not have divisions by ambush. We could then use West Block, the Hotel Kurrajong and the old Hotel Canberra fully as Westminster uses all of Whitehall. We could get over the problems of this building for the cost of

amendment the Standing Orders. Recommendations on decentralisation assistance grants involve $9.6m. As far as I can make out the people who are supposed to benefit most from the multicultural broadcasting do not want it. About $21.2m of the taxpayers' money is involved. In relation to airport development, the business of putting up airports seems to be an election hazard. Airports have taken over from dams. Now during elections we feel airports coming on. Railways are a special problem. Australian National Railways is expected to have an operation loss of $53m on a revenue expenditure of $170m. The liquefied petroleum gas subsidy involves $25m and on the petroleum products freight subsidy, $125m. Those subsidies fly right in the face of the parity pricing policy. There is plenty of room left to go further and we should be contemplating further cuts now.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (9.46)-The honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde), who preceded me, spoke about deregulation. But he forgot to mention that he comes from a background which is the most subsidised and protected in Australia. I do not know whether he is a grazier or a wheat grower. He sounded like a peasant anyhow. He expounded the theory that profits are sacred whilst losses are communal. He talked about taxpayers' money, forgetting to mention that he receives a lot of it in subsidies.
Until last week I was under the impression that we, in Australia, were being governed by a government and the two Houses of the Parliament. However, my naive belief was shattered by the revelations of the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock), the former Minister for Industrial Affairs, who stated that the Coordination Committee introduced by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is effectively superimposed over the Cabinet. So we learned about the existence of this powerful instrument of the Prime Minister, the gang of five, as the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) called it. Of course, we already knew about the Ministerial Review committee, the razor gang. It is obvious now that we are governed by two gangs-the gang of five and our very own gang of four. Between these two gangs presides the sinister and divisive figure of the Prime Minister.
As the result of the activities of the Coordination Committee, the gang of five, we have just lost the only remaining relatively able and decent Minister in the Fraser Ministry. The result of the activities of the razor gang will be much more disastrous. It will mean more unemployment, fewer services to the public, and the sell-out of people's assets to private enterprise. On the basis

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2175

of the Liberal philosophy that profits are sacred Potential savings in administrative expenditures are less sigand private, whilst losses are communal, profitanificant than potential savings in programs.

ble government enterprises will be handed to the We have just seen how this Government takes the

private sector while unprofitable services and advice of AIDA. We have just witnessed the last

Commonwealth responsibilities will be transfervestiges of our health program axed by this

red to the States. Let them worry about it. The list Government whose Prime Minister promised:

of savage cuts is too long to be repeated here. The 'We will maintain medibank'. It took him five

Prime Minister's shameful recital last week lasted swings of the axe to take us back to the fifties to

more than an hour. The cuts, not mentioned be the chaos of inefficient and costly private health

fore last year's elections, will create more and insurance. Let me get back to the Prime Minister's

more unemployment. Yet it is questionable ,mentor, the AIDA bulletin, and quote further

whether they will result in any savings. No anfrom the leading article. The article stated:

nouncement has been made about where the Before proposals for expenditure restraint can be made, it is money is going. There was no mention of tax relief important to identify in some detail the factors in the growth

to the public. This Government, despite its rhetoric, is the highest taxing government in Australia's history. Its last Budget amounted to more than $36,000m. There is every indication that the expenditure in the next Budget will be

of social welfare outlays. There are essentially six main categories of outlays, known generally as:
Assistance to the aged (mainly age pensions); Assistance to veterans; Assistance to the handicapped; Assistance to widows and single parents;

even higher. But even if we paid less taxes-a

Assistance to families (mainly family allowances);

promise never fulfilled by the Prime Minister-

Assistance to the unemployed and sick.

would that really mean more freedom?

This reads like direct terms of reference to the

According to the most vocal advocate of less taxes on the rich, Professor Milton Friedman, an essential part of economic freedom is freedom to choose how to spend one's income. Of course, Milton Friedman forgets, as honourable members opposite do, the recipients of social welfare payments-the unemployed, the widows, the old

razor gang, to axe what is left of our welfare program. Of course, there are already hints and statements by the members of the gang that they are sharpening their razor to shave off the thin veneer of civilisation and caring for the less privileged, to expose the society's selfishness and barbaric greed for profits.

age pensioners and others-who will not be able Let us analyse what is behind the action of the

to have the freedom of choice how to spend their Government. Is it only a move to line the pockets

income if they are not going to get any. Pensioners of the rich friends or a deliberate pursuance of a

and many others will not have even the freedom dogmatic philosophy? It would be very charitable

of movement if public transport, on which they if I said that it is motivated by both, as the sell-out

solely rely, is neglected further as a result of the of the nation's assets is general whilst the dog-

policies of this Government. Public services like matic ideology of the Government is applied only

public transport, public hospitals and public housselectively. The measures introduced by the razor

ing are important for the least affluent. Unemgang are applied so selectively that they hurt only

ployment and welfare benefits are important to the ordinary people of Australia while the rich

those who have no other income.

escape the razor's edge. The selective imposition

The rhetoric of small government or less government intervention is only a cover-up for an attack by the Fraser Government on the living standard of the Australian people. Behind the Government's rhetoric there is an assault on all the civilian services of modern government. One does not have to look far to establish where the orders for such an assault are emanating from. I will quote a few lines from the March bulletin of the Australian Industries Development Association. The bulletin states:

of cuts, ceiling and restraints indicates a deliberate onslaught of the conservative forces on the living standard of the Australian family.
Why was it, that at this point of our history, the capitalist conservative establishment chose to abandon its human face and use the ugly, mean face of the Prime Minister instead? In the era of the 1950s and 1960s, when the post-war capitalist economy was booming, there were few dissenting voices in the Western World to the demand that governments intervene in the management of the economy so that unemployment and inflation

The political difficulty of biting deeply into welfare expenditures is acknowledged. Nevertheless it is clear that not only constraint on growth but expenditure reduction is necessary in the welfare field.

were kept to the minimum. There was a general consensus that only governments could provide services such as low-cost housing, health care for the disadvantaged and urban transportation,

Further it stated:

which by their nature are not available from the

2176 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review afCommonwealth Functions

private sector or on which the private economy defaults as there are no profits to be made in these fields. It was generally accepted that measures to assist the unemployed, to extend welfare payments, to increase old age pensions, to introduce environmental protection, consumer protection and so on were the proper function of government. The role of government was to protect the individual in our society. In other words, government was used to hone off the rough and harsh edges of the capitalist system. Hence the introduction of Medibank, migrant translator services, increased funds for schools, colleges and universities, abolition of tertiary fees and a score of other measures to improve the quality of life in the early 1970s in Australia. Unfortunately, the introduction of better welfare services in Australia was delayed because of the reactionary Liberal Government under Menzies. By the time we started to introduce mild social reforms the capitalist economy was already heading towards a deep crisis from which it has not emerged even today.
If we have this analysis in mind it will be much easier to understand the sudden switch to Fraserism. Whilst the economy of the Western capitalist countries, including ours, enjoyed a period of steady growth and relatively stable prices in the 1960s, there were already forces in operation which later upset the economic equilibrium and drastically altered both the economic and the political context of macro-economic policy. The phenomenon I refer to is the continual growing of corporate concentration, an unavoidable feature of capitalist development. The enormous size and power of multinational. corporations enabled them to resist so-called free market forces. They could dictate prices and increase them at will, thus avoiding the discipline of the market. They effectively used their power to set aside the market and increase prices and profits. The ability of multinational corporations to use their power to this effect became a new intractable cause of inflation. Prices now rise not as a consequence of strong demand but because of the strong upward push of corporations.
Of course, we do not hear the Treasurer (Mr Howard) or the Prime Minister talk about the upward price push of large multinational corporations which control the market forces. They still fallaciously talk about the upward push of wages knowing only too well that wage increases do not precede but follow price rises affected by the power of big corporations. This new development-inflation caused by concentration of corporate power and not by increased demand-made itimpossible for the Government

to use the old tried-out capitalist weapon of resorting to create a pool of unemployed to reduce inflation. The Prime Minister and the Treasurer resorted to such tactics; they created more than half a million unemployed. To their consternation their inhuman strategy did not work; nor is it working today.
The only result of Fraser's economic policies was the lowering of living standards of Australian families and as a consequence the Prime Minister came close to losing last October's elecion. The last mini-Budget, the abandonment of the Govermnent's responsibilities for our health care and hospitals, the withdrawal of half tax indexation, the razor gang's proposals for reduction in employment opportunities and the sell-out of the people's assets will further erode the living standards of the people.
The razor gang's proposals will not benefit any section of our community bar a few speculators who consort with this Government. In the main, the razor gang's activities were motivated by the dogmatic ideological views of the Prime Minister. Take for instance the sell-out of government assets and land. What kind of business accumen do those people opposite who support such a proposal have? Did I hear the Treasurer say the other day in the House that he and his colleagues are advised by people who have extensive business experience in the private sector? What kind of business prudence is the sell-out of one's assets to pay the bill, or as it is in this case, to balance the Budget?
The honourable gentlemen opposite proved that they are very good businessmen when they manage their own affairs. They are all hanging on to their assets and accumulating even more. Some people were so eager to lay their hands on more cash or land that they got in trouble. Yet when it comes to the people's assets the Government wants to squander them. This is what happens when the custodians of publicly owned land are people such as the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch). It is like putting Dracula in charge of the blood bank. The people of Australia will remember how the Liberal National Country Party Government sold their assets and how they squandered them. There is nothiflg that can save this reactionary lot in the next election. We will have a Labor government in 1983.
Mr Young-If not before.
Mr KENT--I hope before. I hope that one of our first tasks will be to repossess the people's assets-not to buy back the assets but to repossess

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2177

them-that this Government is using to line the the people of this country should tolerate the ar-

pockets of its corporate friends. ,

gument that because a government wishes to do

something it must be right.

Mr CADMAN (Mitchell) (10. I)-The" concept of repossession is fascinating and one that is expressed widely throughout the nation. In fact, a member of the Australian Labor Party said tonight that Labor Party policy is to walk in and tak~ up, giving no compensation but walking over any enterprise that such a government might choose to pick up, dominate and incorporate as part of the public sector. The sort of rubbish we have heard suggested from the other side of the House tonight includes, would honourable members believe, the retention of the post of collector of scalps in the Australian Capital Territory. Those are the sorts of positions and expenses that this Government has taken to with the razor. It has dispatched the unimportant, the irrelevant and those parts of the public sector whose removal will not interfere with services. In fact its actions will make for a leaner, and more efficient and worthwhile government sector to serve the people of Australia.

In New South Wales we have a Premier determined to enter the Federal Parliament. He is building an entertainment centre in Sydney at a cost of $3.4m, That,will be his means of entering the Federal House. Today I read an interesting story to the effect that the honourable member for Sydney (Mr Les McMahon) will be made the manager of that centre in order to allow the Premi~r to come into the Federal Parliament. We are told that anything a govern~ent does for whatever purposes must be of good intention. In New South Wales we have a Premier seeking to spend taxpayers' funds in order to achieve for himself a place in the Federal }arliament. What a ridiculous and irresponsible and unaccountable process.
We have also heard that Premiers around the country have been talking about the reduction made in the Commonwealth grants to be made to the States and also speaking about the way in which decisions made by the Review of Commonwealth Functions coinmittee will affect their

Mr Barry Jones-Have you thought of that as a job for you one day?

fund-raising capacity and ability to deliver services. Yet we have State governments entering into activities such as the purchase of coal

Mr CADMAN-I am sure that honourable members opposite, and particularly the honourable member for Lalor, appreciate that so much of the funds that we collect from taxpayers are eaten up by administration. I am sure that all honourable members will agree that the people we really seek to help miss out because of inefficient methods in giving them their due. In Aboriginal affairs and social welfare so much of the taxpayers' funds are taken up byadministration because of the complicated nature of what we are endeavouring to do in a fair way and with good intentions. It is time that we as a nation dealt with these factors and delivered to people their due deserts and the benefits we believe they are eligible for.

loaders-activities of the sort which they need not partiqipate in. There is absolutely no need for governments to become involved to the extent that the Labor Party wishes them to become involved. In New South Wales alone $l,OOOm could be saved in a year by getting rid of those services in which the Labor Government need not be involved. As I understand the philosophy of the Labor Party it should not be involving itself in such projects. It has been diverted from its original intention. This is a great shame for politics today. The Labor Party has been diverted from its intention and commitment to assist those who are needy and those who are poor. It is natural that the middle ground is filled by non-socialist parties who have a compassion for and understanding of those who are needy. They will in fact deliver ser-

I believe that the Labor Party's dedication to large government and the real differences between socialist philosophies and anti-socialist philosophies have been indicated in this debate. Accountability of government is a principle supported by the Liberal and National Country parties. Irresponsible government is sponsored by the socialist movement,within Australia. It believes in the idea that if government is doing it it must be right. That is the theme of the argument that we

vices and develop programs and systems to help the needy. Governments should not be in business; governments should be helping people. Governments should be caring for and thinking of individuals. Getting involved in large government and large business enterprise is not helping anyone. It is not helping the Government and it is not helping the needy. In fact, this Government has made a decision to reduce services by slashing the superfluous.

have heard expressed on the other side of the I belie~e that the mechanical decisions made by

House. We hear that if government is involved it the ReVIew of Commonwealth Functions com-

must be good. That is not true. I do not think that mittee are a first step. In fact, what we need to

2178 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

have throughout the administration of government services is an understanding of the benefits that can result from efficient administration and a commitment to that which is well deserving and well delivered. A knowledge and understanding of good administration can provide many more services and provide them more cheaply. Over a period of five or six years or even longer-infact since the Labor Party came into governmentthere have been many examinations of the functions of government and the administration of government. It is only this Government that has taken decisions.
Honourable members opposite will remember ~he Royal Commission into Australian Government Administration on which there is no action whatsoever. Honourable members on this side of the House will remember the Administrative Review Committee set up in 1975 under the chairmanship of Sir Harry Bland. There have been investigations of all sorts. They include the Medibank review of 1976, the review of delivery of services financed by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, the inquiry into care of the aged and infirm, the Myers inquiry into unemployment benefit, the Norgard inquiry into the Commonwealth Employment Service and the Baily task force inquiring into health and welfare and review of procedures and processes in the Department of Social Security. A great deal of examination and thought has gone into a careful assessment of government administration. Each step of the way this Government is seeking to improve its efficiency and ability to give services that are well thought out and based on sound policies and to deliver them in an efficient way.
The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure is another example of what this Government has sought to do to ensure effective and economic implementation of government policy and administration. The Auditor-General is charged with reporting on the efficiency with which departments are administered and the way in which programs are delivered. I believe that that record alone, without the decisions made by the Review of Commonwealth Functions committee, demonstrates that the anti-socialist parties have a commitment to effective accountability and responsibility in government and a desire to ensure that programs do not go on year after year. Established programs can become ingrained so that at Budget time departments put up their bids to extend and increase their every section, every function and every division of administration. It is time there was a reassessment, a re-examination of exactly what departments and people do. It is ridiculous that the

Australian Capital Territory has had a Collector of Scalps for so many years. I understand that the other place in this Parliament has had people coming in for five years to collect the mail on Saturday mornings even though there have not been mail deliveries. I find that typical of examples that I see from day to day of things which should be attended to. Let us start right here, in this place, and extend it so that there is a proper understanding of responsibility, of effective management,and an effective corporate view.
The findings of the Bland committee indicated that, despite close questioning, of the 26 heads of Government departments only two on a regular basis sought to find out how their department was standing, with a running sheet, with a cash flow situation, to see whether they were operating effectively and within budget. It is unbelievable that only two heads of Government departments took the trouble to find out whether they were living within their budgets. I think that a sense of corporate planning and corporate responsibility is needed with the Australian Public Service. I hope that the next step that this Government takes will be to ensure that incentives and also restrictions are placed on the Public Service so that attitudes can be fostered and so that, without cuts or reductions, services can be delivered efficiently and cheaply.
The sorts of proposals I believe would bring this about include the requirement that all Government departments live within their budgets unless directed by Cabinet to undertake additional expenses. I do not believe any government department has a right to overrun its budget through poor management, unless it is directed to take up additional programs. I do not believe that any department has a right to draw down the Advance to the Minister for Finance unless a proper submission has been approved by Cabinet. I do not believe that that process is proper. The processes of poor budgeting, poor accountability and poor assessment cannot be tolerated. The easy way out is to make those poor calculations and then draw down additional finances by way of the Advance to the Minister for Finance. Any department which underspends its budget without detriment to its projects or programs and can carry forward those funds to the next years should do so. There must be encouragement for efficiency. There must be some sort of fostering of that which is excellent in administration. Too often in this country, too often in the departments of the Commonwealth Government, and always in the departments of State governments, those people who overspend, who are inefficient and who ask for more are the

Review o/Commonwealth Functions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2179

ones who get more. Those who manage carefully the role of government; an attack on the quality of

and seek to support those whom they should be services supplied by government to ordinary

serving are the ones who in some way are people. Basically, all of this reflects the national

penalised and marked down.

and world view of this incompetent, accident

1 believe that the Public Service Board should notify all personnel within departments which underspend or meet budget that their personal advancement will be improved by their performance in good management. We should encourage good management and a concern for the way in which funds are spent and handled. I believe also that unfavourable reports by the Auditor-General should be regarded by those departments which receive them as a mark of disapproval to the extent that personnel in those areas shold not be considered for advancement at the same rate as they would normally be. The progress and development of the expenditure of funds is most important and most significant. The decisions that have been announced in this place take one step towards rationalisation and the sweeping away of cobwebs that have developed over many years. They are cobwebs that I believe have no significant effect on the Australian community. If honourable members opposite want to talk about

prone, divided and anti-people Government. We reject its view of Australia's future, which is to allow unrationalised resource development, to depend upon jobs that mayor may not be generated in ~he services sector as a result of export earnings, to Ignore the essential brittleness of such an economy, to allow the de-industrialisation of many manufacturing and secondary industries, to allow a situation of declining expenditure to meet social needs in the community, and to continue with a most subservient, puerile foreign policy. The Aus-
tralian Labor Party rejects this approach and puts forward an alternative national view. This alternative national view is one of a multi-tiered economy with balanced resource development in which we would maintain and expand manufacturing and secondary industries, which in turn would generate increased growth in a firmly based services and public sector. Above all, we stand for a peaceful world and an independent foreign policy.

education for example, and really have a feeling for those people in need, I suggest that they go to the Williams report and read it instead of coming into this House and making statements that are neither researched nor understood. The Williams report into education, training and employment indicates that Anderson, Bowen, Fensham and Powell in their study Students in Higher Education, carried out for the Tertiary Education Centre of the University of New South Wales and sponsored by the New South Wales Government, referred to the abolition of fees at universities. The view has been endorsed time and again that fee abolition, as they said:
. . . had at best a marginal effect on the accessibility of higher education to socially and economically disadvantaged groups. At worst the abolition of fees can be seen as a further

I wish to comment on some of the extraordinary events of the last few days which have been generated by this Government that espouses small government. We have seen attacks on specific purpose grants for health and housing, and the extraordinary interim formula which has been put forward to bridge the gap between this financial year, with the demise of the 39.87 per cent formula, and next year, when we will see general purpose grants to the States based on a percentage of total income tax. We have seen the extraordinary way in which the States have been cheated out of $70m and how they have been locked into a continuing loss because that $70m will be part of the new formula, as a percentage of total taxes as it applies year after year after year. It is not a

benefit to the economically advantaged.

once-only operation. We have seen the extraordi-

I suggest to honourable members opposite that before they come into this place espousing halfbaked policies they should really research them.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

nary behaviour of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Treasurer (Mr Howard). Why have they behaved like that? Obviously it has been because the Prime Minister is still basically insecure, leading a divided Government worried about a certain person on the back bench: and worried about impressing the corporate sec-

Mr WEST (Cunningham) (lO.16)--The tor. He is worried by those people on the back

events of the last couple of weeks have shown the bench, known as the drys, who keep espousing

Government's lack of concern for ordinary smaller and smaller government, no matter what

people. We have seen a devastating assault on damage that does to the economy. A factor that

health services, then the review of the much emerges out of all this is that never again will the

vaunted razor gang last week, and on Monday we State Premiers be able to trust the Common-

moved to the scandalous events of the Premiers wealth's final offer as being the absolute limit of

Conference. All of this amounts to an attack on Commonwealth capacity.

2180 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

There is an argument for restricting Loan Council borrowings.According to the Prime Minister's special program, they have already been endorsed to an extent of $5,000m. Now the States are after another $5,000m. It may be that they are asking too much in that area. When this Government talks of control it does not mean the control of finance to provide the infrastructure for resource development to aid transnational companies which seek to exploit our nonrenewable national resources; it means the control of expenditure on items which satisfy basic social needs such as health, public housing, public transport and so on. Let us see when the Premiers meet again in June whether it is strong enough to rein in infrastructure expenditure for the servicing of resource development projects.
Let us look at what the Government intends to do in the area of environment and home affairs. Firstly, it says that responsibility for regulation and control of nuclear activities in Australia is to be implemented as far as possible by the States. It wants to hand over responsibility for the financing of the Northern Territory environmental regulatory services to the Northern Territory Government. It wants to hand over the day to day management of our national parks in the Northern Territory and the Northern Territory Government. If there is one truly national legislative responsibility it is in relation to the dangerous, dirty and selfish uranium and nuclear industry. The Government's proposal to hand over to the States the regulation of this industry is grossly irresponsible. It will create more government, not less government. It will create greater costs, not lower costs, and more risks to the people who will be working in the industry.
There is no uniform effective environmental assessment legislation to process conventional resource developments, let alone uranium developments. The situation is that resource development legislation,. under which the States are supposed to assess the environmental aspects of such development, is lacking in uniformity. Only the Commonwealth, New South Wales and Victoria have legislation which allows the public display of environmental impact statements and/or public, local or regional inquiries. Even then the Federal Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act relies on other constitutional powers, such as the issue of export licences and Loan Council Authority for borrowings to implement recommendations of these inquiries when they are held. In Queensland and Western Australia, the two major resource development States, there is

no worthwhile conventional environmental legislation. There is no provision for public display of environmental impact statements and no provision for public inquiries. It is the action Minister who instigates a resource development proposal, who makes the final decision on whether it will go ahead. This position is bad enough, but the current legislative position under which uranium projects are assessed and the industry operates is even worse. It will become worse under this Government.
There is a multiplicity of current Federal and State Acts which govern the development of the uranium Industry. On a Federal level there is the Atomic Energy Act, the Environmental Protection (Alligator Rivers Region) Act and the Environmental Protection (Nuclear Codes) Act. The Northern Territory Acts include the Uranium Mining (Environment Control) Act and the Radioactive Ores and Concentrates (Packing and Transport) Act. In South Australia there is the Mining Act and the Mining Act Amendment Act (No.2). In Queensland there is the Mining Act and the Radioactive Substances Act. In Western Australia there is the Mining Act and the Nuclear Activities Regulation Act. There is a mUltiplicity of almost meaningless legislation which has no overall Federal umbrella to pull the whole thing together and give it support. Of course, as an Opposition we do not support it. Now the Government intends to make the situation even worse. It intends to hand over responsibility for regulation and control of the uranium and nuclear industry to the States.
Against that background let us look at the multiplicity of projects which the Government is talking about. There is the Ben Lomond project in Queensland and the Honeymoon proposal in South Australia which was endorsed yesterday by the Tonkin Liberal Government. This provides for in situ acid leaching of uranium from the ore body and the return of the radioactive liquid waste back into the water-table. That is the sort of mine that is proceeding at this stage under State legislation. The Government wants to give the States even more power. There is also the Beverley project, the Koongarra project, the Yeelirrie project and the Roxby Downs project. All in all that constitutes about $1.5 billion worth of development in uranium mining. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table which shows the multiplicity of these reserves, the ore grades and ownership which is, of course, foreign dominated.
Leave granted.
The table read asfoUows-

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2181

Deposit Ranger (Jabira), NT
Jabiluka, NTOne Two
Koongarra, NT
Nabarlek, NT Yeelirrie, WA Beverley, SA
Roxby Downs SA (Olympic Dam)
Honeymoon, SA
Mary Kathleen, Qld
Deposit Andersons Lode Ben Lomond Maureen

Reserves (tonnes U 30g)

Proven Probable Possible
SE

52,292 28,586 30,000
110,878

MAJOR DEPOSITS
Ore grade U308/ore Ownership
% .336 Energy Resources of Australia Ltd .2 - 30.8% Peko-Wallsend Ltd .2 -30.8% E.Z. Industries Ltd
-14.2% Other Australian shareholders
-10.1 % Japan Australian Uranium Resources DevelopmentCo. Ltd (Japan)
- 4.0% UrangeseIlschaft GmbH (W. Germ.) -6.3% Braunkohlenwerke A.G. (W. Germ.) -3.8% Saarberg-Interplan Uran GmbH (W. Germ.)

Foreign owned
% 24.2

Demonstrated 3,300

.24 65% Paneontinental Mining Ltd

35

Demonstrated 202,400

.39 35% Getty Oil Development Co. Ltd

205,700

RAM

Indicated

13,300

.3-.35 100% Denison Australia Pty Ltd

100

Inferred

15,000

(Canadian)

28,000

RAM

Demonstrated 12,000

2.1 100% Queensland Mines Ltd

4.4

RAM

(a) 50% Kathleen Investments (Aus!.) Ltd

(b) 4.4% Noranda Mines Ltd of Canada

(e) 45.6% Other Australian shareholders

Estimated

47,320

.14 75% Western Mining Corporation Holdings Ltd

25

RAM

15% Exxon Corporation (US)

10% UrangesellschaftGmbH (W. Germ.)

Estimated

15,625

.24 16.67% Oilmin N.L.

50

RAM

16.67% Transoil N.L.

16.67% Petromin N.L.

50% Western Uranium Ltd

(100% Phelps Dodge Corp. US)

Not disclosed

51 % Western Mining Corp. Ltd

49

49% The British Petroleum Co. of Aus!. Ltd

Probable

3,400

.21 49% M.I.M. Holdings Limited

51.9

SE

RAM (a) 48.9% Asarco Inc. (US)

(b) 5% Overseas portfolio investors

(c) 46.1% Australian shareholders

25.5% CSR Ltd

25.5% Teton Drilling Co. PtyLtd (US)

Finalised

6,300

.12 100% Mary Kathleen Uranium Ltd

31.2

RAM

(a) 51 % Conzine Riotinto of Australia Ltd

(i) 61.1% Rio-Tillto Zinc Corp. Ltd

(ii) 38.9% Australian shareholders

(b) 41.64% Australian Atomic Energy Comm.

(c) 7.36% Other Australian shareholders

Reserves (tonnes U308)
Probable & Possible SE Possible RAM
Proven

1,800

OTHER DEPOSITS
Ore grade U 308/ore Ownership
% Queensland
.2 100% Queensland Mines Ltd RAM 'as above~

1,720 2,528

.32 100% Minatome Australia Pty Ltd (a) 50% Pechiney Ugine Kuhlmann (France) (b) 50% Compagnie Francaise de Petroles (France)
.15 51% Central Coast Exploration N.L.

Foreign owned % 4.4
100
49

2182 . REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

Deposit
Skal Valhalla Westmoreland

Reserves (tonnes Ups)

Probable SE
Probably & Possible SE
Probably & Possible SE
Indicated Inferred RAM

412 3,800
6,000
4,745 5,650

East Kalkaroo

Probably SE

1,150

Goulds Dam (Billeroo) Mt Painter (Mt Ward)

Probable SE
Inferred RAM-

AAEC ProspectAustatom
Angela
Barote Caramal

Not disclosed
In situ SE
Not disclosed
Not disclosed

1.427 7,258
7,700

Ngalia Basin Exploration J 0 in t VentureBigrlyi

Proved Probable

Walbiri Others
Ormac Joint Venture

Estimated Not
disclosed RAM
Not disclosed

457 1,406
1,863
686

Lake Mason

Estimated RAM

2,700

Ore grade U 3Og/ore Ownership
% .06 49% Getty Mining Pty Ltd (US)

.13 100% Queensland Mines Ltd RAM 'as above'

.13-.19 100% Queensland Mines Ltd RAM 'as above'

.17 40% Queensland Mines Ltd .25 'as above'
12.75% CSR Limited 9.75% CRA Limited 'as above' 37.5% UrangeseJlschaft GmbH (W. Germ.)

South Australia

.14 RAM

80%Sedimentary Uranium N.L 6.67% M.I.M. Holdings Ltd 'as above'
6.67% CSR Ltd 6.67% Teton Drillng Co. Pty Ltd (US)

.11 75.5% CSR Ltd RAM 24.5% Teton Drilling Co. Pty Ltd (US)

.007-.022 50% Oilmin N.L. 50% Transoil N.L.

Northern Territory

Commonwealth of Australia

Not disclosed

50% Uranerzbergbau GmbH (W. Germ.) 50% M.I.M. Holdings Ltd 'as above'
50% Peko-WaJlsend Ltd 50% EZ Industries Ltd
35.05% Kratos Uranium N.L. 32.69% Minatome Australia Pty Ltd 'as above' 32.26% Wyoming Mineral Corp. (100% Westinghouse Corp. USA)

.446 15.7% Central Pacific Minerals N.L. .136-.517 36.8% Urangesellschaft GmbH (W. Germ.)
36.8% Agip S.p.A. ofItaly
.16 10.7% Australian Atomic Energy Commission

45% Ocean Resources N.L.
(a) 11.2% Pittsfield Co. Ltd (Hong Kong) (b) 88.8% Australian shareholders 10% Pancontinental Mining Ltd 20% Consolidated Goldfields of Australia Ltd (a) 69.8% Consolidated Goldfields Ltd (UK) (b) 30.2% Australian shareholders 25% Canadian Superior Mining (Aust.) Pty Ltd (100% Canadian Superior Oil Ltd of Canada)
.035 100% Coitus Pacific N.L. (a) 70% Australian shareholders (b) 30% Overseas shareholders

Foreign owned
% 4.4 4.4 45.3
10.3 24.5 n.a. n.a.
50 n.a. 65.95
73.6
44
30

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2183

Lake Maitland

Estimated

500

'..06 100% Coitus Pacific N.L.

30

RAM

'as above~

Lake Raeside

Potential

1,700

.025 100% Coitus Pacific N.L.

30

RAM

'as above'

LakeWay

Indicated

6,800

.05 51% westirilihouse Electric Corp. (US)

75.9

RAM

24.9% Delhi International Oil Corp. (US)

24.1% VamLtd

Mount Joel

Inferred

3.500

Not 100% M.I.M. Holdings Ltd

53.9

SE

disclosed 'as above'

Western Australia

Lake Mason

Estimated

2,700

.035 100% Coitus PacificN.L.

30

RAM

(a) 70% Australian shareholders

(b) 30% Overseas shareholders

Lake Maitland

Estimated

500

.06 100% Coitus Pacific N.L.

30

RAM

'as above'

Lake Raeside

Potential

1,700

.025 100% Coitus Pacific N.L.

30

RAM

'as above'

LakeWay

Indicated

6,800.

.05 51%Westinghouse Electric Corp. (US)

75.9

RAM

24.9% Delhi International Oil Corp. (US)

24.1% VamLtd '

Amount Joel

Inferred

3,5.00

Not 100% M.I.M. HoldingS Ltd

53.9

SE

disclosed 'as above'

Minindi-Mooloo Downs Identified

472

.017 95% Cliffminex N.L.

n.a.

RAM

5% Metals and Energy Minerals N.L. -

Thatcher's Soak

Estimated

3,400

.03 100% Coitus Pacific N.L.

30

RAM

'as abOve'

Thatcher's Soak

Estimated

1,350

.05 100% Wattle Gully Gold Mines N.L.

n.a.

RAM

Mr WEST-I thank the 'House. All of these projects will lead to a tremendous overproduction. Even the Australian Atomic Energy Commission, that wonderful environmental authority, forecasts that by 1985 world demand will be about 39,000 tonnes. Our share of the world market, the Commission says, will be 8,000 tonnes maximum. This Government is pushing the States into a position where they will be producing 14,000 tonnes by the middle and late 1980s. We will never be able to sell the stuff and there will be an unseemly scramble to sell on a declining wOJ:ld market with a resulting weakening safeguards and fall in in environmental standards.
In this situation, giving nuclear ,regulatory powers to the States is the worst thing a government could possibly do. It will lead to competition in mines. It will lead to plans for enrichment plants. It will eventually increase demand for nuclear power stations. The Premiers of Western Australia, South Australia, Victoria, and Queensland and the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory almost slaver at the mouth in anticipation of completing the nuclear power cycle by the establishment of enrichment plants and power stations. They are all on the public record as being in support of completing the development of the nuclear cycle. In the uranium and nuclear areas we can expect to see the same sort of competition which now bedevils the nation in the area of coal

development. An amount Of $9 billion is involved in coal development; $8 billion in aluminium smelters and $10 billion in power stations. No wonder the Government is worried about the Loan Council. The same situation applies in relation to coal to oil plants. Competition is occurring throughout the States. Now the Government actually intends to encourage competition to extend into the uranium and nuclear industry by handing over coptrol to the States. The Government does not even know how it is going to legislate for this.
Mr Uren-And cut back the funds for social infrastructure.
Mr WEST-It will be doing that at the same time. Major uranium producing nations-even the United States of America and Canada-all have federal legislative pontrol over nuclear activity. We would be the only banana republic in theworlq that had the stupidity to say to the States: 'You look after this dangerous, dirty and sen!!itive industry'. In the United States regulation of all activities related to uranium mining processing and nuclear power generation is under the control of the Federal Government. There is no question about that. Control over all radioactive materials rests with the United States Nuclear Regulatory Committee. What does the Government think about that with its small government

2184 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Review ofCommonwealth Functions

proposals? In Canada after uranium has been disonly were the National P~rks and Wildlife Service covered, exploration, mining and milling licences and the Northern Land Council not consulted on

must be sought from the federal Government, recent decisions affecting Kakadu's future, but

with control over all radioactive materials resting also they heard of them only after the announce-

with the Federal Atomic Energy Control Board. ment was made last week. Koongarra is probably

I turn now, in the few minutes which I have left to speak, to deal with the proposition that the control and management of the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service parks in the Northern Territory~Uluru and Kakadu~should be handed over for day to day management to the Northern Territory. That is a completely wrong concept. It proves that only State parks are wanted, not national parks. Under, Fraserism, areas of national significance will not now be declared national parks if the Government moves out of this area. If the States or the Territories leave them unprotected that will be it. There is clear Commonwealth responsibility under the Constitution, if the government so desires to pick

the most glaring example of what the Northern Territory Government and the Commonwealth Government intend for the Kakadu National Park area. It is an enclave in the Kakadu Park which Justice Fox considered too ecologically sensitive to bear uranium mining. Now, because the company Denison Australia Pty Ltd and its predecessor Norartda Mines Ltd made' a mistake about the boundaries, the Department of Trade and Resources rather than the Department of Home Affairs and Environment is making plans to alter the boundaries to intrude further into the Park without any consultation with the Northern Land Councilor the National Parks and Wildlife
Service.

it up, to establish national parks not only in the Northern Territory but also in the States. There is no question about that.
The cop-out to the Territories is even more disgusting than the abrogation of the Government's

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Debate (on motion by Mr Good luck) adjourned.

rights to set up, if necessary, parks in the States. The Commonwealth is promoting more rather than less bureaucracy by having a separate park system in each State o{Territory. A plan of man-
agement for Kakadu National Park came into force in April 1981 and it should remain in for,ce for five years. The Northern Land Council has stated that it does not want any change to the administrative procedures of th park because it does not know the strength~~

ADJOURNMENT
Retirement of Deputy Principal Attendant-National Acoustics Laboratory-Prices Justification Tribunal: Petroleum Industry-South-West Tasmania Wilderness-Australian Mining Industry-Proposed new International Air
Terminal in Perth
Motion (by Mr Hodgman) proposed:

Debate intermpted.

That the House do now adjourn.

ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! It being 10.30 p.m. 1propose the question:

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-If I may presume on the House for a moment, I inform the House that tomorrow' will be the 65th birthday of the Deputy Principal Attendant, Mr

That the House do now adjourn,

Collins. He will be retiring after 17 years service

Mr Hodgman~I require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Qu~stion resolv.ed in the n~gative. "

with the House of Representatives. Mr Collins, who is. more familiarly known to most of us as Andy Collins, has served for the greater part of his time here in the chamber and, since 1976, he has

REVIEW OF COMMONWEALTH FUNCTIONS
Ministerial Statement Debate resumed.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (10.30)-The Northern Land Council has been told about what

been the senior chamber attendant. I am sure all honourable members will join me in thanking Mr Collins for his many years service to the House ane! in wishing him many happy years of retirement.
Honourable members~Hear, hear!

the Government intends to do and it opposes it. It Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (10.33)~

does not trust the Northern Territory GovernWithout usurping the position of the Opposition

ment. The Australian National Parks and on the adjournemt debate I join in the remarks

Wildlife Service, like the Aborigines, has been made by you, Mr Deputy Speaker. A number of

kept in the dark about the plans for Kakadu. Not colleagues from both sides of the House have

Adjournment

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2185

observed over the last 16 years the diligent, unasHealth (Mr MacKellar) and possibly other

suming work that Andy Collins has rendered in Ministers.

this chamber. He is a very popular man. It is good to see thim leaving this place looking so sturdy and fit. He has had a healthy background. I have been told tonight that he was once very famous as a captain-coach of the Leeton rugby league football team. He came from Captains Flat and played a very distinguished role in that mining area. Mr Deputy Speaker, I join with you on behalf of the rank and file of the Parliament in saying that this man represents a silent service. He has set a great example for others to emulate. I hope he maintains his good health and gives the supera~nuation scheme a damn good shake.

During my time as Minister for Health many allegations were made by some of the leading private manufacturers in the supply of hearing aids that NAL was inefficient and obstructive in some way to their activities, that it was not adequately training and counselling people in the use of their hearing aids and that they were not getting the most benefit from them. I satisfied myself by visits to the various places providing services that any deficiency in that regard was purely one of available resources. If such services are cut by razor gangs, efficiency will be reduced, not because the expertise or the dedication of the people in the

Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the service has been changed but simply because they

Capital Territory)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek have not been given the tools to do the job.

indulgence to add to the remarks passed by my At the same time, some of the private suppliers

colleague in relation to the birthday and retireand manufacturers are indulging in great rip-offs

ment of Andy Collins. I think the Opposition and con jobs by which they filch from the pockets

Whip, the honourable member for Hughes (Mr of unsuspecting pensioners their life savings to

Les Johnson), summed up extremely well the pay for hearing aids which are no better in many

feelings of all members of this House. We are very cases than the ones they can get free from NAL.

much in debt to Mr Andy Collins for the service They advertise their services in a deceptive way

he has rendered to the Parliament and, more im~ with statements such as: 'Pensioners free hearing

portantly, as my colleague has said, for the friendtests. Come and see our visiting expert in

ship that he has extended to honourable members. Rockhampton.' Some of them, of course, are

Whilst in ,some respects it is a sad day, like the reputable tradesmen as in most other trades and

honourable member for Hughes, I am delighted professions. They explain thoroughly to pen-

that Andy is leaving this place looking fit and sioners what they are letting themselves in for and

young and, I hope, with J.l1any years of happy re- ' what the alternatives are. In fact, they invite

tirement ahead of him. On behalf of members on people to go to NAL to get another quote which

this side of the House I join in the remarks passed will cost them nothing. The hearing aids and bat-

in the early stages of the debate.

teries from NAL will cost them nothing under the

Dr EVERINGHAM (Capricornia) (10.35)-1 am concerned at news which has reached me today of a proposal which has been put to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) by a man who purports to speak for a great number of friends of those with impaired hearing in

scheme introduced when I was the Minister for Health. Nevertheless, there are proposals to erode all these provisions. In the report of the razor gang we were told that the manufacture of hearing aids is to be farmed out on contract to private manufacturers.

Australia and the Australian Deafness Council in I am not against involving private manufac-

Queensland. I refer to Mr Colin Lamont, a former turers in the supply of goods and services when

Liberal member of the Queensland Legislative this can be done to the best effect and with the

Assembly. Apparently, he has proposed a major greatest efficiency. I introduced this practice in

sell out of the National Acoustics Laboratory to the supply of free artificial limbs. The repatriation

private enterprise and that a deterrent charge be artificial limb factory co-operated with private

imposed on persons acquiring hearing aids from enterprise to supply artificial limbs for all people

the Government or, alternatively, that some kind in Australia. What I am objecting to is the pro-

of voucher system be devised whereby persons posal that there be a blanket handout to private

could get a contribution from public funds to pick enterprise and that the expertise at NAL, whose

up their hearing aids from the private sector. employees are world leaders in producing hearing

There was no reference to any perpetuation of the aids and testing equipment and devising new

National Acoustics Laboratory or the presermethods, will be sold out to charlatans who are

vation of its technical expertise. Rightly, concern importing expertise and not developing equip-

has been expressed by people in Queensland who ment of world standards as NAL has done. The

have contacted me about this matter. I underGovernment has no reason for doing so other than

stand that they will be contacting the Minister for a mad, manic devotion to a private enterprise

2186 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Adjournment

philosophy. It believes that if an organisation proGovernment forms this organisation to price pet-

duces profits for anybody but the taxpayer it is all roleum in Australia. I hope it will get the right

right; if it produces a service for the public people-people who know a little bit about the

efficiently and if it obtains world recognition as a industry. I have found that very few people in this

service which is contributing to the economy of place know very much about the marketing of

the country by reducing deafness, it is no good.

petrol. They leave it to other people to determine

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

what should be done. I repeat that that has been one of the contributing factors to the problems associated with that industry for a long time.

Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (10.40)-1 want to say to Andy Collins 'All the best'. 1 would not have been as polite to him as I have been over the years if 1 had known that he had coached a rugby team. Never mind. After all the discussions we had, I always thought he followed Australian rules. That aside, I wish him all the best.

Another extraordinary point to which I wish to draw attention is the fact that restrictive trade practices do not allow oil company managers to talk together. They may have been able to overcome some of the problems associated with that industry. They are all intelligent people, all hopeful of getting a share of the market and all hopeful of improving the lot of the shareholders and the

I have not spoken for a long time on the petpeople who work in that industry. Because of the

roleum industry, but in the last couple of months restrictive trade practices legislation-with which

a few things have occurred and I think it would be Tdo not disagree-the oil company managers can-

remiss of me if 1 did not bring them to the attennot talk together about the price of petrol. Sub-

tion of the Parliament. I know that the razor gang sequently they never meet. This creates problems

has recommended the removal of the Prices Jusbecause they all work against one another. They

tification Tribunal. A few points have been made seem hell-bent on ruling the industry and on try-

as to whether or not it should have been removed. ing to break each other. If they had worked in uni-

I firmly believe the Prices Justification Tribunal son they might have been able to overcome some

was not able to set the wholesale price of petrol of those problems.

equitably and sensibly in the area of petroleum marketing. 1 always thought if the PJT recommended a maximum wholesale price in every capital city the oil companies in certain selected areas would be able to sell petrol at a price cheaper than the maximum wholesale price. I believe that was one of the contributing factors to the problems associated with the marketing of petrol.

It is too late for that now, but I hope that the PJT will be replaced by an organisation which will know something about this complex industry and which will take into consideration the changes taking place within the oil industry. I hope that organisation will take into consideration that the price of petrol is at a high level because of this Government's import parity pricing policy. The consumers realise that. Petrol is

The oil industry is ever-changing. As a result of precious to them; therefore it must be distributed

the Royal Commission on Petroleum in 1973 the equitably in this country.

industry changed dramatically. Honourable
members will be aware that a couple of the major oil companies have moved into the area of marketing at their service stations. They provide a
24-hour service for groceries, toiletries and other foodstuffs. This is a move which I believe will spread. It is estimated that in America 35 per cent of total petroleum sales is from these super-sites. I note that there is an oil glut at present in America. I believe the removal of the PJT and the change of strategy by the oil companies will create problems. Therefore, I hope that the organisation the Government sets up to determine the price of wholesale petrol in Australia will take into consideration how the oil companies are able to move in different directions and how, sometimes to the

Mr KENT (Hotham) (10.45)-It is my intention to speak tonight on the decision of the Tasmanian Government to proclaim the Franklin and Lower Gordon rivers, in Tasmania's south-west wilderness, as part of a national park. I was holding back my comments and my congratulations to the Lowe Government in the expectation that one of my Tasmanian colleagues, probably my friend the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck), would grab the opportunity to congratulate the Tasmanian Premier. However, as he was conspicuously silent on this matter I, as a Victorian member, decided to take the liberty to speak on behalf of my less vocal Tas-
manian colleagues.

detriment of people working in the industry, they I congratulate the Premier of Tasmania upon

are able to do certain things that may jeopardise saving the gorges of the Franklin and Olga rivers

the consumers of petrol in this country. When the for future generations of Australians. I hope that

Adjournment

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2187

the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) will join me in those congratulations because only recently, on 8 April, he said in reply to a question by the honourble member for Cunningham (Mr West):
The south-western wilderness area is land of great beauty. It is unique; it is irreplaceable. I hope that it can be listed in the World Heritage list.
Unlike the honourable member for Franklin, on this point I agree with the Prime Minister. After touring south-west Tasmania recently in a light plane, I believe that the flooding of rivers in the area for hydro-electric power would have been an ecological disaster. This magnificent, rugged wilderness is one of the few remaining untouched areas in Australia and, if left in its present state, will provide a unique heritage for generations of Australians to come. The south-west has the reputation of being one of the finest bush walking areas of the world. Its topography is varied. It has magnificent examples of glacial landforms, forested valleys and rivers that have formed enormous gorges and its coastline is extremely rugged. It presents enormous scope for geological and archaeological research by scientists. Only recently, in January and February, it was discovered that Aboriginals had inhabited the region during the last Ice Age. These archaeological discoveries were directly threatened by the plans of the Hydro-Electric Commission of Tasmania to flood the area. The invaluable heritage of the relics found there, and those yet to be found, would have been lost forever. There would be no going back, or second chances, if the decision to flood these areas had gone ahead.
Let us examine why the Tasmanian Hydro Electric Commission would commit such environmental vandalism. The destruction of the area was designed to yield 180 megawatts of power. I invite honourable members to compare this with the output of Loy Yang, which is 4,000 megawatts, or even the Newport power station, which is 500 megawatts. This alone is indicative of what a thoughtless plan the flooding of the Franklin was. In this plan the Hydro-Eelectric Commission was abetted and supported by the Upper House of Tasmania. I understand that that House is not exactly a democratically elected body; that it perpetuates itself by a gerrymander. Lest honourable members should think that I am alone in my opinion on this matter, I propose to quote from an editorial in the Melbourne Age of 5 May. The editorial states:
The question is no longer simply the fate of south-west Tasmania. The Council-and to some extent the HEC-have made It a fight about who is running the State. A small group of conservative independents, elected on one of Australia's worst gerrymanders--
Mr Hodgman-Oh, that's terrible.

Mr KENT-I am quoting not from a socialist newspaper but from the Melbourne Age. The editorial continues:
is endeavouring to block the will of a democratically elected government on a major issue-and promising to do so indefinitely. . . . last Thursday's decision by the Government to declare the gorges of the Franklin and Olga a national park is a welcome sign of resolve.
If the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) wants to hear some more I will quote the editorial further:
Mr Lowe should now keep up the pressure by legislation to abolish the Council gerrymander. The Fraser Government should help by persuading its Tasmanian supporters to respect both constitutional convention and the landscape of the south-west.
May I hope that for once the Federal Government will stop playing politics, and will come to the assistance of the Tasmanian Government and help to preserve the south-west wilderness.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.50)-1 know it must be of great comfort to all the Tasmanian members to know that the best interests of their State are now safely in the hands of the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent). Last week some members of this House attended the keynote address at the Australian Mining Industry Council Minerals Outlook Seminar given by its Senior Vice-President, Mr H. M. Morgan. As not many Labor members actually attended that address so that they would really find out something about the mining industry-apart from the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating), who has a degree of responsibility in this area which is not shared by many of his colleagues-I believe that I should point out to the House some of the realities about the mining industry. The Australian Labor Party appears to think the industry is some sort of bottomless honeypot from which it can get goodies non-stop to pay for its welfare programs, which in fact, are not generally aimed at people in need but at people from whom it hopes to buy a vote.
The points made by Mr Morgan are worth stating to the House. He said:
The current Federal/State rivalry over who gets the biggest slice of the government share of mineral related revenue threatens to become the single most important, and divisive, issue in Australian politics during the next five years. And the mining industry faces the chilling prospect of being caught in the crossfire. At the present time both sides in this Federal/ State row argue that they have the right to impose taxes on the industry because the resources are owned by the people they represent. I doubt that the members of the pre-Federation Constitutional Conventions who reserved Crown ownership of minerals to the States ever thought that position would be challenged.
I think it is worth pointing out too that Mr Morgan said:

2188 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Adjournment

While the current Federal Government has repeatedly rejected the proposition that it impose a resources tax on the industry, continual urgings for it to do so have resulted in a number of States engaging in reviews of their own royalty charges. Quite naturally, they are not prepared to run the risk of allowing another authority to benefit from the development of their resources. Equally, the mining industry looks askance as the prospect of it being subjected to increasingly heavier charges designed to satisfy the phony political objective of ensuring that the Australian community receives an equitable share of mineral development proceeds. The community's share in the industry is already higher than that of any other industry. Last year, for example, the government share in the mining and exploration sector of the industry was 55.8 per cent of the pre-tax operating profit of the industry. How much more does this industry have to pay to satisfy the political objectives of those who cannot understand that the total government share in the industry of $1,013 million last year, compared with a total net profit of $874 million, is already an equitable share of our business?
Mr Howe-What is the fee for this speech?
Mr BAUME-That is the sort of interjection that I would expect from the honourable member. It reflects the level of his thinking and the level, I believe, of his contribution to this House. The next point I make relates to the bureaucratic control of this industry which honourable members opposite seem so determined to pursue. Mr Morgan said:
There seems to be a belief in the community that a remote bureaucracy which makes decisions and rules about practical matters will have greater wisdom and virtue than those who have a vested interest in the economic activity it is regulating. I have found little evidence to support this belief. My experience is that the best decisions and the best management come only from tbose who have a position of real accountability in a direct personal way for performance.
In Australia any new minerals development project may well have to run the gauntlet of submissions to, and approvals from, up to 20 government instrumentalities, at the same time governments have stretched their constitutional competence to embrace matters which to the industry appear to be remote from the intention of earlier legislators.
It is'difficult for the community at large to comprehend the impact of the multiple interventions by government on resource projects, but there is no doubt that the result is increased cost, further delay and longer response times. None of these things can possibly benefit the man in the street, nor, in my opinion, can they do much to improve or protect his quality of life.
I believe that it is a shame that more members of the Labor Party did not go along to hear Mr Morgan's address. I hope that it had some sort of impact on the honourable member for Blaxland who attended the address. It seems a shame to me that so many members of the Labor Opposition are convinced that this mining honeypot is bottomless. The reality is that it is very risky business and I believe the Australian mining industry is doing a magnificent job, particularly under the present Government.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (lO.55)~I wish to raise in this House tonight a matter which is be-
ginning to cause deep concern in my electorate;
that is, a decision by the Department of Transport to locate a new international air terminal in the northern corner of Perth Airport. The matters involved are complex and I intend to raise them frequently in this place. At this preliminary stage, however, I want to place on record the grave exception taken by the Belmont Council, a local authority in my area, its members and officers, to the Department's decision and to the accompanying propaganda campaign being conducted among residents living near the airport. They are not complaining because they want the airport removed-let me make that quite clear. They are complaining because they do not believe they are being properly consulted and honestly dealt with and because they take the view that the propaganda campaign of the Department does not accurately portray the recommendations made by a joint State-Commonwealth committee on which the Council was represented.
That committee met for a number of years and contained representatives of a number of government departments, both State and Federal, and of a number of local authorities. The committee produced a series of recommendations and the Council believed that those recommendations would be acted upon. In the present process it believes that the environmental problems of its citizens have not been properly considered. It takes particular exception to an article which appears on page 2 of the Department's leaflet, which has been widely distributed in my electorate in association with the Department's efforts at explaining the proposed new terminal. That leaflet purports to represent the joint State-Commonwealth committee's recommendations. In it the Department implies that the committee firstly, recommended without qualification that Perth Airport be developed as the sole primary airport in the Perth region and, secondly, determined that a new north-south parallel runway was not justified on cost effective grounds and was not necessary on environmental grounds.
Both implications are misleading. In the first place, whilst the committee suggested that Perth Airport should be the sole primary airport for the Perth region until the year 2004, it further said that development should follow the production of a master plan based on a detailed analysis of airport development options and their impact on the environment and land use. On the Department's own admission, no such master plan has been

Adjournment

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2189

produced. In the second place, the committee's made some other comments which I feel ought to

opting for abandonment of a parallel runway was be responded to before the House adjourns;

only a preliminary finding, not a final recommendation. It was accompanied by a request for more detailed research than the committee found it possible to do. It was also stated by the committee that any decision to abandon a parallel runway should be accompanied by departmental consideration of compensation for homes and buildings affected by noise. The committee acknowledged that taking up this option would increase the number of buildings affected. Again there was no reference to this matter in the Department's propaganda leaflet. These are very important points and they affect the capacity of the community in the area to achieve a consensus on the

I had the honour to serve for some eight years as the member for Huon in the Legislative Council, and the Huon electorate includes a substantial part of the south-west. I know the south-west. I have walked in it, and I was sent in there in tragic circumstances some years ago when three men drowned in what was Lake Pedder before the hydro-electric scheme came into effect. I believe that I am the only member in this Parliament who went out into the streets and took part in marches and open air rallies opposing the flooding of Lake Pedder before conservation became fashionable.
Mr Dawkins-Opportunism.

expansion of the airport.

Mr HODGMAN-It was not opportunism.

As all honourable members would be aware, when a major Commonwealth installation is to be located in an inner city location, as is the case in Swan, it is very desirable, if possible, to achieve a degree of consensus in the community, particularly among the local authorities concerned.

Sometimes people do things that they believe in. In 1967 I went out into the streets and campaigned on an issue because I believed in it. I do not believe that it is in the interests of Tasmania, or of Australia, for members of the Opposition, including-

Having local government representation on this Mr Young-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a

joint State-Commonwealth committee, I think, point of order. I think the mouth from the south,

was a very reasonable and forward step. Howthe Minister

ever, all the good that was done by having that representation has been undone by the nature of the campaign being conducted and by the decision that has been arrived at by the Department of Transport. I hope that when the Public Works Committee visits Perth later in the year there will be an opportunity for this matter to be raised by

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Orderl The honourable member will not offend in that way.
Mr Young-He is misusing the arrangements whereby an additional 10 minutes is available for Ministers to reply to criticisms or to matters raised relating to their portfolios.

the local authority with that Committee. I hope Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I uphold

the result of raising it will be to produce some the point of order. The Chair was prepared to give

changes in the Department's decision. I urge the the Minister an opportunity to address himself to

Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) to initiate that requirement, possibly with more latitude

those changes himself.

than was appropriate. I ask the Minister immedi-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Order! It being 11 p.m. the debate is interrupted.
Mr Hodgman-Mr Deputy Speaker, I require

ately to confine himself simply to responding to the matters raised in the honourable member's speech.
Mr HODGMAN-I accept you ruling, Mr Deputy Speaker, and will respond as the honour-

the debate to be extended.

able member for Port Adelaide leaves the

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate may continue until 11.10 p.m.

chamber. The honourable member for Hotham, before congratulating the Premier of Tasmania on founding a new national park in the south-west,

Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the ought to realise that the Premier and his Govern-

Capital Territory) (11.0)-1 want to take only a ment want to put a massive hydro-electric com-

few minutes of the time of the House to respond mission scheme in the south-west and to seek the

to some of the remarks made by the honourable funds for that scheme from the Government of

member for Hotham (Mr Kent) because they rewhich I have the honour to be a Minister. Before

late to my home State. Whilst I appreciate his people in this Parliament congratulate what J

motives in wishing to come into this Parliament suggest is hypocritical and cynical grandstanding

and congratulate the Premier and the Governby a State Premier who declares an area to be a

ment of Tasmania on the declaration of a new national park and then wants to put in a multi-

national park in the south-west of Tasmania, he million dollar hydro-electric scheme in the middle

2190 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Adjournment

of it, they ought to check their facts. Finally, let me say that if people are genuinely interested in Tasmania then they should listen to the voices of the five Tasmanian members who have represented that State in this House for the last five years with very great distinction.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The debate is concluded.
House adjourned at 11.3 p.m.
NOTICE
The following notice was given:
Mr Bungey to move -

That this House:
(1) recognising that the Australian Woolstorcs-
(a) were purchased with  1,259,500 drawn from the unspent balance in the Wool (Contributory Charge) Trust Account representing contributions by wool growers not by the Government, and therefore reflect little or no Government equity, and
(b) have been largely financed and operated by Australian wool growers through the Australian Wool Bureau and succeeding organisations without recourse to Government support since 1953.
(2) calls on the Government to review its decision to sell the Australian Woolstores Organisation.

Answers to Questions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2191 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Primary Industry
(Question No. 1011)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 1 Apri11981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The following details on names, dates and terms of appointment, and salaries of public office holders ofstatutory authorities under my responsibility are those applicable at 30 April 1981. Details on deputies to Members are not included. However, when deputies attend meetings in place of Members, the daily sitting fee applies.
It should be noted that the salaries of all those listed, other than my departmental officers are set by the Remuneration Tribunal and that membership salaries of all listed authorities, other than those dealing with research, are industry funded. .
Statutory research authorities are funded either jointly by the Commonwealth and industry on a dollar-for-dollar basis or by the Commonwealth alone and members are eligible for a daily sitting fee from those funds.

Statutory Authority

Date of appointment

Term of appointment

Salary per annum

R G. Jones (Chairman) T. H. Bryant (Deputy Chairman) W. D. S. Harpham N. W. Seccombe D. S. A. McFarlane J. K. Horwood RAusten I. P. Kennedy G. E. McCamley J.B.Newman G.Mackey . . G. F. Heaslip (Chairman) V. G. Collins M. G. Binstead R.F. Thomas E.I.Ashby . G.C.Porter D.Crowe K.M.Leckie T. R C. Cropper I. Smith K.RJames D.Blair

Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation

1.12.80 1.12.79 1.12.79 3.2.81 1.12.80 1.12.80 1.12.79 3.2.81 3.2.81 3.2.81 1.12.80

3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years

$49,495 $10,675 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 Officer of Dept of Primary Industry

Livestock Producers' Consultative Group (to AMLC)

2.7.80 2.7.80 2.7.80 2.7.80 2.7.80 2.7.80 2.7.80 29.7.80 2.7.80 2.7.80 2.7.80 16.3.81

5 years 5 years 5 years 5 years 5 years 5 years 5 years 5 years 5 years 5 years 5 years 5 years

Daily sitting fee-$100 Daily sitting fee-$80 Dailysittingfee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Dailysittingfee-$80 Dailysittingfee-$80 Dailysittingfee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80

Meat and Livestock Exporters and Abattoir Operators Consultative Group (to AMLC)

J. A. Gilbertson (Chairman) E. A. McDonald P. A. Cullen C. H. Curtis J. H. Medway T. R. Eastwood K. F. Gooley K. J. Smeltzer R J. Ewing .

21.10.77 21.8.80 14.11. 78 16.3.79 16.3.79 21.1 O. 77 9.9.80 16.3.81 19.3.81

No set term of appointment No set term of appointment No set term of appointment No set term of appointment No set term of appointment No set term of appointment No set term of appointment No set term of appointment No set term of appointment

Daily sitting fee-$100 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80

R G. Jones (Chairman) J. P. Dempster J.M.Kerin . D. L. Miles . K. M. Leckie H. I. Robertson

Australian Meat Research Committee

1.12.80 3.3.81 3.3.81 3.3.81 3.3.81 3.3.81

Chairman AMLC 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years

Remunerated as Chairman AMLC Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80

2192 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Answers to Questions.

Statutory Authority
R. S. Wilson, O.RE. P. D. A. Wright D.J. Walker R. M. Butterfield E. N. Fitzpatrick D.D.Hussey
N. J. Thomson (Chairman) J. G. Fairbrother A. J. Peacock M. M. Hamilton P. Gilchrist . J. W.Ryley R. B. Cumming A. R. Johnson W.Patrick J. I. Moth L. Skinner
N. J. Thomson (Chairman D.Campbell R.G.Bowman I. Barker RMuirhead D. R. Lindsay J. W. McLaughlin J. W.Ryley L. C. Lloyd R.Lienert D.Hinton
J. F. McAuliffe (Chairman) L. C. E. Hitchcock D.C.Burke R. W.Pender
M. L. Vawser (Chairman) W. H. Pyle (Deputy Chairman) P. V. Gallagher P. Lever-Naylor W. R. Dickson P.D.Rowley J. P. Bennett J. G. Spinkston 1. D. Saulwick D. O. Burston A. E. Wallace
J. C. Gleeson (Chairman) A.C. Skene K.G.Smith R. P. McArthur R. H. Bray I.!. Saunders C. J. Bell C. T. O'Brien R. K. J. Barker K. L. Perkins P.B.Roskam

Date of appointment

Term of appointment

Salary per annum

3.3.81 3.3.81 3.3.81 3.3.81 3.3.81 22.5.79

3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years Until 31.5.82

Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Officer of Dept of Primary Industry

Australian Chicken Meat Research Committee

1.7.78

3 years

Officer of Dept of Primary Industry

1.7.78

3 years

Daily sitting fee-$80

1.7.78

3 years

Daily sitting fee-$80

1.7.78 1.7.78

3 years 3 years

Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80

1.7.78 1.7.78

3 years 3 years

Dailysittingfee-$80 Daily siUingfee-$80

4.4.79 20.12.80

Until 30.6.81 Unti130.6.81

Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80

22.5.80

Until 30.6.81

Daily sitting fee-$80

31.3.81

U ntil30.6.81

Daily sitting fee-$80

Pig Industry Research Committee

9.2.79
9.2.79 9.2.79 9.2.79
9.2.79 9.2.79 6.5.80 9.2.79 4.4.79
2.7.79 28.4.81

3 years
3 years 3 years 3 years
3 years 3 years. Until 8.2.82 Until 8.2.82 Until 8.2.82 Until 8.2.82 Until 8.2.82

Officer of Dept of Primary Industry Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80

Pig Meat Promotion Committee

17.6.78 17.6.78 3.10.78 17.6.78

3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years

Daily sitting fee-$1 00
Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80 Officer of Dept of Primary Industry

Australian Dairy Corporation

1.7.80 1.7.80 1.3.79 1.7.78 1.7.78 1.7.78 1.7.78 1.7.80 1.7.80 27.4.81 27.8.79

5 years
3 years 3 years 3 yeats
3 years
3 years
3 years 3 years 3 years Until 30.6.81
UntiI30.6.81

$49,495 $10,675 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 Officer of Dept of Primary Industry

Australian Dairy Industry Advisory Committee

9.6.80 9.6.80 9.6.80 9.6.80 9.6.80
9.6.80 9.6.80
9.6.&0 9.6.80
9.6.80 7.4.81

3 years 3 years . 3 years 3 years 3 years
3 years 3 years
3 years 3 years
3 years 8.6.83

$8,575 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sittingfee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fce-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80

Answers to Questions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2193

Statutory Authority
M. L. Vawser (Chairman)
D. F.Smith W.H.Pyle J. P. Bennett P. D.Rowley K. L. Perkins M. W. Hanrahan L.L. Muller P. Lever-Naylor A. R. Kyburz
R. B. Fuge (Chairman) H.G.S. Todd J. G. Simpson R. E. Slaughter E. F. G. Ptolomey J.Petrie . J. lori N.C.Mair P. J. Carter
T. N. Barton (Chairman) B. D. Clifton R. K. J. Barker N.R.Gorman C. R. Tummon L. C. Stevens T. H. Willcox A. 1. F ewster R. H. McDonald J.C.Smith
A. R Kyburz (Chairman) J. L. Briggs T. N.Barton A. A. Clemson V. B. Chandler
Sir Leslie Price, O.B. E. (Chairman) T. M. Fullerton W. A. Graham M.B.E. M. Bourke E. E. Nuske, OBE. M.S.Shanahan C.E.Condon C. T.Mann B. Hewitt RD.McLeod A. B. Eichner P. D. Kahl, M.B.E. J. C. Frearson P. L. Nielsen
A. J. Berinett (Chairman) A.N.Smith J. W. Meagher B. L. Oxenham A. F. Tideman

Date of
appointment

Term of appoint-
ment

Salary per annum

Dairying Research Committee

Ex Officio No set term of appointment

(ADC

Chairman)

6.3.80

3 years

1.7.78

3 years

1.7.78

3 years

1.7.78

3 years

1.7.78

3 years

1.7.78

3 years

4.5.79

3 years

13.9.78

3 years

27.3.81

3 years

2.6.80 18.1.80 22.11. 79 1.3.79 21.9.78 19.10.79 18.6.80 17.6.78 31.8.80

Australian Egg Board
3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years3 years

1.7.78 1.7.78 1.7.78 3.4.81
1.7.78 1.7.78 1. 7.78 1.7.78
1.7.78
1.7.78

Australian Honey Board
3 years 3 years 3 years To 30.6.81 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years

Honey Research Committee

1.4.81
1.4.81 1.4.81 1.4.81 1.4.81

3 years
3 years 3 years
3 years 3 years-

Australian Wheat Board

.26.10.80 26.10.80
26.10.80
26.10.80 26.10.80 26.10.80 26.10.80 26.10.80
26.10.80 26.10.80 26.10.80
26.10.80 26.10.80 5.11.80

3 years
3 years
3 years
3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years
3 years 3 years 3 years
3 years 3 years Until 25.10.83

Wheat Industry Research Council

1.4.81 2.1. 77 5.2.76
22.11. 73 18.7.77

No set term of appointment No set term of appointment No setterm of appointment
No set term of appointment No set term of appointment

Remunerated as Chairman Australian Dairy Corporation
Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$SO Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee~ $80 Officer of Dept of Primary Industry
$7,125 $2,900 $2,900 $2,900 $2,900 $2,900 $2,900 $2,900 $2,900
$7,125 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 $2,900 $2,900 $2,900 $2,900 $2,900
Officer of Dept of Primary Industry Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee~$80 Officer of CSIRO
$53,976 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125
Officer of Dept of Primary Industry Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$SO Daily sitting fec-$80 Daily sitting fce-$80

2194 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Statutory Authority

Date of appoint-
ment

Term of appointment

Salary per annum

W.J. Toms J.P.Quirk J.E.Begg E. E. Nuske OBE. H. N. Balcomb

15.9.71 7.4.77 16.10.79 1.1.58 9.6.79

No set term of appointment
No set term of appointment No set term of appointment
No set term of appointment No set term of appointment

Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80

A. J. Bennett (Chairman) G.S. Purss
A.N.Smith J. W. Meagher A. F. Tideman W.J. Toms M.J.Cock J.P. Quirk J.E.Begg C.J.Rowe

Barley Industry Research Council

8.4.81 8.4.81

3 years 3 years

8.4.81
8.4.81
8.4.81 8.4.81 8.4.8! 8.4.81
8.4.81 8.4.81

3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years
3 years

Officer of Dept of Primary Industry New Council-sitting fee to be deter-
mined by Remuneration Tribunal

* Enabling legislation provides for an advisor for each appointed member to attend. Recent practice has been that deputy
members have attended meetings in the capacity of advisors. The daily sitting fee of $80 applies to both industry and State representatives.

A. J. Bennett (Chairman) A. C. Crosbie F.R.From . J. K. Anderson W. K. Meier J. K. Leslie . P. E. Kriedemann M.J.T.Norman
B. Gowrie-Smith
A. J. Bennett (Chairman) D.R.Hastic A.Rigoni G.H.Warner V.A.Brink . D.R. Wills . D. E. MacCallum H.A. White D. P. Lapidge D. G. W. Curlewis
R. T. Boynton (Chairman) R.J.Morey B. R. Williams R ..B.Walker H.C.Gubler P. C. Chandler H.Morgan E. A. N. Beaumont E. L. Jenkins
Sir Peter Derham (Chairman) P. D. Scanlon J. W. Pettigrew R.E. Taylor R. S. Turnbull
I. Deakin
S. R. Catanzariti

Oilseed Research Committee

1.4.81 1.2.81 1.2.81 1.2.81 1.2.81 1.2.81 1.2.71 1.2.81 1.2.81

Until 31.1.84
3 years 3 years
3 years
3 years
3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years

Officer ofDept ofPrimary Industry Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80

Australian Tobacco Board

11.3.81 20.1.81 20.1.81 20.1.81 20.1.81 20.1.81 20.1.81 20.1.81 20.1.81 20.1.81

4 years 4 years 4 years 4 years 4 years 4 years 4 years 4 years 4 years 4 years

Officer of Dept of Primary Industry Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting foo-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting foo-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80

Australian Apple and Pear Corporation

9.9.80 1.9.80 1.9.80
1.9.80 1.9.80
1.9.80 1.9.80 1.9.80
1.9.80

3 years
3 years
3 years 3 years
3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years

$4,300 +
Daily sitting fee-$135
Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee--$80 Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80 Officer of Dept of Primary Industry

Australian Canned Fruits Corporation

1.1.80
1.1.80
1.1.80 1.1.80 1.1. 80
1.1.80 1.1.80

3 years
3 years
3 years 3 years 3 years
3 years 3 years

$8,575 Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80

Answers to Questions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2195

I. A. Pickworth A.W.Lloyd P. I. Rosenblum

1.1.80
1.1.80 1.1.80

3 years No set term of appointment
3 years

Daily sitting fee-$80 Officer of Dept of Primary Industry
Remunerated as Chairman of Australian Canned Fruits Industry Advis-
ory Committee

P.I. Rosenblum (Chairman) B. R. Scanlon A. K. Dickinson G. F. Lord R. B. Bradbury
M. E. Borroughs (Chairman) I. R. Oag M. P. Calabria R. S. Turnbull P.A. Pullal' G. Brown-Shepherd J. W.G. Moss P. MeL. Mather P. N. 10hnston K. R. Carnie S. R. Hoare
E. W. W. Peat[ (Chairman) L. G. Vitucci G. I. Thompson A. D. Preece I. M.1. Smith A. B. Dolan K. J. Seppelt D. R. McWilliam W.I. Harris R. B. Schiller M. W. Moore-Wilton

Australian Canned Fruits Industry Advisory Committee

1.1.80 1.1.80 1.1.80
23.9.80 1.1.80

3 years 3 years 3 years
3 years 3 years

$7,125 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80
Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80

Australian Canned Fruits Sales Promotion Committee

1.1.81 1.1.81 1.1.81 1.1.81 1.1.81 1.1.81 1.1.81 1.1.81 1.1.81 1.1.81 6.4.81

3 years 3 years
3 years
3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years
3 years 3 years 3 years No set term of appointment

Dailysittingfee-$100 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Officer of Dept of Primary Industry

10.2.79 10.2.79 10.2.79 10.2.79 10.2.70 10.2.79 10.2.70 10.2.70 10.2.79 10.2.79 14.8.80

Australian Wine Board
3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years No set term of appointment

Daily sitting fee-$1 00 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-S80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Officer of Dept of Primary Industry

D. W. Stride, A. O. (Chairman)
M. MeN. Lucey J. C. Harrison W. M. Whiting M. V. Sutterby A. R. Mead V. L. Byrnes E. L. Jenkins

Australian Dried Fruits Corpora tion

1.1. 79 1.1. 79 1.1.79 1.1. 79 1.1.79 1.1. 79 1. 1. 79 1.1.79

3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years

$8,575 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Officer of Dept of Primary Industry

W. J. Byrne (Chairman) D.McBean W. B. Harris J. W. Meagher C. R. Turkington M. MeN. Lucey R. G. Horsburgh F. H. Gill, OBE. V. L.Byrnes R. W.Tillcr H. M. Tankard
T. B. Curtin (Chairman) F. A. L. Connell N.M. Haysom K. L.Avent
D. 1. Asimus (Chairman) J. S. Silcock (Deputy Chairman)

Dried Fruits Research Committee

30.6.80
1.6.80 1.6.80 1.6.80 1.6.80 1.6.80 1.6.80 1.6.80 1.6.80 1.6.80 1.6.80

Until 31.5.83 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years

Fishing Industry Research Committee'

24.9.80 24.9.80 24.9.80
24.9.80

2 years 2 years 2 years
2 years

Australian Wool Corporation

10.9.79 1.1.81

Until 29.7.83 3 years

Officer of Dept of Primary Industry Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80
Officer of Dept of Primary Industry Daily sitting fee-$80 Daily sitting fee-$80 Officer of CSIRO
$53,976 $10,675

2196 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Answers to Questions

W. J. Holcroft . D. Fletcher-Jones B. N. Kelman E. W.Barr E. L. O'Brien P.D.Moore F. M. Davidson F. H. M. Collins
L.J. Yeo (Chairman) A. N. Johnston S. S. Neville F.G.Stuart J. K. Westmore W. A. Williams M. W. Andrews F. M. Davidson

11.3.80 1.1.80 23.2.81 1.1.81 1.1.81 1.1.80 1.1.80 1.1.81

3 years
3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years

Australian Wool Testing Authority

1.7.78 1.7.78 1.7.78 1.7.78 1.7.78 1.7.78 1.7.80 1.4.80

3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years

Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Administrative Services
(Question No. 1022)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Office holders who might come within the scope of the question are as follows:

$7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 $7,125 Officer of Dept of Primary Industry
$4,300 $1,775 $1,775 $1,775 $1,775 $1,775 Officer of CSIRO Remunerated as Member 'of Australian
Wool Corporation

Statutory authority

Office holder

Date of

Date of

Term of

first

current

current

Current

appointment appointment appointment salary/fee

Commonwealth Grants Commission
Remuneration Tribunal

The Hon. Mr Justice R.

1.10.1974 1.10.1979

Else-Mitchell, C.M.G.

(Chairman)

Mr W. R. Lane, CBE. (part-time 16.12.1966 1.10.1977

Commissioner)

Professor R. L. Mathews, CBE.

14.12.1972 15.12.1980

(part-time Commissioner)

Dr. J. B. Donovan (part.time

1.1.1979

1.1.1979

Associate Member)

Mr E. S. Eyers, OBE. (part-time 1.10.1979 1.10.1979

Associate Member)

Sir Leslie Melville, K.B.E. (part.time 1.1.1979

1.1.1979

Associate Member)

(Chairman

between 1966

and 1974)

The Hon. Sir Walter Campbell

23.1.1974 23.1.1979

(Chairman)

Christmas Island Phosphate Commission

Sir Andr\lw Grimwade CBE. (Member)
Mr R. M. Porter (Member) Mr M. C. Timbs (Australian
Commissioner)

23.1.1974 23.1.1974 11.6.1976

23.1.1979 23.1.1979 11.6.1976

30.9.1984 30.9.1982 14.12.1985 30.6.1981 30.6.1981 30.6.1981
22.1.1984
22.1.1984 22.1.1984 At pleasure

$59,000 p.a. (plus $3,075p.a. allowance)
$15,700p.a. $15,700p.a. $11,225 p.a. $11,225 p.a. $11,225 p.a.
The Commonwealth pays no salary or fee but reimburses the Government of Queensland on a pro rata basis. The daily fee is of the order ofS170
$8,700p.a. $8,700p.a. $11,500 p.a. or
$IS,OOOp.a. when acting as Chairman

Answers to Questions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2197

Statutory authority

Officeholder Mr W. B. Marston, OBE.
(Commissioner appointed by the Australian and New Zealand Governments Jointly). (A third ComI1lissioner is appointed by the New Zealand Government)

Date of first appointment 27.11.1975

Date of current appointment 10.3.1978

Term of

current

Current

appointment salaryffee

At pleasure $11,500p.a. (ofthetwo Governments)

Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1023)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister fDr Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 1 Apri11981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dales and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards

and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The names, dates and terms of appointment and salaries of all persons appointed to the Repatriation Commission, the Repatriation Boards and the Repatriation Review Tribunal are as follow:

Name
Repatriation CommissionSir Richard Kingsland, CBE., D.F.C. R. G. Kelly, A.M.
K. D. A. Medbury, OBE.

Date of appointment
17 July 1980 12 June 1978 22 May 1980

Repatriation BoardsT. P. Collins J. D. McCurdy K. E. Williams J.B.Coats J.G.G1ancy K. N. McLeod L. J. Hagerty K. S. Jones W. D. Jeffery' W. C. Mullaney, B.E.M. D. W. Donkin, M.B.E. G.E.Ross D.A.Smith L. S. Black T. V. Shaw M.C.Lemon L. Phenna, M.B.E. B. F. Finlay

17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980

Term of appointment
23 July 198018 October 1981 25 June 197824 June 1981 25 May 198024 May 1983
I October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 I October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 I October 198030 September 1983 I October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983

Salary
$53,976 includes $4,300 responsibility loading $41,286 $41,286
$25,821 $25,821 $25,821 $25,821 $25,821 $25,821 $25,821 $25,821 $25,821 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083

2198 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Name R E. M. Hughes R. W. Allsop K.J.Murray J. A. Fahey, A.M. R.C. Walker R.J.Emslie M. Ireland M.1. Kirwan R W. Allen, D.C.M. W. K. O'Brien B. F. Smith

Dateof appointment 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980 17 September 1980

Repatriation Review TribunalF. J. Mahoney, C.B., OBE. 22 April 1979

B. Virtue

7 June 1979

B. G. Hepworth

11 February 1981

1. B.Fo1ey

7 June 1979

K. 1. Harding

7 June 1979

G. E. A. Robinson

7 June 1979

M. K. Bannister

29 July 1980

C. B. Campbell

20 December 1979

J.A. Flett

20 December 1979

S. D. Thistleton

7 June 1979

1. RFlynn

7 June 1979

R.A.Osborn

7 June 1979

M. W.Askey

7 June 1979

C. W.Rowe

7 June 1979

J.M.Moller

7 June 1979

P. M.Healy

7 June 1979

A.F. Yeomans

7 June 1979

G. M. Rothschild

7 June 1979

E.D.Hirst

7 June 1979

S.M. Harris

7 June 1979

D. R.Smyth

7 June 1979

B. J. Locke

20 December 1979

Term of appointment
1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 I October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September1983 I October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September 1983 1 October 198030 September .1983 1 October 198030 September 1983
14May 197915 March 1985 1 July 197930 June 1984 16 February 198115 February 1986 19 June 197930 June 1984 1 July 197914 July 1984 1 July 19792 December 1984 I August 198031 July 1985 14 January 198013 January 1985 14 January 198013 January 1985 1 July 19792 March 1984 1 July 197930 June 1984 19 June 197930 June 1984 19 June 197930 June 1984 1 July 197930 June 1984 19 June 197930 June 1984 19 June 197930 June 1984 19 June 197930 June 1984 19 June 197930 June 1984 1 July 197930 June 1984 1 July 1979~ 30 June 1984 19 June 197930 June 1984 14 January 198013 January 1983

Salary $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083 $24,083
$44,304 $38,265 $38,265 $38,265 $38,265 $38,265 $38,265 $38,265 $38,265 $27,555 $27,555 $27,555 $27,555 $27,555 $27,555 $27,555 $27,555 $27,555 $27,555 $27,555 $27,555 Daily sitting fee paid to part-time
Deputy President $160

Answers to Questions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2199

Name

Date of appointment

Term of appointment

A,G.Knox J. P. Harkins R. P. Hassall J. L. W. Merson D.F.Gilson C.J, Fagan J. A. Spooner A.Wharton I. M. Green

20 December 1979 29 January 1981 20 December 1979 20 December 1979 20 December 1979 20 December 1979 20 December 1979 20 December 1979 20 December 1979

14 January 197913 January 1983 9 February 198125 April 1982
14 January 198013 January 1983
14 January 198013 January 1983 14 January 198013 January 1983 14 January 198013 January 1983
14 January 198021 December 1981 14 January 198013 January 1983 14 January 198013 January 1983

Repatriation Review Tribunal: Part-Time Medical Members-

M. S. Alexander, OBE.

28 June 1979

1 July 1979-

30 June 1982

L. V.Armati

28 June 1979

1 July 197930 June 1981

T. P. G. Bateman

5 December 1979

5 December 19794 December 1982

G. Clifton-Smith

28 June 1979

1 July 197930 June 1982

D. L. Dobell-Brown

28 June 1979

1 July 197930 June 1982

B. E.Hagan

5 December 1979

5 December 19794 December 1982

G. E. Hession

5 December 1979

5 December 19794 December 1982

Sir Patrick John Kenny

30 June 1980

1 July 198030 June 1981

C. J. Love

28 June 1979

1 July 197930 June 1982

F. K. McManis

28 June 1979

1 July 197930 June 1982

J. W. McNamara

30 June 1980

1 July 198030 June 1981

WA.Murphy

28 June 1979

lJuly 197930 June 1982

R.C.Opie

28 June 1979

1 July 197930 June 1982

G, H. Puddicombe

28 June 1979

1 July 197930 June 1981

R.K.Reid

5 December 1979

;5 December 19794 December 1982

E. H. Ross

28 June 1979

1 July 197930 June 1981

Salary
Daily sitting fee paid to part-time Deputy President $160
Daily sitting fee paid to part-time Deputy President $160
'Daily sitting fee paid to part-time Deputy President $160
Daily sitting fee paid to part-time members $115
Daily sitting fee paid to part-time members $115
Daily sitting fee paid to part-time members $115
Daily sitting fee paid to part-time members $115
Daily sitting fee paid to part-time members $115
Daily sitting fee paid to part-time members $115
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable froin time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions

2200 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Name C. H. Selby E. W.Sibree J. D. M. Aboud J. V. T.Apel B. E. Ariotti J. B. Francis A. G. P. Gallagher B. E. E. Hirschfeld J. B. Lynch L. 1. McGuire G. R. C. McLeod K. R. Mitchell L. S. Parker B. S. Purssey A. H. Robertson G.S. Stable J. G. Toakley J.N. Ure A. G. Campbell
B. D. Cowling
R.H.Elix D.S.Kidd

Date of appointment 30 June 1980 30 June 1980 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 30 June 1980 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 5 December 1979 30 June 1980 28 June 1979

Term of appointment
1 July 198030 June 1981
1 July 198030 June 1981
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
I July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 198030 June 1981
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1981
1 July 197930 June 1981
5 December 19794 December 1982
1 July 198030 June 1981
1 July 197930 June 1982

Salary
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time.to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time.to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions.
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions

Answers to Questions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2201

Name R. G. Plummer D. T. Shortridge D. J. Sidey A. G. Spitzer J. L. Stokes I. H. F. Swain C.G. Wilson F.G.Binns R. K. Brodribb D. P. Churton A. C. D. Corney P. W. Fay A. J. Foster L.N. GoHan L. W. Knight R. W. MacIntyre-Smith D. B. Nathan P. Pitney P. C. Pitt M. D. Readett R. C. Reigelhuth T. C. Roddick

Date of appointment 30 June 1980 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 5 December 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 22 December 1980 28 June 1979 27 March 1980 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 30 June 1980 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 27 November 1980 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 5 December 1979

Term of appointment
1 July 198030 June 1981
1 July 197930 June 1981
1 July 197930 June 1981
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
22 December 198021 December 1983
1 July 197930 June 1982
27 March 19804 December 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
I July 198030 June 1981
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
27 November 19804 December 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982

Salary
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting.Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions

2202 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Name B.M. Schram D.K.Sutton W. M. Thomson R. Wall B.M. Watson A.W.Young A.J. Basham J. E. Clarke M.V.Clarke C. L. Coghlan R.K.Doig J. B. Fethers D.R.Gauld J. S. Guest, OBE. B.M. Hoare J. T. Hueston H. B. Kay R. C.W. Lowe M.S.Maiyah G. McCloskey R. N. Mellor J.B.Morley

Date of appointment 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 30 June 1980 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 5 December 1979 30 June 1980 28 June 1979 5 December 1979 22 December 1980 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 22 December 1980 28 June 1979 31 August 1980 5 December 1979 5 December 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979

Term of appointment
1 July 197930 June 1982
1July 197930 June 1982
I July 197930 June 1982
1 July 198030 June 1981
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982
lJuly 198022 May 1981
1July 197930 June 1982
5 December 1979-- 4 December 1981
22 December 198021December 1983
1 July 197930 June 1982
1July 197930 June 1981
1 July 197930 June 1982
lJuly 197930 June 1982
22 December 198021 December 1983
lJuly 197930 June 1982
31 August 19804 December 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982
5.Decenlber 19794 December 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
lJuly 197930 June 1982

Salary
Sessional Fees payablefrom time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payablefrom time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
. Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions

Answers to Questions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2203

Name R.K. Newing J. R. Officer P. J. Parsons C. S. Richards H. D. Steward G. G. Stillwell L. T. Stretton J.Summons A.H. Toyne G. W. Trinca S. Troski N. J. Wilkins J. C. Zwar P. C. Anderson W.J.Boerema D. A. Clements H. Coates P.M.Connor T. B. Cullity N,McLaren C.D.Murphy R.N.Murray

Date of appointment 22 December 1980 28 June 1979 30 June 1980 22 December 1980 30 June 1980 5 December 1979 22 December 1980 5 December 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 28 June 1979 5 December 1979 5 December 1979 5 December 1979 5 December 1979 22 December 1980 5 December 1979 22 December 1980 5 December 1979 22 December 1980

Term of appointment
22 December 198021 December 1983
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 198030 June 1981
22 December 198021 December 1983
1 Jilly 198030 June 1981
5 December i 9794 December 1982
22 December 198021 December 1983
5 December 19794 December 1981
1 July 197930 June 1982
I July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
1 July 197930 June 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982
22 December 198021 December 1983
5 December 19794 December 1982
22 December 198021 December 1983
5 December 19794December 1982
22 December 198021 December 1983

Salary
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from lime to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions

2204 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Name Z. Pervan R. F. Pinerua E.R.Reid P.A. Staer A. D. H. Stewart J. E. Teasdale O. B. Toller J. R. H. Watson Z. B. Webster

Date of appointment 5 December 1979 5 December 1979 5 December 1979 5December 1979 5 December 1979 5 December 1979 5 December 1979 5 December 1979 5 December 1979

Term of appointment
5December 19794 December 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982
5December 19794December 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982
5December 19794 December 1982
5 December 19794 December 1982

Salary
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional F~es payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions
Sessional Fees payable from time to time to Senior Medical Specialists visiting Repatriation Institutions

Benoxaprofen: Marketing as Opren
(Question No. 1073)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) Is his Department evaluating the drug Benoxaprofen, marketed in the United Kingdom as Opren.
(2) If so, when are the results likely to (a) become known and (b) be published.
(3) If the results are successful, will the drug be placed on the National Health Scheme list.
Mr MacKeJlar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) (a) I am unable to state when the results will become known although it is likely that the evaluation reports will be considered by the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee before the end of this year.
(b) Results of the evaluation ofdrugs are not published, but are communicated in detail to the sponsoring drug companies as soon as practicable after their consideration by the ADEC.
(3) Drugs are considered for listing as pharmaceutical benefits under the National Health Scheme following a specific request from the company concerned or other interested parties. This consideration is given by the Pbarmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee, which is the independent statutory body established under the National Health Act to advise the Minister for Health on the listing of pharmaceutical benefits. The company has applied foriisting of Benoxaprofen and this will be considered if and when marketing approval is granted.

Drugs: Removal from Pharmaceutical Benefits
(Question No. 1176)
Mr Armitage asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
Further to his answer to my question No. 634 (Hansard, 2 April 1981, page 1329) relating to drugs taken off the pharmaceutical benefits list since 18 October 1980, which drugs on the list referred to in part (4) of the answer to question No. 634 are available to treat the conditions outlined in the reply to part (3) of the question.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There is a wide range of drugs available as pharmaceutical benefits which are not restricted in regard to the conditions for which they may be prescribed as pharmaceutical benefits.
The selection of a suitable alternative pharmaceutical benefit for the treatment of a condition outlined in the reply to part (3) of question No. 634is primarily amalter for the individual patient's medical adviser to determine having due regard for the nature and severity of the condition, possible interactions with concomitant medication, patient idiosyncrasies and any other factors relevant to the individual patient.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1394)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Have any officers and employees of his Department
been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if
so, how many.

Answers to Questions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2205

(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of
each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.

Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable

member's question is as follows:

'

(1) Yes; currently 16.

(2) Details in respect of those with current approval are as follows-

Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) 67 officers of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs have thei~ home telephone rentals fully paid and other charges partially paid.
(2) The 1979-80 expenditure was $12,105.

Division
Fourth Fourth Fourth Fourth Fourth Fourth Fourth Fourth Third Third Third Third Third Third Third Third

Nature of outside Salary employment

$ 10,880 14,735 14,735 15,127 15,500 16,700 17,400 17,402 16,848 17,602 22,000 22,046 23,510 24,581 25,000 26,689

Lecturer Bar Steward Gardening activities Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Municipal Councillor Racing Official Hon. Vet., RSPCA Lecturer Tutor Lecturer Freelance Writer Lecturer Lecturer

Overseas Travel: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1462)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of the Department of Veterans' Affairs travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc.,
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) A total of six officers and employees of the Department of Veterans' Affairs travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) The total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances etc., was $27,190.16.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1541)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by the Department.
(2) What was the cost to the Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.

Television Reception
(Question No. 1630)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that inferior television reception is received in parts of Roleystone within the Perth Metropolitan area.
(2) Have plans been made to remedy the reception in this area; if so, what plans and when can action be expected.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) There are no plans at present to provide an improved television signal in the Roleystone area; however the area will be considered in future planning of the National (ABC) Television Service. The initiative for improvements to reception of commercial services normally comes from the stations concerned.
Quarantine: Wood Eating Carpenter Ants
(Question No. 1695)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the New Zealand newspaper The Dominion of 6 February 1981 that wood eating carpenter ants were detected at Wellington in a container from Japan.
(2) If so, did the New Zealand Department of Agriculture and Fisheries advise his Department of the find, and supply details of the source and nature ofinfestation.
(3) Do Australian quarantine officials give details of similar finds at Australian ports to the New Zealand Department of Agriculture and Fisheries; if not, will he take active steps to develop such co-operation in quarantine matters between Australia and New Zealand.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. However, for years wood carpenter ants have been regularly intercepted at Australian ports of entry and appropriate quarantine action has been taken.
(2) No. Given quarantine surveillance arrangements which apply at Australian ports of entry, it is not considered necessary for New Zealand to advise Australia of routine pest interceptions made at New Zealand ports of entry.
(3) No. The specific arrangements proposed are not regarded as necessary. However, an arrangement does exist whereby New Zealand advises Australia and Australia advises New Zealand of any infestations detected in plants or goods moving across the Tasman.

2206 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Leprosy
(Question No. 1727)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many lepers are in Australia and what is their distribution by State and Territory.
(2) How many cases of leprosy have been reported in each State and Territory in each of the last 3 years.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In view of the stigma attached to the word 'leper' and the now curahle nature of the disease, it is desirable that sutTerers from leprosy be no longer referred to as lepers but as cases of leprosy. It has been the practice that all cases of leprosy, regardless of cure, remain registered for life. Annual notifications are small and the number of active cases at any one time is a mere fraction of those remaining on the register. The figures set out below are cumulative and do not take account of patients who may have recently died and have not been removed from the register since the last comprehensive review. The number of persons registered in each State and Territory as at 31 December 1980 is as follows:

NSW Vic. Qld SA WA Tas. ACT NT 68 72 209 18 831 2 Nil 949 (2)

Total 2,149

NSW Vic. Qld SA WA Tas. ACT NTTotal

1978
1979 1980

6 3 8 3 15 Nil Nil 16 51 8 7 10 5 12 Nil Nil 18 60 10 8 5 I 9 Nil Nil 7 40

Total 24 18 23 9 36 Nil Nil 41 151

Source: State and Territory health authorities.
Further information concerning leprosy was given in my answer to Question 5380 (Hansard, 16 April 1980, pages 1845-7).

Smallpox Virus
(Question No. 1728)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Are any supplies of smallpox virus held in Australia; if so, where, and for what purpose.
Mr MacKellar-The Minister for Health has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I am informed that no smallpox virus is held in Australia. Under Quarantine Proclamation 6G importation of such virus is prohibited.

Antarctica: Animal and Bird Diseases
(Question No. 1742)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What procedures have been adopted to ensure that animal and bird diseases are not introduced to the indigenous wildlife of Antarctica by (a) Australian expeditioners and (b) other nations with bases in the Antarctic.

Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The 'Agreed Measures', developed and agreed to by the members of the Antarctic Treaty, detail provisions for the protection of all native Antarctic wildlife and for the prevention of the introduction of pests or disease into the Treaty area. Australia gave the 'Agreed Measures' force oflaw under the Antarctic Treaty (Environment Protection) Act which was proclaimed in June 1980. The Antarctic Division is administratively responsible for the Act including a permit system which is used to monitor and control activities which may have an adverse effect on the native fauna and flora or their habitat.
In accordance with Section 19 (I) of this Act, unless specifically authorised by permit, it is unlawful to take to the Antarctic any animal, plant, virus, bacterium, yeast or fungus that is not indigenous to the Antarctic. This provision does not apply to the introduction of animals and plants into Antarctica for use as food provided that they are used for this purpose and are kept under stringent conditions. Live poultry cannot be introduced.
The Division has actively implemented operational procedures consistent with the Agreed Measures. The growth in the use of containers and the unitisation of cargo and supplies has lessened the risk of contamination to the Antarctic environment. The cleanliness of containers is checked prior to their shipment from Australia. Unitised cargo loading has reduced the need for timber packaging. Other features of the Division's operations which promote environmental protectionare:
No live animals are introduced to Antarctica or subAntarctic Islands. Husky dogs are bred at Mawson station and there is infrequent exchange of husky dogs between Antarctic stations.
Annual provision of new clothing, footwear, cooking utensils and machinery reduces significantly the likelihood of germs surviving on inanimate objects.
With few exceptions, frozen meats, vegetables and poultry products taken to stations are produced in Australia, and hence are free from most of the major pests and diseases.
Immediately prior to departure to Antarctica, all heavy machinery (ie tractors, motorised tobaggans and sledges) is steamed clean and if appropriate painted.
Once identified any possible source of quarantine threat is communicated to Antarctic stations and resupply vessels for their information and appropriate action.
In the history of Australia's Antarctic operations, no infection has been detected by quarantine inspectors in Antarctic resupply vessels.
(b) Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties are bound by the provisions and procedures of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. However, it is considered that itinerant yachts and foreign fishing trawlers operating in the Southern Ocean constitute a quarantine risk and there is a need for greater surveillance in this area.
Antarctica: Garbage Disposal
(Question No. 1743)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How is garbage and effluent disposed of at Australian Antarctic bases.
(2) Are the methods employed different from those adopted at the Antarctic bases of other nations; if so, in which way.

Answers to Questions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2207

Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The present situation is:
CaseyAll sewage and sullage is piped untreated to the sea. Burnable garbage is incinerated whilst remaining garbage
is disposed to landfill.
Davis and MawsonSolid human waste is incinerated. The products are ash
which is disposed to landfill. Liquid human waste and sullage is piped untreated away
from buildings whence it drains to the sea. Burnable garbage is incinerated whilst remaining garbage
is disposed to landfill.
In respect to future developments, current proposals as presented to the PWC provide that:
Liquid waste (human and sullage) will be biologically treated and effluent will be piped to the sea.
Sludge from the treatment process will be returned to Australia.
Burnable garbage will be incinerated. Other garbage .will be compacted and returned to Australia. Large metal objects will be cut up and returned to Australia.
(2) Twelve countries are operating stations in Antarctica. We have information concerning waste disposal practices of all these countries with the exception of Poland, Chile and Argentina.
The foHowing summarises disposal methods used for human waste and sullage.

Method

Number of stations where employed

Piping untreated waste to sea

4

Waterborne system using recirculated

effluent from which solids have been

removed and incinerated

1

Landfill . . . . . . . . . .

2

Chemical toilets with sullage piped to

sea or ice . . . . . . . . .

2

Untreated waste piped to ice disposal

I

Wastes tankered to landfill area

1

Information concerning garbage disposal is not as clear as for human waste and sullage. The method commonly used is one or a combination of the following:
Landfill. Incineration. Disposal to sea from ships. Disposal to sea by placing on pack ice. Returning to country of origin.
From the information giVe'll in answer to Question I, waste disposal methods used at Australian stations are approximately similar to those used, at the present time, by other countries.
In the future it is proposed that Australia should treat liquid waste and disposal of garbage by incineration and/or returning it to Australia. By comparison, no countries are known, at the present time, to be treating liquid waste as is proposed for Australian stations. Two countries at least are using chemical toilets.
If the proposals to treat liquid wastes are approved, Australia would be establishing a higher standard of waste disposal than is used at the present time by other countries.

This higher standard would minimise the impact of waste disposal upon the Antarctic environment.
Antarctica: Preservation of Historic Buildings
(Question No. 1744)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Who is responsible for care and maintenance of the two huts on Ross Island, Antarctica, used by Captain Scott.
(2) Has Australia made any contribution to the preservation of these historic buildings; if so, what.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) The huts on Ross Island are the responsibility of New Zealand. The NZ Huts Restoration Committee, which was formed in 1959-60, undertakes care and maintenance of the huts. The Committee is accommodated within the NZ Department of Science and Industrial Research and draws on the following organisations; Royal NZ Navy; Historical Places Trust; Ministry of Works; NZ Antarctic Society; Dominion Museum and the NZ Antarctic Division.
Hut caretakers each summer are unpaid volunteers and are kitted by the NZ Antarctic Division and are transported to Antarctica by US aircraft. Up to one thousand visitors inspect the huts each year.
(2) Australia has made no contribution to the preservation of the huts.
Antarctica: Origin of Meat and Vegetable Foodstuffs
(Question No. 1745)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What meat and vegetable foodstuffs at Australian Antarctic bases were obtained from non-Australian sources in each of the last 3 years.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
With few exceptions, meat and vegetable foodstuffs supplied to Australian Antarctic stations are Australian produce. It is estimated that less than one per cent of food supplied is of foreign origin.
Foreign meat and vegetable foods supplied over the last three years includes small quantities of smoked salmon, tinned and dried fish, dried field rations and some condiments. Some selected foods have also been supplied for the benefit of exchange scientists wintering at Australian Antarctic stations.
A detailed statement offood supplied to Australian Antarctic stations from non-Australian sources over the last three years can be compiled from existingrecords. However, this compilation would be time-consuming because of the need to consult procurement documents and shipping manifests. If the honourable member requests it, I will ask for this to be done.
Cost of Bridge, Kuringa Drive, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1774)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What was the cost of the bridge spanning Kuringa Drive, Australian Capital Territory, and what is its purpose.

2208 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable 'member's question is as follows:
I am advised by the National Capital Development Commission that:
(a) The estimated cost of the bridge is $120,000. (b) The bridge was constructed to provide a safe means of
moving stock, plant and machinery across Kuringa Drive, which is a major arterial road giving access to the Barton Highway from north Belconnen suburbs.
Stage 2 of Central Services Complex, Mitchell, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1835)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What are the reasons for the 23rd Annual Report of the National Capital Development Commission showing the completed cost of erection of Stage 2 of the Central Services Complex, Mitchell, Australian Capital Territory, as $3.217m, whilst the 1979-80 Annual Report of Department of Housing and Construction shows the completed cost as $3.16m.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows: '
I am advised by the National Capital Development Commission that:
The completed cost of$3.16m for the Stage 2 of the Central Services Complex at Mitchell as shown in the 1979-80 Annual Report of the Department of Housing and Construction refers to the building contract only.
The completed cost of $3.217m for the Stage 2 of the Central Services Complex as shown in the 23rd Annual Report of the National Capital Development Commission refers to the total project and includes, in addition to the building contract, separate contract works covering the installation of hydraulic platform pits and the installation of security equipment.
Aboriginal Housing
(Question No. 1843)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What action has been taken by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs on the recommendation contained in the 5th Annual Report for 1979-80 of the Commissioner for Community Relations (page 58) that public housing appropriate to the needs, values and lifestyles of Aboriginal people in all States and the Northern Territory should be provided.
(2) In what way would acceptance of this recommendation require changes in the policy or practices of the Department.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) and (2) My Department's housing programs have for some years been directed to ensuring the provision of accommodation of a type and at locations suitable to the range of needs, values and lifestyles of Aboriginal people. The programs comprise grants to State and Northern Territory housing authoriti~, grants-in-aid to Aboriginal housing associations, loans by the Aboriginal Development Commission for the purchase or erection of housing, and the provision of hostel accommodation through Aboriginal Hostels Limited. The grants to State and Northern Territory housing authorities are intended to cater for Aboriginals who do not meet the

eligibility criteria under the welfare housing programs administered by the States and the Northern Territory or who, because of their position on the waiting list or because of the unavailability of suitable accommodation at the required location, would not be provided with housing under those programs within a reasonable time.
Guda Guda Aboriginal Community, Western Australia
(Question No. 1905).
Mr Campbell asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Will 'funds be allocated to connect the Guda Guda Aboriginal Community, Western Australia, to the Wyndham town water supply in the 1981-82 forward estimates for the Department of Aboriginal AITairs.
(2) What level of funding will be necessary to connect this community to the town waler supply.
(3) Will the Department of Aboriginal Affairs ensure that the most direct route available will be selected in preference to any other alternative.
(4) If the pipeline route will take an indirect route in order to service block owners who lie in a circuitous route between Wyndham and the Guda Guda Community, will the Minister guarantee that the Wyndham East Kimberley Shire, or the block owners themselves, pay the full amount of the extra costs involved in taking this route.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) $180,OOO-as estimated by the Western Australian Public Works Department and the Commonwealth Department of Housing and Construction.
(3) The responsibility for selecting the route of the pipeline rests with the Public Works Department. The most direct route was not feasible due to marshy land and iriaccessibility for servicing in the wet scason.
(4) The responsibility for assessing the connection fee rests' with the Western Australian Public Works Department. Since
the water pipeline will pass other blocks the residents are en-
titled to watet connection, and are liable for resultant fees and charges as set by the Western Australian Public Works Department.
Colostomy Bags: Cost ifplaced on the National Health Scheme List
(Question No. 1909)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice on 9 April 1981:
What would be the estimated cost for colostomy bags if they were placed on the National Health Scheme pharmaceutical lis!.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Under the provisions of the National Health Act only drugs and medicinal preparations may be made available under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.
Stoma appliances, which are predominently colostomy bags and associated equipment, are made available free of charge to stomatees through stoma associations under the Stoma Appliance Scheme.

Answers to Questions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2209

The estimated cost of the Stoma Appliance Scheme for the financial year 1980-81 is $2.6m.
Southern Bluefin Tuna Fishery
(Question No. 1957)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(1) Has the South Eastern Fisheries Committee been required to undertake a study of the tuna and trawl fisheries and to report to the Australian Fisheries Council in September 1981.
(2) Was the South Eastern Fisheries Committee the body which originally recommended to the Australian Fisheries Council that the freeze on the southern bluefin tuna fishery be lifted.
(3) Can the study now asked of the South Eastern Fisheries Committee be done in a fair and unbiased manner, given the on-the-record position of the Committee concerning the lifting of the freeze.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) Yes.
Southern Bluefin Tuna Fishery
(Question No. 1958)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 28 April 198 I:
(1) Did he say in a recent statement that fishermen planning to enter the southern bluefin tuna fishery should not base their expectations of profitability on taking southern bluefin tuna.
(2) If so, for what other reason would fishermen planning to enter the fishery seek a licence, unless they wanted to take southern bluefin tuna.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) an (2) I said that fishermen planning to enter the fishery should not base their expectations of profitability on taking southern bluefin tuna because it is possible that new entrants to the fishery could make substantial investments on the, assumption that they will have long term access to the fishery. The question of long term access will depend on what future management arrangements, if any, apply in the trawl and tuna fisheries in south eastern Australia. I felt it was responsible to warn persons considering making an investment to fish for southern bluefin tuna, that management measures might eventuate which could affect the viability of such investment.
Southern Bluefin Tuna Fishery
(Question No. 1959)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the inquiry being conducted by the Senate Standing Committee on Trade and Resources into the responsibilities of the Commonwealth Government for the development of thc Australian fishing industry, and that that Committee, in hearings held in recent weeks, has heard evidence from his -Department, the Australian Fishing Industry Council and other interested bodies.
(2) If so, why has he chosen to take a major management decision in terms of the southern bluefin tuna fishery, without

awaiting the outcome and recommendations of that Committee given the very detailed terms of reference of the Committee and that hearings of the Committee now are being held.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) No-one could seriously suggest that management decisions of any significance should be postponed pending the outcome of a Senate inquiry, particularly in cases, such as this, where the issue is not referred to in the terms of reference of the inquiry.
Southern Bluefin Tuna Fishery
(Question No. 1960)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(I) Did he recently express his concern that Australians could be prevented from fishing for souther bluefin tuna when there is an agreement which enables Japanese fishermen to do so.
(2) Following the 1980 Australia-Japan fisheries renegotiation talks, did he set up a working group to inquire into the potential for Australian fishermen to participate in longline fishing for tuna which currently accounts for 30 per cent of the souther bluefin tuna catch in the Australian fishing zone.
(3) If so, how can a major management decision be taken concerning this fishery, prior to receiving the report andrecommendations from the working group into tuna long-lining which he has set up.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Such a working group was established.
(3) Whether or not there is a freeze on entry by Australians to the southern bluefin tuna pole and line fishery is not critical to the task of the working group.
Delay in Payment to Chemists foi' Prescriptions
(Question No. 1973)
Mr Fisher asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(I) What is the current delay in the payment to approved chemists for prescriptionsdispensed as Pharmaceutical Benefits under the National Health Act.
(2) Are there increasingly longer periods between claim lodgement and payment; if so, what are the reasons.
(3) Are measures being contemplated by his Department to reduce the delays to a more acceptable period; if so, what arc they.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The aim of my Department is to effect payments of National Health Scheme claims within 30 calendar days of receipt, as is normal commercial practice. This target is currently being achieved in all States. Claims passed for payment on Friday 24 April 1981 were those that had been received by my Department on:
New South Wales-27 March Victoria and Australian Capital Territory-6 April Queensland-I 3 April South Australia and Northern Territory~7 April

2210 REPRESENTATIVES 7 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Western Australia-9 April Tasmania-14 April
(2) No,
(3) Earlier this year there were delays in the payment of chemists' claims in some States, particularly in New South Wales but also in South Australia and Victoria. In order to improve this situation a reallocation of Divisional (State) Office workloads was effected and processing procedures reviewed. These measures were successful and the situation continues to improve.
Industrial Relations: WhyaUa, South Australia
(Question No. 15)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 20 August 1980:
(1) Has he caused any inquiry to be made in view of recent l'eports on the ABC television program Four Corners about problems being experienced by workers in Whyalla, South Australia which had led to general poor relations between Broken Hill Pty Ltd and its workforce or has any section of his Department, on its own initiative, made such an inquiry.
(2) If so, (a) who conducted the investigations; and (b) what were the findings.
Mr Viner--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) My Department has examined the transcript of the Four Corners program, 'Working for the Company' which was produced in July yast lear. I understand that the program dealt with aspects of work and life that might arise in a so called 'company' town.
No specific or special inquiry was made by my Department as a result of that program.
Superannuation: Adriatic Life Insurance
(Question No. 452)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Is it a fact, that Adriatic Life Insurance, with cooperation from the Department of Defence, is promoting a section 79 superannuation fund for members of the RAAF with contributions up to $1,000 per annum accepted over the sum being contributed to the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Fund.
(2) If so, was the Tax Commissioner approached to ignore the service pension when calculating allowable contributions to this fund.
(3) What rate of interest is being used to calculate allowable contributions to the fund.
(4) Is an increase in the maximum sum allowed at retirement pending or has a special case for Defence personnel been negotiated.
(5) If a special case was negotiated, will this be advised to all insurance companies and would it also apply to the public service as a whole.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l), (2) and (3) Because of express provisions in the income tax law prohibiting him from diVUlging information respecting the affairs of any other person, the Commissioner of Taxation is unable to comment on the income tax affairs of Adriatic Life Insurance or individual members oftheRAAF.
As a general proposition, however, a member of the Defence Forces or, for that matter, any Commonwealth or other

employee, may apply to join a public superannuation fund established and maintained in accordance with section 79 of the Income Tax Assessment Act, provided that his contributions to, and benefits available from, all classes of superannuation funds do not exceed the maximum amounts laid down by the Commissioner.
(4) The Commissioner has recently increased the maximum contributions which may be paid to and the benefits which may be made available from all classes of superannuation funds.
(5) The new levels of contribution rates and maximum benefits have been made public and all insurance companies would be well aware of the increased benefits.

Arcata Investments Pty Ltd
(Question No. 454)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(l) With reference to my question No. 453 of 24 February 1981 to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, concerning the company which was given an immediate profit of $300,000 by the Receiver of Cambridge Credit Corporation, namely Arcata Investments Pty Limited, will he investigate whether this transaction led to exploitation of Australian taxpayers as well as the creditors of Cambridge Credit Corporation through a scheme of tax evasion using overseas tax shelters.
(2) Is Arcata Investments Pty Limited a Nauru-based company with the ultimate parent company being a Hong Kong company.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) The matters raised by the honourable Member have been referred to the Commissioner of Taxation who is responsible for the administration of the income tax law. The Commissioner has advised that the secrecy provisions of that law preclude him from commenting in any way on the taxation affairs of any person or company or on any action that might be taken in respect of any person or company.

Department of Primary Industry: Television Advertising

(Question No. 938)

Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:

(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.

(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.

Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1)Department of Primary Industry
Australian Honey Board Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation Australian Dairy Corporation . . . . . Pig Meat Promotion Committee Australian Dried Fruits Corporation (expen-
diture was incurred in New Zealand)
(2)(a) Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Australian Dairy Corporation

$
Nil 11,187 59,595 805,000 902,276 20,742
30,000
500 1,838

Answers to Questions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2211

$ (b) Nil.
Department ofIndustrial Relations: Television Advertising
(Question No. 940)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There is no record of any expenditure on television advertising by the Department, including the Industrial Relations Bureau and the Trade Union Training Authority, in 1979-80.
(2) (al Nil; (bl Nil.
Television Translator at Warburton, Victoria
(Qeuestion No. 964)
Mr Cunningham asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) Did his predecessor give a commitment to install a television translator in the Upper Yarra area north-east of Melbourne at Warburton.
(2) If so, when will work commence on installation of the translator.
(3) Will the translator's installation mean that all residents in that area will be able to receive adequate television reception.
(41Will there be a cost involved for residents in the area
resulting from the installation of the translator.
Mr SincJair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The proposal calls for establishment of facilities to provide the township with programs from the three Melbourne commercial stations and the ABC. Suitable provision is being made for the SBS to participate if this should be considered desirable.
At this stage the three Melbourne commercial television stations have been offered the grant of licences to serve the locality and my Department is at present co-ordinating final technical operating conditions for the translators with the stations.
The national service translator is scheduled for completion in the 1981-82 financial year; subject of course to the level of funding made available by the Government.
(3) These translators are designed to serve the town of Warburton in the Upper Yarra Shire of Victoria. As with most television installations of this nature there may he some isolated pockets that will not receive adequate coverage. However, my Department is unable to precisely determine the number and extent of these or the most appropriate method of improving coverage in them until the translators are operating.
(4) Those residents choosing to watch programs from the translators will have to employ equipment capable of receiving UHF transmissions. As stated in my reply to Mr Milton,

(Question No. 257) the modification of television receivers without UHF capability requires the installation of UHF to VHF down converters. A commercially available 'UHF settop converter' retails at approximately $80.00. Good reception of UHF transmissions also requires the installation of a UHF antenna. A cost of $80.00-$90.00 could be expected to be incurred for the complete installation of a new antenna of this type. This figure could be reduced if the existing VHF antenna hardware is utilised. Costs for the UHF antenna only range from approximately $25.00-$35.00. A diplexer unit which allows the use of VHF and UHF antennae with a common feedline retails at approximately $15.00.

Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1391)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Have any officers and employees of the Department of Communications, been granted permission to engage in outside employment, if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case,
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Currently within this Department only one formal approval to engage in outside employment exists.
(2) The current approval is in respect of a Fourth Division officer with the annual salary of $16,300 per annum approximately. The outside employment involves work on a Communication Project for the Australian Army which has been contracted to a private company. The officer concerned is on leave without pay for the period of outside employment.

Air Travel in Australia: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1490)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

What sum was paid to his Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

During the financial year ended 30 June 1980 the Department of Housing and Construction paid in the order of $1,095,000 for air travel within Australia, as follows:

Trans-Australia Airlines Ansett Airlines of Australia MacRobertson Miller Airlines
Miscellaneous *

$ 54<),120
397,496
122,796
25,119

Total

1,094,531

* Includes small amounts paid to private commuter oper-
ators, Aero Clubs and the like.

2212 REPRESENTATIVES 7.May 1981

Answers to Questions

Recognition of Aborigines, Torres Strait Islanders and South Sea Islanders

(Question No. 1847)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice on 9

Apri11981:

'

.( ~) What ~ction has been taken by the Department of Abongmal Affairs on the recommendation of the Commissioner for Community Relations in his. 5th Annual Report for I ??9-S0 that G.o~ernment agencies should grant equal recogmtlOn to Aborlgmes, Torres Strait Islanders and South Sea Islanders.

(2) Doe~ t~e experience of Departmental officers support the Commissioner's assessment that distinctions made between the 3 groups in delivery of services and assessment of needs has created tensions and disharmony.

Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(1) An Inter-departmental Committee established in 1975 to examine the situation of South Sea Islanders in Australia recommended that although there was evidence of some disadvantage, extension of the special assistance available to Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders was not warranted.

The Committee found that South Sea Islanders were not fully aware of existing general community assistance programs and benefits. As a result, when the then Minister for Social Security tabled a summary of the Committee's main findings on 13 S~ptember 1978 she announced that the needs of ~outh Sea ~slanders would be given specific attention by a SOCial worker m her Department working in conjunction with other staff in regional offices.

(2) Officers of my Department have informed me that although distinctions in assistance programs available to South Sea Islanders, and Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders have been blamed for exacerbating tensions between the groups, the Department's experience has been that the causes of such tension, where it exists, are more deeply rooted.

5th Annual Report of the Commissioner for Community Relations
(Question No. 1848)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Does the Minister support the following statement of the Commissioner for Community Relations at page 99 of his 5th Annual Report for 1979-80 that the solution to the white problems lies with the white governments and white bureaucracies; the answer to black problems lies with the powers that oppressed the Aborigines in the first place.
(2) Ifnot, why not.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) and (2) The quoted statement comes at the end of a section of the Commissioner's Annual Report in which he discusses complaints he received about 'Special Programs for Disadvantaged Groups' implemented by Commonwealth and State Governments. The Commissioner indicates his full suppor.t for Governments in implementing special measures and mdlcates that these do not constitute racial discrimination for

the purposes of the International Convention on the Elimination ofAll Forms ofRacial Discrimination or the Racial Discrimination Act, but are required to ensure adequate development and protection of human rights for disadvantaged racial or ethnic groups. It remains the policy of the Commonwealth Government to maintain and develop special programs for the advancement of the Aboriginal people.
Australian Fishing Zone
(Question No. 1863)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
What action has been taken to enforce the 200 mile fishing zone in relation to Norfolk Island?
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Primary Industry monitors reports of foreign fishing vessel activity in the Australian Fishing Zone (AFZ), including the AFZ around Norfolk Island and has arranged for the charter of aircraft on a number of occasions to investigate alleged infringements when timely information regarding such incidents has been received. In addition, the Australian Government has informed the relevant foreign governments of incidents involving foreign flag fishing vessels suspected of illegal activities in the -AFZ around Norfolk Island.
Licences have been issued which permit a number of foreign fishing vessels to fish in the AFZ off Norfolk Island under prescribed terms and conditions. The operations of such vessels are monitored by means of a mandatory radio reporting systemwhich requires each vessel to provide details of its movements and activities (including catches) to the Department of Primary Industry (via the Australian Coastal Surveillance Centre) on a regular basis.
Surveillance and enforcement measures in the AFZ are under continuous review, including those relating to areas of the AFZ surrounding external territories, and will be further considered during the forthcoming review of the existing Australian civil coastal surveillance system, the report "n which is due to be presented to the Australian Government in mid-1981.
Southern Bluefin Tuna Fishery
(Question No. 1956)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(1) Did he say in a recent statement concerning the lifting of the freeze on the southern bluefin tuna fishery, that new entrants,.if any, will not be able to eStablish access rights under any future management regime on the same basis as fishermen who have operated in the fishery to date.
(2) If so, does his reference to a future management regime indicate that there will be a future management regiine to replace the freeze on entry.
(3) Does the statement referred to in part (I) indicate that he intends establishing some form of second-class licence in the southern bluefin tuna fishery, in that certain licences will not carry with them the same rights as licences which existed prior to the lifting of the freeze.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) No.

Answers to Questions

7 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2213

(3) No. The statement indicates that if in future it proved necessary to control or even reduce the number of boats in the fishery, those who had been in the fishery for a period of time would be given priority over new entrants to the fishery.
Southern B1uefin Tuna Fishery
(Question No. 1961)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(1) Did he recently quote an economic study, or survey, undertaken by his Department as at least a substantial part of the basis on which he took (he decision (0 lift the freeze on entry to the southern bluefin tuna fishery.
(2) If so, has the Australian Fishing Industry Council informed him that they regard the economic survey carried out by his Department as being inadequate, in that it contains old information which, in the view of the Council, is of very limited benefit, and also that it contains important gaps that throw the value of the entire document into doubt.

(3) Did the Australian Fishing Industry Council also request him to update and upgrade the economic survey which he used as the basis for his decision before any substantive decision is taken on the longlerm future of the southern bluefin tuna fishery.
(4) If so, why did he choose to ignore the advice of the Council concerning the value or the economic survey.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. The lifting of the freeze was based on the decision of the Australian Fisheries Council in 1979, confirmed in 1980 and supported by substantial sectors of the Australian fishing industry.
(2) See (1).
(3) Yes, although it is difficult to see how 1979-80 information could be regarded as seriously out of date.
(4) I did not ignore the advice of the Australian Fishing Industry Council.


