House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 123, 1981 Tuesday, 2 June 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2861

Tuesday, 2 June 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
by Mr Beazley, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Kent, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Morris and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs of life: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5,811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.

9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
11. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that honourable members of the House of Representatives:
1. Recognise the importance and place of the Australian Hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
2. Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that honourable members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier, Mr Carlton, Mr Fisher and Mr Les McMahon.
Petitions received.
Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Owing to an overwhelming and continuous demand by the Australian people for a cruise service within the economic scope of the working man and his family, we request the Government to lift the ban placed on Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels entering Australian Ports.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Robert Brown and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored public inquiry.

2862 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Petitions

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling and Mr Humphreys.
Petitions received.
Tertia~y Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
1. The proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. The proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education ifloans are refused because a student is seen as a 'poor risk' (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. In regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. The proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.
5. The proposal not to fund 30 colleges of advanced education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid 1980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or for any category ofstudents;
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students.
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced. (iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary
Assistance. (v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are
rationalised be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling and Mr Scholes.
Petitions received.
Health Care
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal ofCommonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;

That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programs will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howe and MI' Les McMabon.
Petitions received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has had serious adverse efl'ects, namely:
a. Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
b. The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilisers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
c. The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian [arm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Jenkins and Mr Willis.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
A substantial contrihution to Australia's economy by the payment of taxation and to the quality of life of fellow Australians is made by parents in the work-force who have preschool children.
Taxation relief for adequate child care is necessary to enable these parents to avail themselves of child care facilities in order to take paid employment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that taxpayers who incur child care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in

Petitions

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2863

the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Occupational and Vocational Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The decisions of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government functions to discontinue the professional employment offices, to 'rationalise' and reduce occupational information services, to rationalise and reduce vocational psychology services, to discontinue the waterfront employment offices, to terminate the former regular servicemen's vocational training scheme, to discontinue the regular collection and publication of CES statistics of persons registered for unemployment and of unfilled vacancies, because such publication is embarrassing to the Government, are blatantly political and will in the long term prove not to be cost effective.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Government will reverse these decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Great Barrier Reef: Oil Exploration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens respectfully showeth:
That the undersigned are of the opinion that the Great Barrier Reef and region must be protected in entirety from the potentially destructive effects of mining and respectfully demand that you ensure this by declaring a continuous marine park of the reef zone from Fraser Island to the Torres Strait in 1981, for which management plans of the type devised for the Capricornia Section can be prepared and discussed in due course.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That public investment in tertiary education in the form of Federal Government funding is an investment in Australia's future and enables Australia to meet the demands of technological innovation.
That grave concern has been generated as a result of the Government's decisions to:
(a) Abolish the Education Research and Development Committee,
(b) terminate special support for educational research, (c) scale down in-house and contracted research activities
of the Department of Education, (d) scale down participation in international education
activities, particularly UNESCO and OECD, (e) further tighten already restrictive eligibility guidelines
for TEAS,

(f) supplement TEAS assistance by means of a loan scheme,
(g) phase in tuition fees for students undertaking degrees and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification,
(h) reduce grants to universities and colleges to take account of fee income,
(i) completely abolish 30 colleges of advanced education and
U) scale down various engineering schools in colleges of advanced education around Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these regressive decisions and desist from obvious attempts to pave the way for a complete reintroduction of tertiary fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Telecom Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the decision of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government Functions to establish an inquiry into Telecom to examine the extent to which private interests might become involved in or take over activities currently performed by Telecom is in itself a waste of taxpayers' money and is of highly questionable value.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will not dismantle Telecom for the benefit of private interests.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That, as ex-servicemen are eligible to receive a service pension five years earlier than other Australian males are eligible to receive an age pension, subject to certain conditions, so too should the age at which the means test is applied to pension increases be reduced for service pensioners by five years to age 65.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will, in recognition of the service they have performed for their country, and because of reduced life expectancy as a result of that service, reduce the so-called means test free age limit for service pensioners from 70 years to 65.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) The financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of

2864 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Petitions

Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) The imposition of tuition fees for second degrees and post graduate degrees will deter many able persons from enrolling in such courses and further preserve higher education for the rich.
(iii) The introduction of a loans scheme, subsequent review of the level of TEAS and the tightening of the eligibility criteria for TEAS will cause great financial hardship and will deter students from enrolling in tertiary institutions.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
1. Post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students.
2. The visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately.
3. The government reverse its decision to introduce a loans scheme and instead increase and extend TEAS scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound shall ever humbly pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Health Care Services: Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we strongly condemn any action taken by the Federal Government which will lead to the destruction of the Free Hospital and Medical Services of the State of Queensland.
And your petitioners therefore humbly pray: That the Parliament reject the proposed health cost sharing arrangements between the Commonwealth and the State governments and guarantee the maintenance of the present scheme whereby all Queenslanders who wish to avail themselves of these services may do so. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
RegUlation and Control of Nuclear Activities
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The decision of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government functions to transfer the responsibility for the regulation and control of nuclear activities in Australia to State governments represents a shameful abdication of national responsibility on the part of the national Government and, in respect of the State governments of Queensland, Western Australia and South Australia, places an enormous and highly dangerous power in very dubious hands.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will resume its proper and reasonable role of regulation and control of all nuclear activities in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Migrant Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That serious concern has been generated in the migrant community following the Government's endorsement of decisions of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government Functions to:
Restrict the role of the Commonwealth in adult migrant and refugee education programs to the arrangement and coordination only of such programs and relinquish responsibility for the conduct of individual programs.
Terminate some and rationalise other information services provided by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.
Terminate forthwith the migrant assisted passage scheme.
Transfer the translation/interpreting services to private agencies or withdraw altogether.
Reduce hours of operation of the telephone interpreting service.
Discontinue production of the national groups directory. Reduce overseas based staff associated with the recruitment and selection of persons for permanent settlement in Australia, which will result in greater delays in the processing of immigration applications.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government respect the needs of Australia's migrants and accordingly rescind these decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Australia Post
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government's decision to provide brochures and information on Government programs at post offices around Australia highlights further the Government's excessive use of public money for its own propaganda machine.
That the listing of this decision by the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government Functions under the heading 'Post Offices as Agents for Government Activities' strongly implies the use of postal officers as Government servants, not public servants.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will not abuse its authority in this way and will reverse this decision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Legal Aid
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That serious concern has been generated in the Australian community following the aimouncement of the Government's decisions to:
Attempt to transfer responsibility for legal aid, presently provided by the Australian Legal Aid Office, to the States

Petitions

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2865

of New South Wales and Tasmania and the Government of the Northern Territory;
Abandon the new building for the Institute of Criminologyand
Apply pressure to State governments to contribute sixsevenths of all costs of the institute.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these regressive decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Administrative Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That serious concern has been generated in the Australian community following the announcement of the Government's decisions to:
Transfer most of the work of the Government Printer to the private sector, with AGPS bookshops to be leased to private interests,
Reduce resources devoted to the purchasing division in the technical services sections of the Department of Administrative Services,
Limit circulation of ministerial statements service, and Transfer the provision of non-departmental food, the cleaning and watching of Commonwealth properties, and the management of migrant hostels, to private interests.
That the functions referred to above are best provided by the Public Service.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the government will rescind these regressive decisions and desist from its ill-advised policy of selling off public property and transferring Public Service functions to private interests.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Overseas Aid
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Australia, as an affluent and developed nation, should be able to expend more of its resources on the alleviation of human suffering and deprivation in other less developed countries.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will:
increase overseas aid to 0.7 per cent of Australia's GNP; increase to 4 per cent the proportion of overseas aid channelled through recognised non-government organisations such as world vision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Broadcasting Information Office
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That concern has been generated in the Australian community following the announcement of the Government's decisions to:
Not proceed with the establishment of a broadcasting information office,
abolish the Australia Post Courier service to reduce competition with private companies,
maintain a postal express service for postal items only, use private contractors for mail cartage, pave the way for delivery of mail by private companies by examining Australia Post's powers with the stated view to their reduction or elimination.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these regressive and provocative decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Department of Social Security
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That concern has been generated by the Government's decision to cut back expenditure in the Department of Social Security as outlined in the report of the committee of Review of Commonwealth Government Functions, i.e., by reducing the rate of expansion of regional offices of the Department of Social Security, confining social work activity to that relating to departmental functions, and scaling down the social welfare division of the department.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that 'between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent.'
It is your petitioners sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper

2866 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Petitions

does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction heIshe feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie.
Petition received.
Bendigo Ordnance and Clothing Factories
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned, wish to make it known to the Prime Minister, Mr Fraser, and the Liberal Government that we strongly condemn the proposed implementation of the Government Review Committee (The Razor Gang) recommendations:
The proposed sale of Government enterprises in a number of areas and their implied discontinuation of operation if nol sold is simply a sell-out to private commercial interests and a rejection of the rights of the public to have a say in the operation ofmany areas of industrial importance.
We are particularly concerned with the proposed closure of the Bendigo Ordnance Factory and the sale or lease to private enterprise of the Australian Government Clothing Factory.
The acts will risk the jobs of many hundreds of workers and jeopardise the working conditions of many hundreds of others.
Your petitioners urge that the decisions taken by the Liberal Government in relation to these plants be reversed.
We demand that the Bendigo Ordnance Factory and the Australian Government Clothing Factory remain as they are.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrHawke.
Petition received.
Telephone Interpreter Service: Tasmania
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the Government's decision to phase out the Telephone Interpreter Service in Tasmania.
The TIS has given the migrants of Tasmania a reliable and efficient service for the past two and a half years. If the de-
cision to cut TIS is not reversed, calls will be diverted to Mel-
bourne, and this will mean extra burden to their already overworked service, installation of diverter units, which will prove to be a costly, time consuming and inefficient way of running a previously successful service.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition to retain the Telephone Interpreter Service in Tasmania.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman.
Petition received.

Tertiary Education Funding
To the Honourable the Speaker, and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That the decisions arising out of the Review of Government Functions (undertaken by the Razor Gang) in relation to tertiary education funding will severely impair the process of developing the nation's intellectual resources.
2. That the invevitable outcome of the decisions will, in gen-
eral terms, be:
(i) the financial impoverishment of small and mediumsized universities;
(ji) the abandonment of non-vocational courses and the possibility of widespread academic unemployment.
3. That amongst the particular consequences of the decisions, namely, consequences following on the reintroduction of tertiary fees for selected categories of postgraduate students, will be:
(i) the discouraging of part-time post-graduate students and all those not receiving Commonwealth or University scholarships;
(ii) the weakening of the national research effort to which post-graduate students have in the past made a significant contribution.
4. That the provision of the maximum TEAS benefit to only 14 per cent of all students, indeed, the failure to adequately support financially all undergraduate students, will be a disincentive to enrolment in tertiary institutions.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to re-consider the decisions arising out of the Review of Commonwealth Functions and urgently initiate a full and complete inquiry into the following:
(i) employment in tertiary institutions; (ii) the effects of the Government's decisions upon the
national research effort and upon post-graduate enrolments; (iii) the adequacy of tertiary student support systems.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Health Insurance
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That Federal Government proposals to shift the cost of . health insurance onto the individual has placed a disproportionate and unfair financial burden on lower income groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes.
2. That an estimated 15-20 per cent of Australians will not be able to afford insurance and will be forced to undertake extensive travel to avail themselves of outpatient services, the quality of which will be drastically reduced because of staff cuts.
3. That doctors, who at this moment are awaiting a fee increase, will inevitably become more and more expensive.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government (i) will fe-examine the effects of health proposals and of the necessity for compulsory health insurance on

Petitions

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2867

lower income groups who do not presently meet the description of disadvantaged, and (ii) redefine the criteria determining the genuinely needy and disadvantaged to encompass the categories of persons mentioned in 1. above.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (J 920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Defence Service Home Loans
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That all members of the Women's Services 1939-45 War qualify as 'Australian Soldier' under the Defence Service Homes Act for loans because on voluntarily joining the Australian Forces they took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies, making themselves available for combat duty in war zones, and according to Acts and Rcgulations of the period the military women had enlisted for service anywhere, some naval women to sail in any waters, with all servicewomen available for service in Papua New Guinea.
As those members of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force of the 1939-45 war who were not sent to war zones are granted loans, refusal to grant eligibility to all the ex-servicewomen of the 1939-45 war is unjust and unfair.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that you amend the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the principal Act as amended hy No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of the 1939-45 war.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jarman.
Petition received.
Women's Centres
To the Honourable Speaker and Honourable Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled: This

petition of concerned citizens earnestly requests that the funding of the Women's Health Centres and Rape Crisis Centres be increased to allow theBe centres to adequately provide the services vitally needed by the women of New South Wales. Further to this end that funding be granted to allow new greatly needed Womens' Health Centres and Rape Crisis Centres to be established.
We abhor the continued cuts in funding that have occurred over the past three years, which is creating a situation whereby the centres are facing the likelihood of no longer being able to function.
We submit that the deficit incurred by the cuts be made good by the Federal Government and to this end we submit this petition.
And we your petitioners, as in duty bound, will every pray for the granting of our plea.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
1. There is lack of public information about the content and intention of the proposed legislation on plant variety rights;
2. there is concern that the ethical and moral issues of granting private proprietorial rights over genetic resources have not becn properly and publicly considered;
3. there is evidence to suggest that such legislation may lead to a reduction in the existing plant diversity;
4. there is reason to fear that farmers may be restricted in their activities due to the controls placed on the use and propagation of seed stocks;
5. evidence suggests that plant varietal rights legislation will lead to higher costs for the farmer, the consumer, the plantbreeder and the taxpayer; and
6. evidence suggests that plant varietal rights legislation will lead to a further increase in foreign control of Australian resources.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament defer introducing the legislation until full and informed public discussion of the issues involved has taken place.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And further, that annual Budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Ml' Mountford.
Petition received.

2868 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Petitions

Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions, the ACTU and the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas, our national airline; and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(I) The financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of ducation's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditures) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(2) the imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1974 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(3) those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the postsecondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction offees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(1) Post-secondary tuition fees not be reintroduced for any courses or for any category of students.
(2) The imposition of visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately.
(3) The Minister for Education immediately clarify the Government's attitude to the reintroduction of postsecondary tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament arsembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that:
(1 )Interest rates, rather than falling by 2 per cent as promised by the Prime Minister in November, 1977, are now between 2 per cent and 5 per cent higher than when that promise was made, and are at historically higher levels.
(2) This prevents many potential home buyers from borrowing to purchase a house; causes severe hardship to many

people who are paying off a housing loan, causing some to default and lose their home; prevents or restrains the establishment or expansion of many businesses; and is directly responsible for increasing numbers of bankruptcies.
Your petitioners, therefore, pray that:
Minimisation of interest rates be adopted as one of the aims of economic policy;
the money supply target be relaxed to accommodate income growth without forcing credit restrictions and exorbitant interest rates;
regulation of borrowing rates be reintroduced to prevent the financial institutions raising lending rates to compensate for higher borrowing rates; and
foreign investment be more rigorously controlled in order to prevent destabilising inflows of foreign funds.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scott.
Petition received.
Deakin University: Engineering School
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth our gravest concern about the detrimental effects of the abolition of the Engineering School at Deakin University. We respectfully showeth that:
(1) The Engineering School at the Gordon Institute of Technology and now at Deakin University has been serving the Geelong region and Australia for the past 60 years. It would be the waste of a great service to the Australian public.
(2) The phasing out of Deakin University Engineering by not enrolling students in 1982 will greatly disadvantage students and lecturers via unemployment and curriculum difficulties.
(3) Geelong, being the largest industrial centre in Victoria outside Melbourne, will be disadvantaged industrially through the lack of locally trained engineers.
(4) Geelong students will have to put up with the inconvenience of travelling to other Victorian education centres for studies, as well as the expense of such a move.
(5) The Geelong community and small industries will be disadvantaged through the Deakin University Research and Consulting Engineers (DURAC) not being able to function.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you reverse the decision to abolish the Engineering School at Deakin University immediately for Australia's and Geelong's sake.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Street.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education Fees
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
(1) While the abolition of fees could not, in itself, provide all people with equal access to tertiary education. the reimposition of fees will make it even more difficult for people from ordinary families as well as women and mature-age students-who are already under represented-to commence or continue in tertiary education.
(2) The introduction of a comprehensive loans scheme, to cover tertiary fees, would undermine the TEAS scheme and force students and graduates into debt to finance companies.

Petitions

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2869

Such a scheme would inevitably discourage poorer students from attending post secondary education.
We, the undersigned, oppose any attempts to introduce tertiary fees or a comprehensive loans scheme for post secondary education, and call upon the Government to restate its commitment to free access to education, without fees or loans, and to assure students that no such options are under consideration for the 1981 Budget.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrYoung.
Petition received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base of American B52 bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52s:
(a) Carried nuclear weapons.
(b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another state.
Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy.
Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region.
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin, in that noise, pollution and the threat of accidential radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents.
Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your petitioners' therefore pray that the members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers, and furthermore will ensure that any requests of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley and Mr Kent.
Petitions received.
Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of Australia (DEBRAA) and their supporters respectfully shows that funds for medical research into epidermolysis bullosa are no longer being made available from the Federal Government to the medical research team at the University of

New South Wales, enabling them to continue medical research into epidermolysis bullosa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that these signatures contained on these forms will serve to make it known that we expect these funds to be forthcoming in the very near future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Schools Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned members of parents and citizens associations respectively showeth:
That retention of the schools commission and the curriculum development centre in their present forms is essential for the balanced and progressive allocation of educational resources and facilities in the Australian community.
That serious concern has been generated by the Government's decision to reduce the involvement of the Schools Commission in program administration in the States, and the collections of information; its decision to alter the basis for providing subsidies for school buildings and other capital facilities; and the abolition of the curriculum development centre.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will reverse these decisions to ensure the continuation of the positive role of the Schools Commission in the assessment of needs and initiatives in education and the continued functioning of the curriculum development centre.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliamenmt assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth:
1. That we are gravely concerned at the lack of children's services within the City of Northcote.
2. That we are dismayed at the refusal of the Department of Social Security (Child Care Division) to fund a family day care program within the City of Northcote.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will ensure adequate funds for children's services will be made available so that family day care may be provided within the City of Northcote.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHowe.
Petition received.
Two-airline Policy
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.

2870 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Death ofPresident Ziaur Rahman

That this policy has resulted in expensive air fares and poor service and discourages tourists from the eastern States visting WA, and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an airline policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean. Petition received.
Garden Island, Western Australia
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That although cottages Numbers 11, 12, 13 and 14 on Garden Island in no way impede construction at HMAS Stirling, they are now required by the Department of Administrative Services to move by 30 June 1981.
Your petitioners humbly pray that: Cottages Numbers 11, 12, 13 and 14 on Garden Island be alJowed to remain and to move only when the remaining northern end cottages do so. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrShack. Petition received.
DEATH OF PRESIDENT ZIAUR RAHMAN
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I move:
That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 30 May of His Excellency President Ziaur Rahman, President of Bangladesh since 1977, and tenders its profound sympathy to his family and to the people of Bangladesh.
With the tragic assassination of President Ziaur, Bangladesh has lost a leader of zeal and, I believe, integrity. Bangladesh can ill afford his loss. His party, the Bangladesh National Party, won a substantial majority in democratic elections in 1979. One of the principal reasons for the success and popularity of the late President.was his dedication to the development of rural Bangladesh and its immense population. President Ziaur worked hard to overcome the crushing problems of food shortages and poverty. Bangladesh, as many honourable gentlemen would know, has been high on Australia's list as a recipient of food aid and other assistance in recent years. President Ziaur was able to announce this year that food production in Bangladesh doubled during the previous 12 months. That was a remarkable record by any standard. In many respects this had become the primary objective of his Government. He personally spared no efforts either within his country or abroad to achieve that objective.
In the international context, President Ziaur had established himself as a leader of the least

developed countries. The late President was highly respected by everyone for his views within the North-South debate. Within the non-aligned movement and the Islamic Conference he had established himself as an independent and moderate leader. President Ziaur was a strong supporter of the Commonwealth. I had many contacts with him through that Commonwealth link. It was especially gratifying that President Ziaur attended the first Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting held in Sydney in 1978. Australia was one of the first countries to recognise the newly independent nation of Bangladesh in 1971 and we sponsored its membership of the United Nations and of the Commonwealth. In the past 10 years the friendship between our two countries has strengthened. In the past year Bangladesh was the third largest recipient of Australian bilateral development aid and an increasingly important trade partner. The late President Ziaur was aware of these links. We discussed them together on many different occasions. We had discussed on many occasions how Australian aid could best assist Bangladesh and the achieving of objectives that he had for the people of Bangladesh.
The Australian Government and the Australian people were particularly shocked by the circumstance of President Ziaur's assassination. This is the third occasion in a matter of months on which a world leader has been the subject of political violence. Words cannot express the abhorrence that Australians must feel about these events. They deserve the strongest condemnation by all people. I am sure that all honourable members of this House and all Australians will join me in condemning this brutal act and in extending sympathy to the President's family and to the people of Bangladesh.
There is one other matter which I would like to add before asking the House to support this motion. When one hears of an assassination or an attempted assassination one feels, in intellectual terms, that it is an abhorrent and brutal thing and it attracts our total condemnation. But when at the same time one knows and has developed some degree of friendship with the person involved it takes on a dimension which is obviously more immediate. It is more personal and the feelings that one has are more compelling. It becomes to an extent a personal thing as well as an intellectual condemnation of the act. I had met the President on a large number of occasions. I had come to like and respect him. I am sure that all honourable members will support the strongest possible condemnation of this act being expressed by this House.

Death ofPresident Ziaur Rahman

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2871

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the He instituted a major and geniune land distri-

Opposition)-The murder of President Ziaur bution program, devoted resources to increasing

Rahman, the President of Bangladesh, is a tragedy food production to such an effect that he had been

for his country. President Ziaur was a hero of his able to ask for a 40 per cent reduction in food aid

country's liberation. It was he who first declared in 1981-82, undertook serious birth control

over the radio in March 1971 the revolt against programs, and funded at the local level public

Pakistan. He was a soldier, but he was more than works such as bridges, roads and irrigation, which

that. After the assassination in 1975 of Shiek would provide employment for the ordinary

Mujibur, the first ruler of Bangladesh, followed by people. He travelled endlessly to the most remote

two further coups, General Ziaur took over as regions and smallest villages of his country, urging

Martial Administrator, and effectively ruler, of the participation of ordinary people and instilling

his country until his death a few days ago. His five an urgency and vigour into economic devel-

years as ruler of one of the very poorest nations in opment. That this task was only just begun is true,

the world epitomised the great dilemmas faced by but the relative stability and complete honesty he

even the strongest and most incorruptible of men brought to government and his practical concern

when faced with appalling poverty, extraordinary for his people rather than for the elite showed the

disparities of class and wealth, deep religious imway for any chance of overcoming the problems

pulses and a population growing at extraordinary of his country. His nation is the poorer for his

rates. About 90 million people live in a country passing

two-thirds the size of Victoria.

Dr BLEWETT (Bonython)-As a member of

Restrictions on freedom of the Press and on political activities had all been present during President Ziaur's rule. But, at the same time, he made major if halting steps towards civilian rule and democracy. He ended the one-party rule of Shiek Mujibur, held presidential elections in 1977, parliamentary elections in 1979 and local elections in 1977. He felt compelled to abolish the strict principle of secularism both as a reflection of his own commitment to Islam and in consequence of the importance to his position of the Islamic-based political groups. Yet, for all that, he did not impose the sort of extremist theocracy or religious exclusivity of other Muslim states. In foreign policy he withdrew from the very close relationship between Shiek Mujibur and India, but he did not adopt the extreme anti-Indian posture many of his supporters wanted. Indeed, his refusal to indulge in xenophobic anti-Indianism seems to have been an important element in his assassination. More generally, he pursued a policy of firm non-alignment, with an openness to the West which allowed Australia, the first Western country to recognise the new state in 1971, to build a close relationship.

a parliamentary delegation from this Parliament to Bangladesh, where we were welcomed by the late President of Bangladesh, I wish to add a few words on this motion. President Ziaur Rahman was, for all practical purposes, an authoritarian military leader. But to leave assessment there without regard for the tumultuous history of his country or for the inappropriateness of Western values and classifications in an environment vastly different from that of our own would be to do great injustice to the man and to his work.
Ambitious as the President undoubtedly was, it was an ambition not for himself but for his people and, above all, for the peasants of Bangladesh. The President led a completely unostentatious lifestyle, continuing to live with his wife and two sons in a modest apartment in the military cantonment in Dacca. In a society frequently damaged by political corruption, his personal integrity and honesty were never impugned by his critics or by his enemies. He could be ruthless, which was a virtual necessity for survival in the politics of Bangladesh but in nearly all cases his firmness was tempered by justice and magnanimity. In the last years of his rule there had been a distinct improvement in the respect for political

President Ziaur will be remembered most of all for his rejection of the economic philosophy summarised in the phrase 'trickle-down effect', a theory which has few credible adherents these

and human rights in Bangladesh. In the election of 1979, for example, opposition parties scored a greater representation than in any previous Bangladeshi or East Pakistani parliament.

days. Briefly, this philosophy was that as long as President Ziaur Rahman dedicated himself to

the rich of a developing country got richer, as long the alleviation of the poverty of the rural masses

as an industrial, bureaucratic and technological through a massive village development program.

elite was successfully established, the benefits His intimate involvement in this program was

would eventually trickle down through other reflected in his continual travel by helicopter, by

strata of society. President Ziaur, himself injeep, and on foot throughout the villages of

corruptible, believed in grass roots development. Bangladesh. Indeed, it has been argued that no

2872 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

contemporary Asian ruler had so intimate a contact as ruler with the masses of his people. It is a tragedy for Bangladesh that it should have lost a President with so much of his potential unfulfilled. It would be an even greater tragedy if his death opened a further bloodstained chapter in the troubled history of that country.
Question resolved in the affirmative, honourable members standing in their places.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I inform the House that the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) left Australia on 30 May to attend the sixty-seventh session of the International Labour Conference in Geneva, where I understand he is shortly to be joined by the shadow Minister for industrial relations. Mr Hawke-Thank you, Mr Prime Minister. Mr MALCOLM FRASER-It is bipartisanship. If we practise it there is no knowing where it will ultimately end. The Minister for Education (Mr Fife) is acting as Minister for Industrial Relations until Mr Viner returns on 22 June with or without the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke).
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT: AMENDMENTS
Mrs CHILD-My question is addressed to the Minister for Communications. As a result of information' being given to media interests on proposed or possible amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act, whether in discussion, as the Minister will have us believe, or by prior supply of written material, as is much more credible, has any documentary response been made to the Government by any such interest since 9 April?
Mr SINCLAIR-Yes. PRIVATE AIRCRAFT: NAVIGATION
FEES Mr PORTER-Is the Minister for Transport .ware of the concern being expressed by aircraft owners and the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association of Australia in particular about increases in private aircraft navigation fees? Are the suggestions of increases of up to 300 per cent for private aircraft and of up to 700 per cent for charter aircraft navigation fees correct? Can the Minister inform the House of the current position in relation to the proposals for fee increases?

Mr HUNT-I am aware of the concern of the general aviation industry at the general aviation study that was commissioned in 1978 to report on cost recovery in the general aviation sector. At present there is more than a 100 per cent cost recovery for the international airlines. Under legislation before the House the domestic carriers will have to meet approximately 100 per cent of cost recovery. The regional airlines are currently meeting about 30 per cent and general aviation about 14 per cent. However, the recommendations contained in that study, are a matter of great concern to the general aviation industry which is fundamental to aviation in this country.
I announced to this House not very long ago that we would be extending the period until 30 June to enable the general aviation industry to report formally to the Government on the recommendations contained in that study. At that time. I said-I repeat-that the Government will not be taking any decisions that will undermine the viability of this very important section of the aviation industry in Australia.
In due course I will be discussing this matter with my colleagues in the Government in the light of replies that have been received from various sectors of the general aviation industry. I know that the honourable member for Mitchell addressed a large gathering of the general aviation industry in Sydney recently. He made it quite clear to that gathering that the Government had not committed itself to the recommendations in that report.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT: AMENDMENTS
Mr FREE-My question, which is directed to the Minister for Communications, refers to his answers to questions asked last week in which he admitted that discussions had taken place with broadcasting media interests on amendments t6 the Broadcasting and Television Act but left unanswered the question of whether draft Bills had been supplied by the Government to such interests. Will he now confirm that neither draft copies of the amendment Bill nor any written material describing proposals were supplied to any media interests?
Mr SINCLAIR-The Opposition seems to have a peculiar attitude about consultation. I have made it quite plain in this place that 1 have talked to a range of people about the proposed details of legislation which affects a very important part of media opportunity in Australia. For the electronic media licences are issued under a system which has been set down by procedures

Questions Without Notice

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2873

which are enacted in the Broadcasting and Television Act, which is about to be amended. I have certainly consulted extensively and I have discussed the details of the legislation extensively. I will continue to do so until such stage as the legislation is introduced into the Parliament.
OIL SHALE DEPOSITS
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Is the Minister for Trade and Resources aware of the details of recent announcements relating to the future of oil shale deposits at Rundle and Condor in Queensland? Can the Esso company yet be regarded as a reliable partner in the Rundle project, and can the Minister advise the House of the effect of these moves on the development of alternative energy sources in Australia?
Mr ANTHONY-Tn the course of the last week there have been very significant developments in arrangements for feasibility studies and the development of some of Australia's huge oil shale deposits. Early in the week there was an announcement that the Esso company and the Australian partners, Central Pacific Minerals NL and Southern Pacific Petroleum NL, had reviewed the previous heads of agreement and had now come to an agreement to proceed with investigating the development of the Rundle deposit. These new heads of agreement really enable the partners to go into direct commercial development rather than setting up a demonstration arrangement. I think this vindicates the confidence that the Government, and indeed the Australian people, had in the hopes of this partnership becoming a reality. I think it condemns members of the Opposition for some of the remarks they made questioning the previous heads of agreement.

BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT: AMENDMENTS
Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Minister for Communications which is supplementary to that asked of him by the honourable member for Macquarie. I ask whether he will now confirm or deny that draft copies of the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill and/or any written material describing those proposals were supplied to any media interests?
Mr SINCLAIR-I have said yes, that I have consulted with media interests. 1 have consulted with everybody. Thave consulted on the details of the Bills to be introduced. I have consulted with lawyers. I am continuing to do so.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. This answer is unnecessarily provocative at Question Time.
Government members--Ha, hal
Mr Hayden-I am trying to avoid describing the indulgence of the Minister, in his usual tactic, in evading the truth.
Government members-Oh!
Mr Hayden-Members opposite say 'Oh!'
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will make his point of order.
Mr Hayden-The Minister is not answering the questions. On the basis of evidence available to us there is a very strong suggestion that in fact he engaged in behaviour in association with some media interests----
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. There is no point of order. The honourable gentleman well knows that, provided the answer is relevant, there is no way I can require a Minister to answer in the form which the questioner may wish.

Later in the week there was also an announcement that the Central Pacific and Southern Pacific companies had come to an agreement with the Japan National Oil Corporation, which heads up a whole series of Japanese companies, to do a feasibility study on the Condor deposit, further north in Queensland. They will spend $US24m on a feasibility study over the next two years. Both these developments will require an enormous amount of capital, but I think the events of the last week are an indication of the confidence that overseas interests have in developing oil shale as a possible alternative source of oil. I certainly welcome these decisions and T am sure the rest of
Australia welcomes the chance to develop alternative forms of energy.

DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Hicks proceeding to address a question to the Acting Ministerjor Primary Tndustry-
Mr SPEAKEROrder! The question is out of order.
PECUNIARY INTEREST OF MINISTERS
Mr BARRY JONES-J direct my question to the Prime Minister. Did the Minister representing the Prime Minister in another place say on I April, firstly, that 'it is a well accepted universal practice' for a Minister to disclose any pecuniary interest he or his family may have in matters being discussed by Cabinet; and, secondly, that he was unaware that any Minister had indicated such an interest in discussions on proposed changes to the

2874 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

broadcasting and television legislation? Do Northern Rivers Television Ltd, RichmondTweed Television Ltd, Richmond River Broadcasters and Tweed Radio and Broadcasting Company have an interest in this legislation? Is the wife of the Deputy Prime Minister a shareholder in these and other companies involved in regional broadcasting and television, in whose defence the Deputy Prime Minister is reported to have been an active campaigner within the Government? Did the Deputy Prime Minister declare his family pecuniary interest to Cabinet in discussions concerning the changes to the Broadcasting and Television Act, as recommended in paragraph 8.6 of the Bowen report? Finally, did the Deputy Prime Minister then abstain from taking part and from expressing a view in these deliberations or secure the explicit authorisation of his colleagues to take part or to express a view, also as recommended by the Bowen report?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-It is well known that the Bowen report, as recommended, has been applied in the case of Ministers. I think all honourable members will know that I had stated on many occasions, and before the Bowen Committee in fact reported, that there were very real difficulties in relation to declarations because how far does one go-does one include a member, a member's wife, family, children and all the rest? Do not people who are not members of this Parliament, under the normal rules ofprivacy that we would expect, have the right to their own lives and their own circumstances? The Deputy Prime Minister has reminded me that a declaration was made in relation to those circumstances. Any imputations in the honourable member's question about the nature of argument that might be put would be quite false.

the needs for a second Sydney international airport had confirmed that Holsworthy would be the site for the second airport. As well, the honourable member for Hughes was quoted as saying that the sources that he has in the Department of Transport had confirmed to him that Holsworthy was a serious consideration. I can tell the honourable member for Barton and other honourable members that both of these suggestions are quite incorrect and untrue. In respect of the consideration by the committee, I think it is true to say that my colleague the Minister for Transport has already advised the honourable member for Hughes that as long ago as 1978 the committee, for a number of reasons, had rejected Holsworthy as being a likely site.
As to land exchange deals with the Government of New South Wales, the question of Holsworthy as a second site has never been raised. It is true that in the various parcels of land that have been exchanged, Holsworthy is one that has just latterly been determined; but it has been determined for defence needs.
PECUNIARY INTERESTS OF MINISTERS
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, I wish to add to an answer.
Mr SPEAKER-By indulgence of the Chair the right honourable gentleman may add to an answer which he has given.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I am advised that the wife of the Deputy Prime Minister has held a small parcel of shares in the companies mentioned since the stations began something like 20 years ago and receives out of it all an annual income of something like $80.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT: AMENDMENTS

SITING OF SECOND INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT IN SYDNEY
Mr BRADFIELD-Is the Minister for Administrative Services aware of recent Press reports which claim that certain land exchange deals between New South Wales and the Commonwealth have been negotiated to provide a location for a second international airport in Sydney? Can the Minister provide information to this Parliament regarding these negotiations?
Mr NEWMAN-The newspaper reports referred to in the honourable member's question have been brought to my notice. I think the report appeared in a newspaper called the Voice. In that newspaper report essentially two things were said. First of all the newspaper claimed that sources close to the committee carrying out a study into

Mr HAYDEN-I direct a question to the Minister for Communications. In the context of the consultations which he said took place between certain media interests and representatives of the Government, at his direction, to discuss proposed amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act, were any draft copies of the amendment Bill and/or any written material relating to the proposals supplied to any media interests?
Mr SINCLAIR-They have certainly been discussed, as I have explained before. Written copies, draft copies, of the details of the proposed legislation have been discussed.
Mr Hayden-With a reputation like yours, why would you expect us to believe you?
Mr SINCLAIR-If I had a reputation like the honourable member's I would be ashamed to hold

Questions Without Notice

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2875

my head in public, but that is another story. In Mr SINCLAIR-Drafts have been discussed.

case anybody in this place is mistaken, I certainly The honourable gentleman seems not to under-

have discussed details of proposed changes to the stand ordinary English. In order to ensure that the

legislation, but I have shown the final draft of the details of this legislation meet with the require-

Bill to nobody except the legislation committee of ments of the community, the Government has

Cabinet and to the back bench committee at a engaged and is engaging in extensive consultations

meeting this morning.

on the details of the proposed legislation. We are

not providing legislation. We are talking about de-

PENSIONS

tails of changes. Drafts have been discussed, yes. Drafts have been discussed with a range of people.

Mr HODGES-Is the Treasurer aware that They are still being discussed with a range of pension-age eligible people are depositing tens of people and will be discussed until the final form is

thousands of dollars, frequently obtained in lump introduced into the House.

sum payments from superannuation, in non-

interest bearing investments and bank accounts to enable them to reduce their incomes and so be eligible for the pension? Is he also aware that banks and institutions are openly encouraging people to take this course of action, thereby enabling such institutions to reap a windfall from lending the non-cost capital at up to 20 per cent? Is the Treasurer concerned that people, having made provision for their old age, are through these practices costing the Government and therefore other taxpayers countless millions of dollars? Will the Government give consideration to taking into account non-interest bearing capital and investment in assessing eligibility for pensions and thereby providing pensions only for the needy?

TWO-AIRLINE POLICY
Mr MILLAR-My question is addressed to the Minister for Transport. In the light of legislation presently before the House regarding the restructuring of the airline system, I ask: Does the Minister envisage an increasing dependence on general aviation to fill the gaps which could result from the major airlines withdrawing from unprofitable routes? The Minister will be aware that Transport Australia proposes to introduce substantial cost increases. Is the Minister alert to the fact that when the need arises to fill the gaps the Government could be faced with a situation where general aviation operators have been forced out of business or alternatively have passed

Mr HOWARD-My attention has been drawn to this matter. I think some of these practices are a consequence of the liberalisation of the tests for eligibility for the pension. To do what the honourable gentleman suggested would constitute, on my

on costs which would raise air fares to country travellers to a prohibitive level? Will the Minister defer cost increases to general aviation until Australia'f, total air service requirements may be more accurately assessed?

quick assessment-I stress that it is a quick Mr HUNT-When the Government considers

assessment-a reversion to some kind of asset or the general aviation study report it will undoubt-

means test as distinct from a pure income test and edly take into account the state of the general avi-

would, therefore, be contrary to the decision of ation industry and the package of Bills introduced

this Government, promised in the 1975 policy into the Parliament which will have a very sig-

speech and implemented in 1976, to remove the nificant bearing on the shape of the aviation in-

property component of the means test. Having dustry for the future. It is true that in clause 12 of

said that, I will certainly analyse the other parts of the two airlines agreement there is provision for

the honourable gentleman's question. I thank him airlines to make application to the Government

for drawing the matter to my attention.

after six months of having established a consistent

loss record. They will have an opportunity of pro-

BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT: AMENDMENTS
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Minister for Com-

viding a three months notice to terminate services over those sections of the routes. This will have particular importance to the State of Queensland.

munications a question which is supplementary to We had a conference yesterday with the airline

the succession I have had to direct to him this representatives to obtain certain undertakings

afternoon. In the context of his last answer, in from them. Clause 12 provides the opportunity

which he said that the final draft had not been for discussions to take place between the airlines

provided for any source outside the Government, and the Government to ensure there is satisfac-

can we presume that drafts or a draft other than tory transition from unsuitable services-those

the final draft were provided for the attention of services that have excess capacity and are being

outside media interests?

run at a loss-to more economic use of equipment

2876 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

and services. This of course may involve the introduction of other services being operated by the general aviation industry. Of course, the Government will take into account the need to sustain a viable general aviation industry to serve that purpose in the course of considering the general aviation study.
GOVERNMENT'S ANTI-INFLATION STRATEGY
Mr HURFORD-Did the Treasurer admit to selected journalists in infamous background briefings recently that the inflation rate for 1981-82 is expected by the Government to be 11 per cent? Does this not mean that the Government's anti-inflation strategy is a failure? Does this not also mean that the States have been forced to agree to transfer payments effectively at least 2 per cent less than the inflation rate? If these are the facts, as the funds going to the States represent, of course, a cut in real terms, is it the policy of this Government to encourage the States to increase taxes and charges-which is happening in South Australia now-thus taking away the people's money, to use a famous phrase, or is it the policy of the Government to encourage the States to reduce their services and employment?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will draw his question to a close.
Mr HOWARD-I can assure the honourable member for Adelaide that it is the policy of this Government to continue the policies that produced a non-farm growth of 6.5 per cent in the first half of this financial year.
COFFS HARBOUR: FM BROADCASTING Mr IAN ROBINSON-I refer the Minister for
Communications to a Press statement issued today to members of this House and another pl&':!e regarding FM broadcasting proposals for the Coffs Harbour area. I ask the Minister to clarify the action necessary under the Broadcasting and Television Act regarding the calling for and issue of FM public broadcasting licences. Was a preliminary planning proposal for broadcastingboth FM and AM-on the mid-North Coast issued late last year? Was time allowed for further submissions on the proposal, as provided for in the Broadcasting and Television Act? Are these submissions currently under consideration? Do the anticipated amendments to the Act have a bearing on the matter? Finally, has the Government acted in accordance with undertakings given to have all related procedures followed in dealing with the needs of the Coffs Harbour area in respect of broadcasting services?

Mr SINCLAIR-It is certainly true that radio station CHY is anxious to go on the air. I can understand that. It has made a series of representations to me, as it did to my predecessor. Indeed, as I understand it, the draft planning proposals were first discussed between Mr Staley and representatives of the station in September 1979. There are, however, quite real problems in developing a comprehensive plan for both amplitude modulation and frequency modulation broadcasting in the north coast area. These plans are going ahead as quickly as possible and, no doubt, subject to the contents of some proposed changes to the Broadcasting and Television Bill; could well be facilitated as part of the passage of the Bill. I recognise the desire of the honourable gentleman, however, to take note of all the conflicting interests of the area to ensure that, whatever the extensions of the media might be, they both meet the requirements of the community and ensure that there are adequate and viable broadcasting alternatives throughout the region. I hope that it will be possible to come forward with final proposals shortly.
INDIAN OCEAN PEACE ZONE Mr BEAZLEY-I draw the attention of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to the fact that the United Nations ad hoc committee on an Indian Ocean peace zone will meet in New York this week to determine whether a conference at ministerial or heads of government level will take place this year on a peace zone proposal. I ask the Minister: What instructions has he given to the Australian delegation on the conference issue? Does the Australian Government intend to continue to oppose a conference in 1981 as it did at a similar meeting last March? If so, why? Does the Government remain committed to the Indian Ocean peace zone proposal? If so, will it entertain participation in a conference on this matter should it be held this year despite any opposition from the Australian Government?
Mr STREET-It is quite true that the Australian Government shares the objective of the zone of peace concept for the Indian Ocean. Recent events-first and foremost, of course, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan-have made that extremely difficult to achieve. We believe that should a conference be held it would best be held in an atmosphere in which it had some chance of success. We do not come to the judgment that the present circumstances are likely to result in a successful conclusion. We would prefer to wait until that is a possibility.

Questions Without Notice

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2877

WELFARE HOUSING PROGRAMS
Mr LEO McLEAY-I have a short question for the Minister for Housing and Construction which I hope will elicit a concise answer. My question relates to an answer which the Minister gave on Tuesday, 26 May, to the honourable member for Bendigo about the net value of Commonwealth payments to the States for housing. I ask: What is the total value of repayments of capital and interest due to be paid to the Commonwealth by the States in 1981? What amount ofrepayments will be incurred under the new arrangements for 1981-82? Is it not a fact that next year's repayments by the States will exceed the value of funds they will receive under the new arrangements for housing assistance next year?
Mr McVEIGH--I have to admit that I do not have the exact figures. The situation is that Commonwealth-State housing agreements have been in existence since 1945. In the first year of the arrangement a sum of slightly in excess of $13m was made available. Under last year's proposals the sum of $285m was made available. Quite obviously, each year when the States are repaying those sums with interest over a term of 53 years they are paying back more than they did the previous year. Consequently, quite obviously as we approach 1998 the repayments will reach their height. It is wrong for the honourable member for Grayndler to try to equate payments of interest and redemption by the States over 53 years with a contribution by the Commonwealth in one year. It must also be remembered that the States do not repay money to the Commonwealth with their own funds; those repayments are made by the ordinary citizens, the Jacks and Jills of Australian society. They come from the ordinary, hard working Australian who pays his or her weekly rent or monthly repayment. They do not come out of the coffers of the State. I am glad I have been given the opportunity of at least educating the honourable member for Grayndler--
Mr Uren-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I inform the Minister that an amount of $200.3m was repaid this year by the States to the Commonwealth.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. I suggest that the Minister return to the figures.
Mr McVEIGH-These payments are made out of the household savings and income of the ordinary person. It is wrong, therefore, for the honourable member for Grayndler to try to imply that the States are repaying this money. When I look at the figures I am astonished sometimes at the generosity of the present Government.

Mr SPEAKER-I ask the Minister to bring his answer to a conclusion.
Mr McVEIGH-Very generous terms are made available by the Commonwealth. In the legislation which we will be debating later today, we are making moneys available at an interest rate of 4+ per cent, notwithstanding the current rates. Of course, general interest rates under the Labor Government showed an alarming increase from 1972 to 1975. Bank loan interest rates went up from 7 per cent to 11 per cent.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr McVEIGH-On account of the generous terms made available to the States, the States, by taking the money, repaying it and recycling it, and after meeting all administrative and maintenance costs, are able to show a surplus of $142m this financial year. The honourable member's question was very long and important and I wanted to answer it, unlike my usual style, in some depth.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will bring his answer to a conclusion or I will require him to resume his seat.
Mr McVEIGH-I conclude on this note: The sum total of funds made available for welfare housing in Australia is made up of the very significant contribution madc by the Commonwealth, plus those surpluses plus input by the States. I would only hope that when the State Premiers come to---
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat.
HEALTH INSlJRANCE
Dr BLEWETT-My question is directed to the Minister for Health. Is it a fact that State government activity in promoting private health insurance will be a factor in assessing health revenue raising experience in 1981-82? If that is so, and given the legislative pressure by the CommonlVealth Government to force people into the private health funds, Task: In what way does private health insurance differ signi11cantly from any other form of regressive taxation and in what way do private health agencies dilTer significantly from other taxation agencies?
Mr MaeKELLAR-- The factors to be taken into consideration in the assessment of the States' performances in relation to the new health changes have not fmally been decided. At the most recent Health Ministers conference I suggested on behalf of the Commonwealth some factors which may be taken into consideration. I also suggested that there should be a meeting of State officials and Commonwealth officials as

2878 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

soon as possible so that we could get to an agreed position, if that is possible. In relation to health insurance, the Commonwealth's position and the position of these parties is very well established. We believe it is incumbent upon people who can afford to do so to make some provision for their health care costs. They have the choice; they can either pay the costs out of their own pockets or they can join a health insurance fund. Of course, the other side of the coin is that this Government firmly believes that those people in genuine need should be assisted. We believe that scarce public moneys can best be directed towards those most in need by the arrangements that are being put in place by the Government.
AUSTRALIAN WOOL TESTING AUTHORITY
Mr BUNGEY-I direct my question to the Acting Minister for Primary Industry. What savings and/or benefits will result, firstly, to the Government, secondly, to the Australian Wool Corporation, thirdly, to wool growers, and fourthly, to wool users, by the disposal of the Australian Wool Testing Authority?
Mr SINCLAIR-I cannot quantify the exact sums that will be saved in accordance with the matter the honourable gentleman put forward, but I think a couple of things need to be recognised. The first is that to date, the Australian Wool Testing Authority has been run entirely under the embrace of the Australian Wool Corporation. Whilst it is true that the Australian Wool Corporation is funded, essentially, from levies that result from legislation passed through this House, those funds do represent growers' funds. They represent money that at the moment is set aside in a way which covers the operation of the reserve scheme and the degree to which funds are necessary to buy wool and to maintain the level of the general reserve established by the industry each year. They also cover various expenses relating to the administration of the wool stores and so on. The constitution of the Australian Wool Testing Authority, as a new body, will enable the freeing of those moneys that are presently used through the Australian Wool Corporation's account. It is hoped that, by the involvement of all those concerned in the industry, growers' money can henceforth be used for other purposes of the Australian Wool Corporation rather than for the Australian Wool Testing Authority.
Secondly, the Australian Wool Testing Authority operates in a commercial area. It is a body which gives certain undertakings. As a result of

discussion between the Minister for Primary Industry and the Prime Minister, agreement has been reached on the basis of the continuity of the necessary guarantees to ensure that the certificates provided in that area are maintained and the guarantees required by the trade continued. Indeed, there has been an understanding that there will be no hiatus in the change from the present constitution to the new constitution to ensure that there is no interruption to wool selling procedures. It is true that, as it is a body that is operating in the commercial market place, there seems to be a very real reason for it to be constituted, therefore, in the market place. The exact basis on which it is to be constituted, however, is a matter which will be finally concluded between my colleague the Minister for Primary Industry and the industry to ensure that all the requirements of the industry are met. However, I believe that the freeing of the money from the Australian Wool Corporation's account which will result from its being separately constituted will ultimately mean a saving of money to the wool grower.
CONTROL OF NUCLEAR ACTIVITIES Mr WEST-I direct my question to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment. To what extent will regulation and control of nuclear activities be devolved on the State and Northern Territory governments, as was so vaguely outlined in the Review of Commonwealth Functions? Does the Government intend eventually leaving environmental assessment of uranium projects, waste disposal techniques, mining safety procedures and production levels to the decision of competing State governments? Will this proposed reduced Federal responsibility involve amendments to the Atomic Energy Act and other Federa11egislation? If it is not intended to proceed on these matters, will the Minister now tell us why these outrageous proposals were included in the razor gang's report in the first place?
Mr WILSON-It was made quite clear in the Prime Minister's announcement of the decisions arising out of the Review of Commonwealth Functions that the Commonwealth's essential interests in this matter would be maintained. The extent to which authority and responsibility are handed over to the Territory in respect of environmental matters will be against that background of the retention by the Commonwealth of its essential interests. Its concern and interest in relation to the uranium industry are clearly known to members of this House.

Questions Without Notice

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2879

DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr O'Keefe proceeding to address a question to the Minister for Trade and Resources-
Mr SPEAKER--The honourable gentleman's question is out of order.
UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFIT
Dr THEOPHANOUS-My question, which is directed to the Prime Minister, refers to his reply to my question without notice on 11 March which concerned the proposed removal of the unemployment benefit for people under the age of 18 years. Will the Government end speculation and anxiety on this matter by completely rejecting this proposal now? If not, when will a determination be made on this matter? Further, when will the Government announce plans for financial assistance to people under the age of 18 years so that more young people-especially from low income families-can afford to remain at school and gain reasonable qualifications and skills?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The first part of the honourable gentleman's question cannot be answered until such time as we, in co-operation with the States and the education authorities, have established education and training opportunities for all young Australians, especially those young Australians who now do not have opportunities because there are not the courses that attract their inclinations or meet their talents. Of course, that is something that we have been pursuing for the last several months, very much as a result of a report of the Schools Commission to which the honourable member for Wills drew attention a week or so ago. I understand that my colleagues have made a good deal of progress with the States and the Cabinet has had reports from them in relation to that. Some of the results of these reports will be revealed when the Minister for Education makes a statement to the House at the appropriate time.
Quite plainly, when some tens of thousands of young people under the age of 18 years are presently in receipt of the unemployment benefit, it indicates the great task that has to be undertaken in making sure that the education system has places for all those who otherwise would be in that category. That is the first thing that we have to do, if we can, in co-operation with the States.
The second thing, of course, is a budgetary matter; that is, an examination of the adequacy of allowances. I am sure the honourable gentleman would not be interested to know-I will advise him in any case-that I was Minister for Education when the present secondary allowance scheme was introduced. I was concerned that the

trend towards more and more young Australians staying at school for the last two years of secondary schooling would pose a problem and a difficulty for low income families. Part of this examination is to test the adequacy of the allowances that might be available if young Australians can be attracted into full time training.
It is only when these two things have been done adequately and to the satisfaction of the Government that we would then consider that third question. If one has a situation where there are good and appropriate-appropriate to the talents and needs of individuals--training opportunities available for all people under the age of 18 years and if at the same time one has the situation where the interests of low income families are protected, it is then, but only then, fair enough to ask that other question about the unemployment benefit. So nobody need have any fear about the circumstances that exist at the moment. Indeed, I believe the more the community understands our objectives in these matters the more it will applaud our efforts to make sure that there are adequate training opportunities for all young Australians. That is certainly much better than that which the present system offers them-a school system which is not suited to their needs, that does not attract them, but leaves them with a feeling of frustration and failure which, more often than not, is the fault of the school rather than the students. Then that becomes compounded by a great difficulty for people in this category being able to get a job. We owe those young Australians something much better than that. The Government has set about trying to achieve something better than that. I hope that we would have the support of all honourable members in that objective.
FILM INDUSTRY: TAX CONCESSIONS
Mr BUNGEYWill the Treasurer undertake to review the legislation providing taxation concessions for the film industry so that the legislation agrees with the proposals originally announced by the Government?
Mr HOWARD-Since legislation was introduced into the House last week to give effect to, in relative terms, an extremely generous concession to a section of the Australian community--
Mr Barry Jones-You can say that again.
Mr HOWARD-It is a very generous concession, providing a write-off of something like 150 per cent and also exemptions from tax in respect of 50 per cent of the income. Since that legislation was introduced there have been a

2880 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

number of representations to the Government from sections of the film industry and from others. The Government is presently considering those representations. Its response to them will be made known either today or tomorrow.
LIFE INSURANCE COMMISSION Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section II of the Life Insurance Act 1945, I present the Life Insurance Commissioner's thirty-fifth annual report 1980 and the statistical appendix thereto.
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- Pursuant to section 47 of the High Court of Australia Act 1979, I present the High Court of Australia annual report 1980.
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW COUNCIL: JURISDICTION OF THE OMBUDSMAN Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- For the information of honourable members, I present the Administrative Review Council Working Party report to Council on jurisdiction of the Ombudsman.
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW COUNCIL: SOCIAL SECURITY APPEALS AND COMMONWEALTH EMPLOYEES COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)-
For the information of honourable members, I present the reports of the Administrative Review Council on social security appeals and on the Commonwealth Employees Compensation Tribunal. The Government is tabling these two reports in manuscript form prior to printing. This is being done so that copies of the reports can be available to honourable members during the present sittings. Limited copies of both reports will be available in the Table Office and in the Parliamentary Library. Copies of the appendices to the report on social security appeals will also be available in the Parliamentary Library. Printed copies of the reports will be made available as soon as possible. The recommendations in the report on social security appeals are being considered by the Government. The Government's attitude to the recommendations in the report on the Commonwealth Employees Compensation Tribunal was announced in the context of the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 1981.

ALBURY-WODONGA DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-Pursuant to section 32 of the Albury-Wodonga Development Act 1973, I present the annual report of the Albury-Wodonga Development Corporation, together with the Auditor-General's report, for the year ended 30 June 1980.
SENATE STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL RESOURCES
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-For the information of honourable members, J present the text of a statement by the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick) on the report of the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources.
MEDICAL BENEFITS ORGANISATIONS Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health)-For the information of honourable members, I present the operations of the Registered Medical Benefits and Hospital Benefits Organisations annual report 1979-80.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Departments Mr SPEAKER-I understand the honourable member for La Trobe wishes to make a request for detailed information from me concerning one of the parliamentary departments. Mr MILTON-Yes, Mr Speaker. I seek information in relation to the operation of certain parliamentary departments. Mr SPEAKER-I understand the honourable gentleman has given his question to the Clerk. If it is in order it will be printed in Hansard, and in due course I will give a reply, which also will be printed in Hansard.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION Mr MORRIS (Shortland)-Mr Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented. Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman wish to make a personal explanation? Mr MORRIS-I do. Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed. Mr MORRIS-In the Daily Mirror of yesterday's date, on page 8, in a feature column entitled 'PS' edited by one Debbie Tarrant, there appears an article headed 'Taking refuge in Hansard'. The article purports to cover the proceedings surrounding last Thursday morning's incident at

Personal Explanation

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2881

Question Time. It states that following the day's proceedings 'MPs and their staff rushed for a copy of Hansard, the official parliamentary transcript, on Friday to examine at what exact point of Mal's grandiose delivery' certain incidents occurred. It states that 'persons noted with extreme interest that a number of not quite-in-order comments' were made by me. Without going into all the text of the article-it is there to be read-the article also notes that Hansard failed to record the interjections that I made. It concludes:
But somehow those normally thorough transcriptions omitted the verbal interruptions.
The article notes that as being peculiar. I find the article malicious. Its inferences are without foundation. It implies that the Hansard record was suppressed by me, by Hansard or by someone else. It implies that my interjections were not a coincidence. They were a coincidence to subsequent events. The article labels as peculiar the Hansard staff not having recorded interjections and questions the propriety of the interjections. For the record, my interjections were 'what about a dollar for the kids'?' and 'This is costing about $12m'.
Mr Speaker, you are aware and I think can confirm that the practice followed by Hansard in recording interjections is that unless the interjections are responded to they are not recorded. That is my understanding of the practice followed by Hansard. Accordingly, the interjections were not suppressed by me. I did not see the greens. In fact I did not read the Hansard of the events until I noticed this article yesterday evening. I do not believe anybody else suppressed the interjections. No member of the Press Gallery rushed around on Friday morning looking for a copy of Hansard or looking for information on the interjections. I was in this building and I saw no members of Parliament or Press reporters gallivanting about in the building. Given the privations being suffered today by thousands of women and children of broken families, I find it regrettable that rather than recognising the plight of these unfortunates, particularly those in women's refuges, the columnist chose instead to impugn my integrity for making the comments which I made, and which I stand by, and to impugn the integrity of Hansard for carrying out its duties in its traditional manner.
Mr SPEAKER-In relation to part of what was said by the honourable member for Shortland, it is the practice of this House, on the direction of the Presiding Officer-I have maintained that practice-that if an interjection is made but is not noticed by the person speaking at the time, it is not recorded in Hansard. The matter raised by the honourable member also gives

me the opportunity to make a personal explanation. Sometimes an interjection heard by members of the House may be offensive but I do not order the interjection to be withdrawn because the person speaking has elected to proceed with his speech. Therefore, the interjection is not included in the Hansard record. This is particularly the case when a second reading speech or some set-piece statement is being delivered to the House.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Wool Industry Amendment Bill 1981. Customs Amendment Bi111981. . Excise Amendment Bill 1981. Companies Bill 1981. Companies (Fees) Bill 1981. Companies (Transitional Provisions) Bi1l1981. Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1981. Crown Debts (Priority) Bill 1981. Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Bill (No. 2) 1981. Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Bill 1981. Securities Industry Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981. Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Bill 1981. Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981. Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bi111981. Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Bill 1981. Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Bill 1981. Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Bill 1981. Appropriation Bill (No.3) 1980-81. AppropriatiimBill (No.4) 1980-81.
ASSENT TO BILLS
Assent to the following Bills reported.
Census and Statistics Amendment Bill 1981. Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Bill 1981. Excise Tariff Amendment Bill 1981. Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill 1981. States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Bill 1981. States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bil11981. Quarantine Amendment Bi111981. Appropriation Bill (No.3) 1980-81. Appropriation Bill (No.4) 1980-81.
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO PERU, VENEZUELA
AND BRAZIL
Mr JARMAN (Deakin)-by leave-I present the official report of the Australian parliamentary delegation to Peru, Venezuela and Brazil. Mr Speaker, I wish to pay a tribute to the leadership which you gave in the early part of the delegation's visit and to the leadership which Senator Young from another place gave during the rest of the visit. I would also like to pay tribute to the work and assistance given by Mr John Dyer, the secretary to the delegation. Without his support

2882 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Australian Parliamentary Delegation

and constant attention to detail, I am sure that the delegation would not have achieved the success which I believe it did. I know I express the views of all members of the delegation in that regard. I believe the delegation did a great deal to further good will between Australia and the South American nations we visited.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes)-by leave-I join with the honourable member for Deakin (Mr Jarman) in paying tribute to the leaders of our delegation to South America and to the staff members who assisted in such an effective and assiduous way. There are very great lessons to learn from South America. We learned a great deal, first of all, about South American hospitality. Mr Speaker, it was an honour for the Parliament that you were accorded something like the freedom of the city of Cuzco when we visited that place. It was an historical visit as it was the occasion when the country was transferring from dictatorship to democracy. It is significant to say that we were treated with the utmost importance.
Peru is one of the most impoverished countries in the world, and it has a very high rate of inflation. It seems to me that the new regime will have an extremely difficult time in overcoming those problems. The new President, Fernando Belaunde Terry, is setting out to create one million jobs through co-operatives and to create state companies. He also aims to reduce the foreign debt to 25 per cent of exports. I understand that the inflation rate was running at approximately 160 per cent, although nobody knew the precise situation and there were various accounts of it. The state debt, for example, was $6 billion.
One could gain the impression in Venezuela only that it was a country on the move. There was a very great sense of pride about the achievements and about projects that were being put in hand. It was very interesting to note the size and success of the state-owned gas-fired steel industry; the iron ore mining company, which also is a state instrumentality; the state aluminium company, which is in partnership with a Japanese concern. Enormous hydro projects are under construction, and pine growing projects have resulted in 160 million trees being planted on 350,000 acres. One of the most impressive industrial developments in Venezuela is that pertaining to the oil industry. The state-owned oil company, Petroven, which has been operating since 1975, has the inside running and is returning enormous profits to the people. We visited the great oil centre of Lake Maracaibo, where over 1,000 oil wells are producing about 900,000 barrels of oil a day, or 80 per

cent of the nation's production. It is very interesting to note that the state-owned company has taken over responsibility for exploration, refining, transportation and marketing. This kind of thing is happening on a very wide scale throughout South America generally.
The literacy rate in Venezuela presents enormous problems, being at a very low level. Onequarter of the adult population is illiterate. There is a very inadequate distribution of the nation's income, with 20 per cent of the population earning two-thirds of the national income and the poorest 20 per cent earning only 8 per cent of the national income. There is a great deal to be learnt from the enterprising spirit in evidence in that country. In Brazil we could be only impressed by the effectiveness of the state oil body. A great deal is being done to develop ethanol as a major fuel. At present the Volkswagen car industry is orientated mainly to the use of ethanol, and of course the Volkswagen car manufactured in that country is the predominant vehicle. I understand that probably 250,000 alcoholic cars, if I could use that term, will be using this fuel by the end of the year. Australia could learn a great deal from this process, which converts sugar cane to a very effective fuel. Apparently, it is 50 per cent cheaper than ordinary petrol but slightly less efficient, and the overall net effect is very advantageous.
A wealth of information is contained in the report which has been tabled today. Regrettably, the report does not mention-it could not mention-the visit which was made to Chile on an unofficial basis as the delegation was returning from its official itinerary. The regime in that country has caused enormous disruption and has subjected many people to very great injustices. It has subdued the trade union movement and, in many ways, has reduced the whole cause of democracy to a most demeaning state. Any member of the delegation who took part in that unofficial visit to Chile would be able to provide information that could be of extremely great value to people who are interested in the pursuit of democracy. I pay tribute to you, Mr Speaker, as the leader of the delegation in Peru, and to Senator Young, who led the delegation for the other parts of the journey. I believe that enormous benefit has been derived as a consequence, certainly for Australia and, I hope, for the people of Brazil, Venezuela and Peru.
Mr SPEAKER-Unfortunately, I could not complete the journey and went only to the installation of President Belaunde in Peru. I regret that I could not carry forward because the delegation

Proposed Stifting Hours

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2883

was an excellent team. Its members applied themselves most assiduously to finding out information, which was the purpose of the journey. I make a comment in passing about Peru, which has experienced the most extraordinary set of circumstances. President Belaunde was elected by democratic process and overthrown by what was termed a left wing military coup. It must have been the most unique military coup in the world. Shortly afterwards, there was a subsequent military coup on the persons who themselves had formed government by military coup. After 10 or 12 years-I have forgotten exactly-the military government got into such a mess that it decided to turn government over to the democratic process once again. Lo and behold, who should win the election but President Belaunde, who had been overthrown by a military coup a decade earlier. The return to democracy was very much appreciated by the people, and we were very glad to have participated in the triumphant return to democracy of one of the great South American states.

The different hours proposed after some discussions were quite different, in the sense that at the present we are locked into two situations. One is not to sit during meal hours. I believe it is not necessary for us to rise during meal hours. I add that if we sit during meal hours the debate would not want to be interrupted by calls for quorums or divisions. There would have to be an understanding between all honourable members that quorums and divisions should not be called during the meal break. There is no reason why the business of the House cannot go forward during that time. That is a point that can be discovered whether it works or not. The other point that must be made. I think is that we have been locked in by a second factor, which is that under the Standing Orders the proceedings commence with prayers, petitions, et cetera, and, most importantly, questions without notice. In other parliaments of the world questions without notice, or the particular variation of that procedure in that parliament, do not necessarily follow immediately after prayers and petitions.

PROPOSED SITTING HOURS Mr COHEN (Robertson)-I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, to raise a matter. Some time last year I approached you and also spoke in this House about revised sitting hours. This matter has been discussed by the parties and throughout the Parliament for a period of 12 months. I understand that you are proposing to take some action regarding the sitting hours. Can you inform the House what you have in mind?
Mr SPEAKER-I will be happy to do that. In the time. I have been in this chamber there have been many occasions on which members have wished to change the sitting hours to suit contemporary requirements. Experiments have been carried out on a variety of times, but after a short period each of those experiments has failed and we have returned to the sitting hours which I have known throughout the period I have been here, except for very minor variations. The honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) raised this matter with me. Generally, it was apparent that the time had arrived when a great number of honourable members wished the issue of sitting hours to be looked at again. Therefore, I felt that it was a responsibility in that I had to do what I could to bring the matter forward for determination. Consideration was made by certain members of the Government parties who then approached me for my response. I thought the most convenient way to determine the matter was to reduce it to two alternatives, that is, to continue with the present hours or with different hours.

I have had discussions with party leaders. It has been indicated to me by party leaders on both sides of the House that before a response is given they would wish to have the matter discussed in the party rooms, that is, the Caucus or Government party rooms. What I had in mind is that if there is a consensus established by the party room meetings we could formulate the provision to go ahead. Otherwise it is my intention, unless there is specific request to me from the parties not to do so, to ask the Clerk to conduct a ballot amongst honourable members in which they would be able to opt between two alternatives-the present sitting hours or a new set of sitting hours.
Mr COHEN (Robertson)-Mr Speaker, thank you very much for that answer. Very briefly, as this matter has now occupied the time of honourable members, both in the House and out of the House, for over a year and as we are coming to the end of the session it seems to me that as we are grown adults it is about time we made a decision. I hope that we will have discussions in our party room tomorrow as I hope discussions will occur in the Government party room so that the ballot can be conducted this week or next week. Then some provision can be made for the next sitting of parliament.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to address a few words on this same matter.
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman may proceed.

2884 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Proposed Stiffing Hours

Mr SINCLAIR-A paper has been distributed by the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) and by Senator Martin. Unfortunately I did not hear the full text of your comments to the House, Mr Speaker, but quite obviously there is a shared concern that there is a basis on which the present sitting hours can be modified in any way to meet the requirements of honourable members and yet still maintain the general available opportunity for Government Business and private members' business. The Government has had some discussions about the matter. It believes it is necessary perhaps to develop further propositions than those now before us. For example, on other occasions there have been propositions relating to two-week back-to-back Tuesday to Friday, Monday to Thursday proposition, with two weeks up. Some honourable members are attracted to that type of proposal.
I am aware, Mr Speaker, that the group of which you have been chairman has been looking at some alternative proposals. The Government feels that perhaps still more work is needed to be done, not just for the purpose of looking at those proposals before us but perhaps to look at some of the other dimensions as to how we can accommodate adequately party committees, parliamentary committees and those other very important parts of a member's conduct of parliamentary business such as the interviewing of constituents and so on. Therefore, it will be a matter which will be discussed in the Joint Party Room tomorrow on the basis of looking at perhaps a wider range of options than is included just within the proposal that you, Mr Speaker, commented on a few momentsago.
The honourable member for Robertson suggested that the matter is urgent. In agreeing with that I still think it is necessary to determine a proposal that is workable. Whatever proposition is put forward I think we need to test it in relation both to the demands of the front bench Executive and the Opposition parties as well as the need for Cabinet to meet and to debate the wide range of matters that seem to come up for consideration both for it and in consultation with various groups.
We are anxious in that whatever proposals go forward that we try to meet generally the wishes of honourable members. We do not wish to do that without consultation with the Opposition or with members of Parliament as a whole. I hope that through party room discussion tomorrow we might be able to progress the matter a little further. I throw some caution into the arena as far as our being necessarily able to resolve the proposition finally at that time.

Mr SPEAKER-Unfortunately, I say to the right honourable Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) that everything he has put is predicated on a decision by the Executive; whereas it has been put to me by honourable members who have approached me that it is a parliamentary matter. As I see it and as I have been informed by party leaders, they wish the matters to be discussed at party meetings. It is well known that at the request of members from both chambers the President and I had drawn up some ballot papers which could be used to ascertain the wishes of honourable members and honourable senators.
FUNDING OF POLITICAL PARTIES
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The refusal of the Government to provide for public funding of political parties for election campaigns.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (3.48)-The Liberal and National Country parties are terrified of the great reform which has been brought about by the Wran Labor Government in New South Wales that political parties be funded from the public purse as from the 1981 election onwards. The New South Wales Labor Government has brought Australia into line with what is occurring throughout all the other great democracies of the Western world. This is an extremely serious debate. It requires serious contributions from both sides of the House. All that we have heard in the past both from this Government and from the Opposition in New South Wales through its former leader, Mr Mason, and its new leader, Mr McDonald, is that the system of funding political parties by the public purse is corrupt. No substantiation of the allegations and no reasons why it would be corrupt-no mention why all the other countries which practise this measure would be corrupt-have been given. Really, it is just a little rhetoric in the hope that the New South Wales Opposition can win some votes back to increase the miserable 35 per cent which it received at the last New South Wales election. After the New South Wales Opposition's efforts yesterday I would have thought that the percentage would fall to 25 per cent because not only has the New South Wales Opposition changed to a worse

Funding ofPolitical Parties

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2885

leader but it has the ayatollah as deputy. One will the money is coming from. Do the taxpayers be-

be able to go into Martin Place every Friday and lieve that money spent in this way is not as valu-

watch people being stoned to death if the Liberals able to the body politic in Australia as, say, spend-

ever get power in New South Wales again.

ing $40m on VIP aircraft or spending $120,000 to

send some of the members from the Liberal Party

I have been campaign director or deputy camaround the world to deliver letters? One of them,

paign director on behalf of the Labor Party in no the honourable member for Bradfield, David

fewer than 11 Federal and State campaigns. I Miles Connolly, or 'smiling cunningly', as they

have been very close to the situation of raising used to call him in the Department--

funds, setting budgets and watching expenditure

on television, radio and newspaper advertising Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable

grow, and I understand completely what is hapgentleman will not use those terms in relation to

pening in Australia. There are very few people in another member. He will withdraw.

this Parliament on the other side who have had

such experience. If there are such people, the Mr YOUNG-I withdraw. The honourable

Government is not putting them up to speak in member is being sent around the world to deliver

this debate. Jim Carlton obviously would have a letters. It is not so long ago that he was a guest of

good deal of experience--

the infamous Smith regime in Rhodesia in

defiance of a United Nations declaration. I hope

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable that the Prime Minister does not send him to any

gentleman will refer to a member by his of the black Commonwealth countries to deliver

electorate.

his messages. That exercise is taking $120,000 of

taxpayers' money, $40m on the VIP aircraft and

Mr YOUNG-The honourable member for thousands of dollars was spent on the Lodge when

Mackellar (Mr Carlton) would be expected to the Prime Minister took over from the former

take part in this debate but he will not. Obviously, Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, because the Lodge

as an apparatchik of the New South Wales Libwas not up to the Prime Minister's expectations.

eral Party, he would know what is involved. We Let the taxpayers make a judgment about the way

have reached a stage when the Liberal and in which the money should be spent in bringing

Country parties expended about $6m during the about a decent system for funding election cam-

1980 Federal election campaign. We cannot get paigns or in the other ways I have mentioned. The

an exact amount but we do know that on teleGovernment does not argue about that other

vision alone $2m was spent by the Government expenditure. It says that it has to spend the money

parties. The days of raffling chooks and the days on those things, but it says that spending tax-

of going down to get two bob or a dollar off a payers' money to bring about a decent political

party's local supporters to meet that sort of system is not on.

expenditure have long since gone. The Liberal

and Country parties are receiving massive doI ask the Parliament: How could a system of

nations from major companies both inside and using money from taxpayers, which money has to

outside Australia. The Australian people are enpublicly accounted for, be corrupt, as the parties

titled to know where that money is coming from, opposite charge, when business donations, which

for what reason the money is being given and if are not accounted for and are hidden in the

this Government is giving any favours to the annual balance sheets of businesses, are not cor-

people who are making these massive donations. rupt. As I say, $5m or $6m came to the Govern-

The Labor Party is pledged not only in New South ment parties at the time of the last election and

Wales but also in every other State and in this was completely unaccounted for. We do not know

Parliament to bring about the same reforms which where one cent came from. We do not know what

have been adopted by almost every other Western deals are being done between business and

democracy. I will come to that matter a little government. We do not know what favours are

later.

being bestowed on businesses as a result of their

donations. That is not corrupt, according to the

The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), of Government. It is corrupt only if governments, as

course, joined in the chorus at the weekend at the they are doing in so many parts of the world, pay

Liberal Party Council meeting by saying that the out taxpayers' money, a much smaller amount,

proposed system in New South Wales is corrupt; and are fully accountable to government auditors.

that we should not use taxpayers' money this way. The Government says that that is a corrupt sys-

Let the taxpayers say whether they want an tem but that private business donations are not

honest political system in which they know where corrupt.

2886 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Funding ofPolitical Parties

These questions ought to be asked: How was the $5m or $6m that was spent by the Liberal and Country parties in the 1980 election campaign obtained? Who were the donors? Were any agreements reached with the donors? Have any favours been granted by the Government to the donors? All these qllestions have to be answered to satisfy the Australian people. The allegations that public funding is corrupt, that it is unacceptable, without any serious substantive argument in support of them are not acceptable either in the Parliament or outside the Parliament among members of the public.
Let us look at some of the things that are on record. I was campaign director for the Labor Party in 1972. Mr Murdoch has gone on recordthis is not something I would have made public because the agreements between political parties and donors are such that the parties try to keep everything secret-since 1972 and said that he made a donation of $74,000 to the Labor Party in 1972. In 1972 Mr Murdoch had one television station, in Adelaide in one of the smaller States, and he had a number of newspapers around Australia. But let us look at what has happened to Mr Murdoch's empire since 1972. Let there be no mistake about it; Mr Murdoch now stands 100 per cent behind this Government-101 per cent, if one likes. He not only donates to the Government parties but also uses his newspapers regularly to support this Government, to do everything possible to see that the Liberal Party is in control both at the national level and the State level. We had the disgusting display of Press bias in South Australia two years ago when the Corcoran Government was overturned partially by the Murdoch empire. Now, Mr Murdoch wants television stations in Sydney and Melbourne. He wants the airways. What additional things would Mr Murdoch do for the Liberal Party that he would not even have thought of doing for the Labor Party in 1972? The answer must have come as a bit of a shock to him in 1972 when he asked Mr Whitlam to make him high commissioner to the United Kingdom. Mr Whitlam said: 'You must be joking'. But Mr Murdoch said: 'But I have made a big donation'. It was not on.
What is MrMurdoch getting now? Many questions are being asked in the Parliament about the draft of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal legislation? The Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) says: 'Certain discussions have been going on with Mr Murdoch'. Everybody in Australia believes that substantial donations are coming from the business people in this country, including Mr Murdoch, to the Liberal and Country parties. This is one of the reasons why

the Liberal and Country parties are absolutely terrified of the legislation which has been introduced in New South Wales, which will give us a decent e1ectorallaw at last. It will not be long before every other Parliament follows. Every other State will follow and so will the Commonwealth, because the Labor Party, the largest single political party in this country, is pledged to bring about this reform. Reform in this area we will have. People opposite say that the business world has no influence in the Liberal Party. Those opposite should ask Dick Hamer how much influence business has in the Liberal Party. He has been on television for the last four days telling us that it was not his colleagues who sacked him; it was big business in Victoria that sacked him. That is the influence that big business has on the parties that sit opposite. Those parties carryon with so much nonsense about the system proposed by the Labor Party.
If the Prime Minister leaves Australia in two or three weeks time and wanders around the world he will meet and shake hands with some very prominent citizens in the other Western countries. Mr Fraser is on record in Australia--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member will refer to a Minister by his portfolio.
Mr YOUNG-The Prime Minister will go to shake hands with some very prominent people. He is on record in Australia as saying that the public funding of political parties is corrupt. I suggest that if he believes that the system is corrupt he believes the people who practise it are corrupt. Let us look at the people Mr Fraser will have to accuse of corruption.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I remind the honourable member to refrain from using the names of honourable members.
Mr YOUNG-The Prime Minister has used the term, Mr Deputy Speaker. He used it at the Liberal Party Council meeting, where one can say anything because only a bunch of nongs are listening. In West Germany the Prime Minister will shake hands with Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, who was publicly funded by taxpayers' money during the last Bundestag elections. He will have to shake hands with Helmut Schmidt and say: 'Look, you know you were elected under a corrupt system of public funding for political parties'. Schmidt will do what Nasser did when he met Menzies. He will look up at the ceiling and say: 'Where did they get this one from?' For years and years West Germany has had not only public funding for election campaigns but also public funding for the existence of the political parties.

Funding ofPolitical Parties

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2887

Then the Prime Minister will go to Austria to This debate is extremely serious in Australia at

meet Bruno Kreisky. He will say the same thing to the moment. The Government has to come up

him. Kreisky is new to politics. He has been inwith some substantive argument against the sys-

volved only since 1919! The Austrian parties are tem of funding of political parties. Wild rhetoric

being funded not only for elections but also for the about allegations of corruption which do not

existence of their political parties and the publicarry the substantive argument are not enough in

cation of their newspapers. So they have an opthe debate on this matter. We will win on the

posing view in their newspapers to the monopolies question of funding of political parties. A reform

which might be owned as they are here in will be brought about. I say: More power to the

Australia. Again, he will tell Schmidt and Kreisky Wran Government of New South Wales for being

that they should do away with this system. In Italy the first to introduce this very major and necess-

he will talk to President Pertini and tell him that aryreform.

the electoral system of funding political parties is corrupt. Let us see how Italy adopted the system. I quote from the New South Wales report dealing with the funding system. It stated:

Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (4.3)-This has to be the Opposition's secret weapon in this House. It has to be the most inspired and most aptly chosen matter of public

The system of public subsidies was introduced following scandals about clandestine payments to political parties by

importance by an Opposition for a long time. There is no better demonstration of that than the

some industrialists in the oil and chemical industries. There concluding exhortation of the honourable

was broad bi-partisan agreement on its introduction. It was enacted in 1974.

member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young). He said that the Wran Government would win on this

The Prime Minister will see President Pertini, Chancellor Kreisky and Chancellor Schmidt. In Sweden a conservative government is in office at the moment. Sweden, since 1964, with the approval of all the political parties, conservative and labour, had supported the funding of political parties. They are not just supported at election time; they are funded continuously for educational purposes, for the newspapers which the political parties put out for campaigning. I sup-

issue. He said: 'More power to the arm of the Wran Government'. If Labor is so certain that the Wran Government will win on this issue why does the Wran Government not have the courage to put this issue to a referendum of the New South Wales public? The Premier of New South Wales is holding a referendum on the subject of pecuniary interest and on the subject of a four-year parliamentary term, but he does not have the courage to have a referendum on this issue.

pose the Prime Minister will say to Falldin in Dr Klugman-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a

Sweden: 'You have to drop the system as well. point of order. The Treasurer does not seem to

Forget about your experience of the last 20 years. know that it is necessary to have a referendum on

Do what we do; sell your soul and try to perpetuthose two other issues according to the Consti-

ate the rotten system which is now applying in tution of New South Wales.

Australia.' He will go to Norway, Denmark, Finland, Israel and Canada and then to the last country. No Australian conservative Prime Min-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- There is no substance in the point of order.

ister likes anything better than to arrive at the Mr HOWARD-The holding of a referendum

White House. They will do anything to get to the would be open, convenient and overwhelming

White House. The Prime Minister over the years common sense, and it would settle this issue once

has written 1,000 letters asking for an invitation to and for all so far as the Australian public and the

visit various Presidents. When he arrives there he people of New South Wales are concerned. If the

will say to President Reagan: 'I am sorry, PresiPremier of New South Wales really believed that

dent, that $21m which you received in public this was such a winner in that State-that the

funding for the last presidential race was made New South Wales taxpayers were all fired up

from a corrupt system. You have to drop that. about the contribution to democracy that this sort

You have to go back and be beholden to all the of legislation could make-he would have the

major United States companies that used to buy courage to have a vote on this issue also. The fact

and sell Presidents in years gone past'. He will of the matter is that the great majority of the

have to tell Jimmy Carter, the former President of people of New South Wales, as well as the great

the United States: 'You were involved in a system majority of the people elsewhere in this country,

which is corrupt'. I hope he will then get the opdo not want taxpayers' money spent on paying off

portunity to speak to the Congress so that he can the campaign debts of the Australian Labor

inform all the successful candidates in the ConParty. That is what the New South Wales legis-

gress that they are partaking in a corrupt system. lation is all about. Everybody knows that the New

2888 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Funding ofPolitical Parties

South Wales branch of the Labor Party is massively in debt. Everybody knows that this action is a raid on the taxpayers of New South Wales to
pay off the campaign debts of the Labor Party which have been incurred not only in getting Mr
Wran elected but also in successive Federal elec-
tions. This proposition is wrong in principle. It is wrong in principle that taxpayers' funds should be
used to finance the campaigns of political parties.
It is wrong in principle that taxpayers' funds should be used to pay off the campaign debts of the Labor Party, the Liberal Party, the National
Country Party or any political party in Australia.

Australia. The Wran Government is petrified to
put to a referendum of the New South Wales people the Bill which was introduced by the Wran
Government and passed by the New South Wales Parliament-the Bill which it so believes in. This
is the legislation that is supposed to scare us to
death. Rather it scares Mr Wran to death. He does not have the courage to put it to a vote of the New South Wales people because he knows it
would be overwhelmingly rejected even by the
hundreds of thousands of people who regularly vote for the Labor Party in New South Wales in
both Federal and State elections.

Part of the test of the capacity of a political party in a democracy to sustain itself over the years is its capacity to attract a degree of financial support. The failure of the Labor Party in this area is part and parcel of its failure as a major party in our system. It is utterly wrong and an utter perversion of proper principles of parliamentary democracy to fall back upon the taxpayers and to force a contribution from every taxpayer in this country towards the activities of a political party that he does not support. That is what this legislation involves. It is not democratic to force a member of the Labor Party to pay, through taxes, to help finance the activities of the Liberal Party. The legislation is a cynical exercise designed to serve the political ends of the Australian Labor Party. The opposition of the Liberal Party in this place and in parliaments throughout Australia is based upon principle. It is based upon the soundly based proposition that part and parcel of the role of a political party is to gather financial as well as physical and electoral support.
Public funding is a long cherished objective of the Labor Party, not only in New South Wales but all over Australia. I remember the maiden speech of the honourable member for Port Adelaide in 1974 when he spoke on that subject in this Parliament. He has spoken on that subject at regular intervals ever since. He is committed to the view that taxpayers' money ought to be used to finance the activities of political parties in this country. I put it to the honourable member for Port Adelaide and to the House that not only does the Labor Party want the New South Wales taxpayers to pay off the campaign debts of the ALP in that State, which were incurred not only in fighting State elections but also in fighting Federal elections, but it also wants that practice to be duplicated all over Australia. The fight that is being waged in New South Wales now by the Liberal and National Country parties is not a fight in respect of New South Wales politics alone. It has implications that go far beyond the State of New South Wales. It has implications all over

Not only does this legislation strike at the fundamental principle that taxpayers' money should not be used to pay off the campaign debts of the Labor Party or, indeed, of any other political party in Australia; it also strikes at another very important principle in a democracy, that is, the right of privacy and the right of anonymity of political support. In supporting this legislation the Labor Party is saying to anybody who makes only a modest contribution to a political party that that person has no right to preserve the privacy of his support for that political party. The thing that really matters in the legislation that has been passed by the New South Wales Parliament is the enormous power it gives to inspectors appointed by the Electoral Commission to examine the books of political parties and to destroy a basic right of anonymity and of privacy, which I believe is a very important principle of democracy. That view also happens to be the view of 65 per cent of people surveyed in a poll conducted by the Age newspaper on this subject, which included a very large number of Labor Party and Australian Democrat supporters. So the opposition is to be found not only in the ranks of the Liberal Party and the National Country Party but also amongst many supporters of the other side of politics in Australia. The legislation that has been passed by the Wran Government was passed very quickly.
Opposition members interjecting--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! If honourable members persist in interjecting, the Chair will deal with them.
Mr HOWARD-The legislation that has been hurried through the New South Wales Parliament by the Wran Government gives extremely draconian inspectorial powers to those people who are appointed by the Commission established under the legislation. That legislation is quite patently designed to serve the political interests of the Australian Labor Party. It forces taxpayers, against their will, to support the political activities of people for whom they would never vote

Funding ofPolitical Parties

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2889

throughout their whole lives. It is wrong in principle for that reason. It is wrong also because it attacks the principle of anonymity and the principle of privacy.
I believe that the Labor Party's support for this legislation is based upon two totally false propositions. The first false proposition is that, somehow or other, parliaments, be they in Australia, the United States or anywhere else in the democratic world, can legislate for the honesty of their elected members. The history of democracies around the world has been that no matter how elaborate are the electoral laws of a country, no matter how severe are the sanctions for doing certain things, honest people can be retained and promoted in politics only through the proper workings of the parliamentary and political systems.
All the sanctions under the sun in the United States did not prevent somebody who reached the office of Vice-President of that country from being driven from office, basically because of corruption. All the elaborate electoral laws in the United States a few years ago did not prevent that from happening.
Mr Barry Jones-He had a few admirers here.
Mr HOWARD-The honourable member for Lalor knows the person to whom I am referring. I put it to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, that all the elaborate laws in this country will not ensure a higher level of honesty and a higher level of integrity amongst elected people. I do not assert that any monopoly of integrity or honesty is held on one or other side of this Parliament, or, indeed, of any parliament in the States of this country. What I do assert is that it is absolutely false and misguided to believe that we will necessarily produce a higher degree of honesty and a higher degree of integrity by passing law upon law and imposing regulation upon regulation, particularly so far as this type of legislation is concerned. There can be no doubt that a political system which allows the contributions of very large trade unions towards the funds of the Australian Labor Party, contributions which are funded as a result of membership and other dues paid by members of trade unions throughout this country, who are in turn not forced--
Mr Young-They are all published.
Mr HOWARD-Does the honourable member for Port Adelaide suggest that the inspectors of this Commission will be able to inspect the books of every trade union in Australia?
Mr Young-The Arbitration Commission can do it now.

Mr HOWARD-I am not talking about the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! I warn the honourable member for Port Adelaide.
Mr HOWARD-I am not talking about the Arbitration Commission; I am talking about the inspectors appointed by the Electoral Commission in New South Wales. The honourable member for Port Adelaide is assuring the House that those people will be able to inspect the books of the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union throughout Australia.
Mr Scott-The IRB is doing it now. Mr HOWARD-Is the honourable member for Hindmarsh going to give me the same assurance? That is very good. I am absolutely delighted to hear that. I am sure the officials of that union will also be delighted to know that that inspection will take place. Mr Scott-You don't even know what is going on. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I warn the honourable member for Hindmarsh. Mr HOWARD-Of course the Government is opposed to political funding. Of course we are opposed to the prescription of taxpayers' money to fund the activities of political parties. Of course we are opposed to the funds of Australian taxpayers who live in New South Wales being appropriated to pay off the $300,000 or $400,000 worth of debts of the New South Wales branch of the Labor Party. That is what this legislation is all about. It is not about some highfalutin principle. It is not about the commitment of the Labor Party to parliamentary democracy. It is about paying off the debts incurred over the past few years by the New South Wales branch of the Labor Party. It is about the $300,000 or $400,000 that the Labor Party has got into the red over the last few years. That is as much as the principle of support for this legislation amounts to. We reject the legislation. We reject this matter of public importance. We do not believe that it is right in principle to force people to contribute towards the campaign expenses of political parties they do not support. I remind the House that every time the Premier of New South Wales complains to the people of that State that the Commonwealth Government has not given him enough money for the essential services of New South Wales, he should be reminded that the $2m or $3m which would be available under this legislation is the $2m or $3m that could be available to finance hospitals, schools, pre-schools and other

2890 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Funding ofPolitical Parties

activities in New South Wales. If Mr Wran were short of funds to support essential services in New South Wales he would really commit himself to an act of principle and abandon funding under this legislation. If he really believes that the Liberal Party is petrified of this legislation in New South Wales, if he really believes in the rhetoric of the honourable member for Port Adelaide, that he can win on this legislation and that there ought to be more power to his arm, he should have the courage to have a referendum and face the people of New South Wales and really find out that they reject his rotten, corrupt legislation.

Last week I saw one of the most disgusting spectacles that I have seen in my life in politics. A Premier of one of the States of this nation was assassinated by one business leader after another on Nationwide. What amazed me was that nothing was said about it in the Press the next week. We saw other top business people-I think it was Peter Couchman first of all-recounting the fact that there had been a series of meetings of business leaders leading up to the decision that Hamer had to go. Then they appeared on television and said: 'He has to go'. Who is running this country?

Mr COHEN (Robertson) (4.18)-We have just heard a ranting, raving performance by the Treasurer (Mr Howard), unprecedented in this House. The way he was carrying on, I thought he was going to do himself a mischief. He has called for a referendum to be held in New South Wales on this legislation. A referendum is to be held in New South Wales in a few months' time. It is called a State election. In that election the people of New South Wales will have an opportunity to reject the Government. If the Treasurer wants to get set about the result of that referendum, I can get him set right throughout this House and right throughout the nation for any amount he cares to nominate. The Liberal Party is mounting a campaign in this election in which it is using the term 'morality'. 'Corruption' is a word that crops up.
This debate is really about the Government's morality, a morality which enables people and companies to provide hundreds of thousands of dollars, millions of dollars, privately and anonymously, to its candidates for election campaigns; or our morality, which is that if people want democracy they have to pay for that democracy to make sure that it is continually and perpetually honest, and that will be done by public funding of election campaigns. We want to get rid of the present situation where democracy is something that can be sold to the highest bidder. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his speech said that the Australian Labor Party in New South Wales introduced this legislation to pay off its debts. That is absolute nonsense. The Labor Party in New South Wales, for his information, is not in debt. We know, from the debate today and the argument of the Treasurer today, that the Liberals are scared; they are terrified. I could use a cruder expression, but I will not. They are doing it in their boots regularly over this legislation because they know that when the companies that now pour millions of dollars into their party have to disclose their funds, funds, amongst other things, will drop off.

Mr Barry Jones-It had nothing to do with the Parliament.
Mr COHEN-It had nothing to do with the Parliament? Who is running this country? Big business in Melbourne, or the elected representatives of the country? I am not a supporter of Mr Hamer but, by God, I felt sorry for the man, assassinated in the way in which he was last week. It was the most nauseating thing I have seen. Can honourable members imagine what would have happened if the trade unions had all been interviewed and they had said: 'Hayden has to go and Whitlam has to go'? There would be outcries from the people behind the scenes who are running the Government. I would like to know and I am sure the people of Australia would like to know how much each of those individuals who were named in that program-the many others as wellcontributed. Do not people in this country have a right to know how much was put into the Liberal Party's coffers in Victoria and federally? I certainly think they do.
We have heard from the Treasurer about the so-called right of privacy, the right of anonymity. Why do people want to remain anonymous when they have contributed large amounts of money to a political party? The only reason is that there can be a conflict of interest. We know there is a conflict of interest when mining companies are starting to put amounts of $100,000, $200,000, $300,000 or $400,000 into election campaigns. That is why they want to remain anonymous and private. As the previous speaker from this side, the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young), said, what an absurdity it is, in a debate of this nature, to talk about legislation and the public funding of political parties in corrupt regimes such as that of West Germany being corrupt. West Germany passed a Political Parties Act of 1967 funding the election of political parties.
Mr Hawke-He didn't say one word about that either.

Funding ofPolitical Parties

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2891

Mr COHEN-The Treasurer did not mention that once. All parties participating in an election campaign in Germany are entitled to public funding provided they meet a threshold. Approximately $1.75 is provided by the Bundestag for each person voting for the political parties. Mr Wran is talking about 22c for each person. In West Germany parties must disclose their sources of revenue. Donors of $10,000 or more must be named regardless of whether they are individuals or corporations. Austria has a fund that gives a basic grant to each party with five members in parliament and apportions the remainder of the fund on the basis of votes polled in the national elections. That system has operated since 1975. Is the system operating in Austria a corrupt system?
We know of the many scandals that have oc-- I curred in Italy over the years. One of the means of
keeping the Italian system honest-which is recognised by the Italian Parliament--is to pro-. vide political funding. Sweden probably leads the way in introducing legislation of this nature because it introduced the payment of subsidies to political parties in 1965. Norway soon followed the Swedish system, as did Denmark, Finland, Israel, Canada and the United States. All those countries are highly respected democracies. What an absurdity it is to suggest that all these countries that have had democratic systems for such a long period would introduce a system that is corrupt. They have introduced a system of public funding for the obvious reason that this gets rid of corruption. Once people are nominated and the amount of money that has been paid in is made known to the general public, that clearly ends the sort of corruption that has gone on before.
The Treasurer spoke about the national level. Let us look at what happens at the local level. Does anyone seriously suggest that, at a local level-most of us are back benchers-a person who contributes $1,000 or $2,000 to the campaign of a local candidate does not buy access to that local candidate? That is not necessarily corrupt. Can any honourable member seriously suggest to me that if Fred Nerks, the managing director of such and such a company, who has contributed $1,000 in the last election campaign to the candidate for Gulargambone or whatever it may be is on the phone he will not get an immediate inter-- view while other people have to wait? Of course he will. He does not buy actual goods and services. He buys access in the same way as do the contributions of general managers of some of the top companies in Australia which contribute $50,000 or $100,000 to the Liberal Party campaign. They want to talk to the Prime Minister (Mf Malcolm Fraser). Honourable members opposite do not

seriously think that they do not get through. I think they have a better chance of getting through than would the girls from the women's refuges today_ We saw a situation only the other day when the Leader of the Opposition--
Mr Ruddock-The door isn't closed to anybody.
Mr COHEN-The honourable member says that the door is not closed. He would be lucky to get through, let alone the people I was referring to.
MI' Ruddock-It is disgraceful.
Mr COHEN-The honourable member should not be absurd. We saw a situation just recently where the former leader of the Opposition in New South Wales,Mr Mason-he has been deposed; he is amongst others who seem to be falling quickly-admitted that he had been offered bribes of $5,000.
MI' Barry Jones-A week.
Mr COHEN-A week. He did not bother to report it to the authorities. To his credit, he rejected the bribe. He should have gone to the police. Rarely has there been a better example of what separates the two political parties. On the one hand, we have a political party that accepts millions of dollars privately from anonymous sources and wants to make sure that those sources remain anonymous. On the other hand, we want open disclosure; we want an end to the peddling of influence by companies and individuals. We want to see political parties funded and we want to see honesty in government.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Miilar)-- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. I call the honourable member for Dundas. Before the honourable member proceeds the Chair suggests to honourable members that the quality of the speeches will be measured by the substance and not the musical accompaniment in the form of interjections.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (4.28)-1t was suggested in this debate that we would hear arguments of substance by the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young). I waited in vain to hear the substance. In fact what we have been given are the confessions of the honourable member for Port Adelaide. They were most interesting confessions. What he had to say dealt with his own relationship, as a former officer of the Australian Labor Party, with those people who have supported the Australian Labor Party in financial and other ways. He suggested that we ought to judge everybody else by the way in which he acted in that office.

2892 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Funding ofPolitical Parties

I think it is a very poor form of analogous argument. The substantial matter that he raised in this debate dealt with the experience of other countries in relation to public funding. There is no way that we would argue, by that sort of analogy, what ought to be acceptable in Austr~lia. Le~ us .look at the position with regard to pubhc fundmg m Germany. It may be interesting to note the extent to which the Nazis were publicly funded in office to remain in office and to draw some analogy from that. It might be relevant to know .the exte~t to which the Italian Communist Party IS today aided by public funds of the Italian taxpayers. Are we to argue by analogy that the public funds of .Australian taxpayers ought to be payable to parties of that ilk? Even Mr Wran in New South Wales would not buy that one. Yet, that is the sort of argument that we are asked by the honourable member for Port Adelaide and the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) to accept. I do not accept those arguments. They have no currency; they have no substance. The reality ~s th~t the Liberal Party does have a code ofbehavl?ur m relation to the way in which money for the LIberal Party is raised. It is a code of behaviour which is honourable and upon which the public of this country can rely. I will tell honourable members opposite what the code of behaviour is because I think it is about time somebody told members of the Australian Labor Party what it was about. If honourable members opposite were able just to separate themselves from their own experience and the extent to which they have involved themselves in fund raising for their own party-need one recall the situation involving some Victorians, the former leader of the Opposition and the Iraqis to know just what they mean by standards-and if they were able to build themselves up into a substantial political party with broadly based support they would not be seeking to get taxpayers' funds to support their campaigns.
I go back to the point Twanted to. mak.e be~ore. The Liberal Party's code of behavIOur IS bnefly this: The organisation raises its own money. That is separate from the parliamentary party. In the statement that was made by the Liberal Party to the joint committee of the Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales on the funding of election campaigns, it had this to say:
Briefly stated, the Organisation raises its own money and w.e insulate our policy-makers from knowledge of our cont~l bulions. No Parliamentary member is informed of the details of donations under any circumstances whatsoever. We do not accept money from other Organisations in furthera~ce of their interests, and we do not accept funds that are subject to political conditions of any kind.
Mr Young--You don't know.

Mr RUDDOCK -1 do not know where the money that supports our political party comes from. There are no conditions attached to any funds that are given by companies or individuals to support our philosophy.
Mr Barry Jones-Except that you will not support socialism.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! I warn the honoUI'able member for Lalor.
Mr RUDDOCK-There are no such conditions that I am aware of or that I believe any other member of the Liberal Party or of this Parliament would be aware of. We are free to make the decisions that we wish to make within our party councils and within this P.arliament on our own judgment, free from any mfluence of that sort. That is the standard that members of the Labor Party ought to be aware of. That is the basic issue which I think is before the people. We know from the polls that have been taken over a long period that the people of Australia are not in favour of taxpayers' funds being diverted into the funding of political parties before the provision of services and amenities that the people themselves want and require. In fact, the Premier of New South Wales has fought an election on another campaign. I remind honourable m.embers of i.t. It was the campaign on double taxatIOn. I submit to honourable mem bel'S that public funding of political parties is a form of double taxation, mainly for supporters of the Opposition. Its supporters-but many other taxpayers as well-are challenged to provide moneys for political purposes through SUbscriptions to unions. Those same people who will be compelled to pay union SUbscriptions compulsorily extracted from their pockets will now be asked to pay another compulsory fee taken out of their pockets by government. It is the most scurrilous form of doubJe taxation I have heard of.
There is no public support for this proposal. A total of 71 per cent of the people are against public funding, according to an Australian Nationwide Opinion Poll, 23 per cent are in favour and 6 per cent are undecided. A decision by the latter group would not alter the result at all. The honourable member for Port Adelaide said in this debate that the Liberals were terrified. I can assure him that in no way are we in the Liberal Party terrified by this proposal. The honourable member for Robertson remarked on the referendum that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) said should be called. We will willingly fight the next election campaign in New South Wales on this matter. I believe that the fighting of that campaign will so terrify Mr Wran that we will be lucky to find him wanting to see that matter mentioned at all during

Funding ofPolitical Parties

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2893

the campaign. Mr Wran knows as well as I and into their lives by inspectors who will know what

honourable members opposite know that this their private circumstances might be and who

would be a disastrous issue for him to fight on. He they want to support in terms of philosophy. Why

would be hounded from office. That is the reality should governments be able to pry by these

of the situation.

means, by looking at party officers, into the ideas

Nobody is in favour of taxpayers' funds being used to pay off the Labor Party's debts. Ii has no public support whatsoever. Nobody is in favour of a political party that cannot succeed in raising

in people's minds? In fact this privacy is something protected by the very secrecy of the secret ballot. In this community we do not try to intrude into people's lives in that way.

membership of its own to support its own wishes
going to the taxpayers' pockets for support. It was interesting to read recently-J cannot vouch for the accuracy of the figures, in absolute terms---of

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is now concluded.

the stated support for each of the parties in New South Wales. It was surprising that the largest political party in New South Wales in terms of membership was the National Country Party,

STATUTE LAW REVISION BILL 1981 Bill received from the Senate, and read a first time.

with over 28,000 members. The Liberal Party had

over 22,000 members and the Labor Party had of

Second Reading

the order of 18,000 members. The smallest politiMr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) cal party in terms of paying, subscribing members (4.39)-1 move: in this country is the Australian Labor Party.

That is the very reason that some $2m of taxThat the Bill be now read a second time.

payers' funds have to be extracted from taxpayers' pockets by the New South Wales Government.

The Statute Law Revision Bill 1981 has three purposes. First, it is designed to correct some printing and drafting errors that have been found to exist

Mr Hodgman-It is extortion.

in a number of Acts. Secondly, it provides for the

Mr RUDDOCK-As the Minister for the Capital Territory says, it is extortion of taxpayers in every sense of the word. The direct cost involved is only a part of it. As I said in a debate the other day in this chamber, when I grieved for New South Wales at the prospect of this legislation, the

repeal of a number of Acts and provisions of Acts the operation of which is exhausted or which are no longer required. Thirdly, it makes a number of technical or minor amendments which, while having some substance, are regarded as being of a non-controversial nature.

cost is much more widespread. There is the cost of the very bureaucracy that is to be established to administer this scheme. That will be a significant cost. It includes the cost of establishing and maintaining the election funding authority, the costs of meetings and payments of members of that authority, the costs of research and publication, the costs of registers, the administrative costs of allocating subsidies and recording disclosures, the additional costs of by-elections that have never been disclosed, the legal costs of the authority, the accounting and auditing costs, the staffing of the authority, the hiring of consultants and the hiring of inspectors to carry ou t inspections. The indirect costs of parties to meet legal and recording and auditing requirements are additional costs that parties themselves will have to meet simply as a result of the nature of these proposals.

The Government has decided to introduce statute law revision bills into the Parliament on a regular basis, at least once in each year and, if required, once in each sitting. This will enable the prompt correction of mistakes and errors and removal from the statute book of expired laws. In the absence of the regular passage of Bills of this kind, the correction of an error in an Act can be achieved only by having a special Bill passed for that purpose or waiting until the Act needs to be amended for some other more important purpose. An objection sometimes made to omnibus amending Bills is that they result in so-called 'hidden' amendments. However, the Government Printer now issues monthly tables of Acts passed by the Parliament and these tables indicate clearly whenever an Act is amended by an omnibus Act such as a statute law revision Act. The provisions

To be considered also is the matter of invasion of the present Bill that deal with the correction of

of privacy and discretionary powers. The New errors and the repeal and amendment of expired

South Wales proposals, by way of the New South laws do not call for particular comment. J propose

Wales Election Act, shows to the people of to explain in some detail the nature and effect of

Australia what is envisaged in terms of intrusion the provisions of substance.

2894 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Statute Law Revision Bill

Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The Bill provides in Schedule I for the insertion in the Acts Interpretation Act of a provision that is relevant to the whole body of statute law. The provision is to the effect that, in the interpretation of a provision of an Act, a construction that would promote the purpose or object underlying the Act, whether that purpose or object is expressly stated in the Act or not, shall be preferred to a construction that would not promote that purpose or object. '

Under our constitutional arrangements it is the function of an independent judiciary to interpret the law and no proposals which we make can or should undermine the freedom that this function requires. Nevertheless the general approach to be adopted to statutory interpretation is something which this Parliament can---and at this stage should-address. The volume and complexity of legislation are assuming daunting proportions and the task of understanding and applying it grows in proportion. Increasingly the more significant decisions our courts are called upon to make turn on a point of statutory interpretation. Our problems are not unique. They are shared, for example, by the British Parliament, to which proposals have been made along the lines now proposed by this Bill. The British proposals, I should add, have been initiated and supported by very distinguished law Lords, including Lord Scarman and Lord Wilberforce.

The effect of the provision to be inserted in the

Acts Interpretation Act will be to confirm that in

interpreting provisions regard is to be had to the

object or purpose underlying the Act in question.

We are not among those who would say that the

general approach of our courts is at present overly

legalistic, but we do think that there is scope for

expressly stating that the statutes this Parliament

makes are to be interpreted in a purposive man-

ner. Tax decisions constitute a topical and import-

ant example that will come readily to all

members' minds, but the matter has wider impli-

cations that extend to many other statutes. I

therefore commend the provision to but before moving on I should invite

the the

HHouosues'e~

attention to some related questions. Explanatory

material is often provided by the Government to

assist senators and members, and subsequent users

of legislation. The material is of particular value

where legislation is complex or specialised in sub-

ject matter or both.

The Government thinks that we need to consider placing this practice on a more regular basis,
even to the extent of having an explanatory memorandum approved by the Parliament and able to

be taken into account by the courts in interpreting difficult provisions in the Act. The memorandum could not and would not be controlling. However, apart from contributing to the ease with which an Act can be understood by the public as well as by senators and members, such a practice offers the hope that the draftsman, when faced with the difficult choice of either using general language which might, however, leave the courts without sufficient guidance, or introducing lengthy detailed provisions, could feel some security in choosing the former course if he knew that a memorandum approved by the Parliament would embody its intent.
A cognate question arises where an Act is based on an expert report tabled in the Parliament, for example by the Law Reform Commission. Courts can at present consider such reports, but the precise way in which they can use them has been the subject of dispute. The fear has been expressed that the use of extraneous materials such as reports and explanatory memoranda will increase the cost and length oflegal proceedings. Certainly the possible disadvantages have to be considered and weighed against the benefits that would flow from the use of such materials. The time has come, however, when the matter should be fully explored, and the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) has announced that he proposes to do so with a view to developing specific proposals that can be brought into the Parliament for further consideration. In the meantime, the present position on the use of extraneous materials is preserved by stating in the proposed new provision that it is not to be construed as authorising the consideration of extraneous materials for any purpose for which they could not be considered if the new provision had not been enacted.
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Part II of the Bill repeals the provisions of the Schedule to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975 that confer jurisdiction on the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in matters arising under various other Acts, and other parts of the Bill reenact the provisions concerned as part of those other Acts. In the course of transferring these provisions from one Act to another, Part IV omits the requirement that the Tribunal be constituted by a presidential member sitting alone when a decision is being reviewed under section 20 of the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969. That section empowers the Commissioner of Taxation to revoke a banker's authority to issue cheque forms that are prestamped with the duty payable under that Act if the banker is convicted of an offence against that

Statute Law Revision Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2895

Act. Part XI provides for the Tribunal to have the essential nature of the force was more accu-

jurisdiction to review decisions of the Collector of rately reflected in the title 'Australian Army Re-

Customs under sections 22 and 23 of the Distilserve'. The validity of the Committee's view is

lation Act 1901. Those sections relate to the reshown by the general acceptance of the title

newal of licences to distil spirits. In all other re- 'Army Reserve', except where the use of the

spects these amendments do not make any change present formal title 'Citizen Military Forces' is

in substance to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

dictated by legal requirements. Before legislation

could be introduced to reflect the new title, it was

Schools Commission Act 1973, Tertiary Education Commission Act 1977
The Bill provides for the word 'Commonwealth' to be included at the beginning of the names of the Schools Commission, the Schools Commission advisory boards and the Tertiary Education Commission and provides for these bodies to perform the same functions in relation

necessary to consider whether corresponding title changes should be made to the Citizen Naval Forces and Citizen Air Force. It was also necessary to consider the structures of the citizen forces of all three Services because some of the elements of those forces bore derivative titles such as Active Citizen Military Forces and Active Citizen Air Force.

to the Northern Territory as they perform in reThe Bill amends the Defence Act to rename the

lation to a State. Clause 117 amends references in Active Citizen Military Forces as the Active Aus-

various Acts to the former names of these bodies. tralian Army Reserve and the Reserve Citizen

Military Forces as the Inactive Australian Army

Defence Act 1903, Air Force Act 1923 and Naval Defence Act 1910
The amendments made by Parts III, X and XV and clause 116 give effect to recommendations made by the Millar Committee report on the Citizen Military Forces in 1974 regarding the title and structure of the Army Reserve.

Reserve. The Regular Army Reserve, which is a non-training element of the permanent military forces, is abolished and its members are trans-
ferred to the Inactive Reserve. In the context of reserve forces, 'active' denotes those elements the members of which have specific training obligations. The Bill also removes from the Defence Act reference to the unattached list and the Re-

The Millar Committee recommended that the Citizen Military Forces be retained as the country's immediate reserve of Army units and be renamed the Australian Army Reserve. The Committee also recommended that the members of the Regular Army Reserve, the Regular Army Emergency Reserve and the Reserve Citizen Military Forces be brought into this single Army Reserve organisation. On 4 April 1974, the report was tabled in the House of Representatives by the then Minister for Defence, who announced approval of these two recommendations. It was not appropriate to proceed with formal amendment to the titles and structures of the Reserve Forces until the Government had considered a further

serve of Officers. These relate to the internal administrative arrangements of the active and inactive reserves, respectively, which are matters of administrative detail appropriate to be dealt with by the regulations or by determinations under section 33 of the Defence Act. It has been decided not to incorporate the Regular Army Emergency Reserve into the Australian Army Reserve as recommended by the Millar Committee. The Emergency Reserve comprises former members of the Regular Army who agree to become members on cessation of their Regular Army service. Members may be called out by the Governor-General when he considers it desirable to do so.

recommendation of the Committee that the Army The enactment of the provisions of the Bill to

Reserve be available for service in situations short which I have referred will bring to finality im-

of a proclaimed time of defence emergency. plementation of the recommendations of the

Honourable members will recall that in January Millar Committee, except for those few rec-

1980 the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) anommendations with which the Government has

nounced that the Government had decided not to chosen not to proceed. Parts III and XV of the Bill

vary the availability for service of the Army amend the Air Force Act 1923 and the Naval De-

Reserve.

fence Act 1910 to make amendments in relation

to the Air Force and the Navy corresponding to

In recommending a change to the title of the the amendments made in respect of the Army.

Citizen Military Forces, the Millar Committee The Bill renames the Citizen Air Force as the

recognised the concern within that force that the Australian Air Force Reserve. It also restructures

existing title misrepresented the nature of the the Reserve so that the Active Citizen Air Force

Citizen Military Forces. It was considered that becomes the Air Force Active Reserve, the Air

2896 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Statute Law Revision Bill

Force Reserve becomes the Air Force General Reserve and an additional element, the Air Force Specialist Reserve, is introduced. The Air Force Specialist Reserve will comprise officers and airmen having specialist skills, such as doctors, dentists, lawyers and chaplains. Members of the General Reserve and the Specialist Reserve will not usually have peacetime training obligations. The Bill renames the Citizen Naval Forces as the Australian Naval Reserve. It does not deal with the elements into which that body is divided because this is dealt with in regulations under the Act.
The opportunity has been taken to revise the provisions of the Defence Act, the Air Force Act and the Naval Defence Act with regard to the rendering of service-other than continuous full time service-by members of the Reserve Forces. The revised provisions are more closely tailored to the needs of the reserves and provide more accurately feir the regulations relating to obligatory and voluntary periods of non-continuous service. Clause 116 amends references in various Acts to the former titles of the reserves forces and to 'continuous full time service'.
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Schedule 1 amends the Federal Court of Australia Act 1976 so as to permit an affidavit to be sworn before a district registrar and a deputy district registrar of the Court. It also amends that Act so as to enable a reserved judgment to be delivered at any subsequent sitting of the Court, ~hether or not the Court is sitting as a full court.
Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976
Part XIII amends sub-section 3 (5) of the Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976. The amendment relates to the description of the area adjacent to Queensland contained in the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967 and is consequential on an alteration that is proposed to be made to that description by another Bill during the present sittings.
Migration Act 1958
The purpose of the amendments made to the Migration Act 1958 by clause 59 is to overcome a problem resulting from the amendments of section 16 of the Act that were made by the Migration Amendment Act 1979. Section 16 deems to be a prohibited immigrant a person who, for the purpose of securing entry into Australia, produces or produced to an officer an official document that was not issued to him or was forged or obtained by false representation. A doubt has arisen as to whether section 16 would apply to a person who produced a visa or return authority to an officer before 1 November 1979, which was the date on

which the amending Act came into force, in a case where the visa or return authority was not a separate document but was stamped in the person's passport. The amendment will make it clear that the section will apply in such a case. Clause 2 will make the amendment retrospective to 1 November 1979.
Navigation Act 1912
Schedule 1 amends the Navigation Act 1912 so as to enable judges of the Federal Court to sit on courts of marine inquiry without the need for special authorisation by the Governor-GeneraL
Pal'liamental-y Counsel Act 1970
Schedule 1 amends the Parliamentary Counsel Act 1970 to remove any doubts as to the validity of the long-standing practice of making dormant acting appointments to the offices of First and Second Parliamentary Counsel. These are appointments that are made in anticipation of any absences from duty of the holders of those offices and are designed to take effect automatically whenever an absence occurs during the currency of the relevant acting appointment.
Pig Industry Research Act 1971
Schedule 1 inserts the word 'Australian' at the commencement of the name of the Pig Industry Research Committee, which is constituted under the Pig Industry Research Act 1971. This will bring the name of the Committee into line with similar committees established under other Acts.
Public Service Act 1922
Clause 79 corrects an obsolete cross-reference in sub-section 82(6B) of the Public Service Act 1922. That sub-section provided that the services of a temporary employee to whom the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979 applied could not be dispensed with except on the ground that the employee had been guilty of conduct which, if he were an officer, would constitute an offence referred to in subsection 55(1) of the Public Service Act. However, on 15 March 1981 the provisions of sub-section 55(1) were replaced by the new disciplinary provisions of Division 6 of Part III of the Act. Clause 79 therefore omits the reference to the repealed sub-section 55(1) and replaces it by a reference to specified grounds of dismissal, which are the same grounds as are set out in the new Division 6 of Part III of the Act. Clause 2 provides that clause 79 is to be deemed to have come into operation on 15 March 1981.

Car Parks Behind Parliament House

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2897

Social Sel'Vices Act 1947
Schedule 1 amends the Social Services Act 1947 to enable claims for age, invalid or widows pension, or sheltered employment allowance, to be lodged with any registrar. That Act presently requires such claims to be lodged with the registrar whose office is nearest the place of residence of the claimant.
Trade Union Training Authority Act 1975
In 1979 the Australian Council of Salaried and Professional Associations and the Australian Council of Trade Unions were amalgamated and the former body ceased to exist. Part XXIII provides for the abolition of the offices of the persons representing the former body on the Australian Council for Union Training, and on each of the State Councils for Union Training, established under the Trade Union Training Authority Act 1975, but it increases by one the number of persons representing the ACTU on each of those councils. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by MI' Dawkins) adjourned.
CONSTRUCTION OF CAR PARKS BEHIND PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) (S.l )-On behalf of the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) who is Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, I move:
That, in accordance with section 5 of the Parliament Act 1974, the House of Representatives approves the following proposal: Construction of car parks behind the provisional Parliament House.
The motion I have just moved is required in accordance with the provisions of the Parliament Act 1974 to carry out the following works:
1. Seal the presently gravelled temporary car park behind the provisional Parliament House into a bitumen sealed 160-space car park.
2. Provide an additional bitumen seal for a 12S-space car park to the east of the House with ingress-egress from Queen Victoria Terrace.
3. Provide security lighting in the form of 10-metre high steel columns with 2S0-watt mercury lamps in each car park. The lighting will be extended into the West Block car park to replace the existing post-top lanterns.
4. Disturbance to native flora will be minimised. However, it is expected that three trees and some shrubbery will be removed to enable the car park to function efficiently.

The estimated cost of the works is $109,000. I commend the motion to honourable members.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (S.2)-1 wish to make one or two comments. The necessity for car parking is an unfortunate scourge which lives in our society. Car parking in the vicinity of Parliament House is quite obviously inadequate. It is unfortunate that the area immediately behind Parliament House has to be disturbed, but that decision, I think, was made some considerable time ago. The area is one of the few natural areas that have been preserved in any of Australia's major cities. That was the result of considerable foresight by earlier generations of Australians. I am not sure that any of us will be delighted with the results of turning a substantial proportion of that area into a concrete jungle, irrespective of the utility the necessity and the convenience for doing so.
I will briefly raise one other matter. That relates to the inadequacy of the current provisions of the Parliament Act. Because of interpretations which have arisen since the drafting of that Act certain alterations to areas within the Parliamentary Triangle can take place without, in fact, reference to this Parliament. I think the Act has been interpreted extraordinarily narrowly to exclude demolition and removal of items that are not structures. 1 hope that at some stage the Government will forgo the convenience of not having the constrictions of the Parliament Act applied and will amend the Act so that it protects totally the area included for coverage within the Schedule of that Act. There will then be no doubt that no alterations, such as the removal of the trees proposed a year ago and deemed not to have been covered by the Act, can take place in the future without the Parliament's being aware of it. I think the national Parliament has a right, a responsibility and an obligation to protect that area in which the Parliament operates and the ceremonial areas surrounding it.
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) (S.S)-in reply-I thank the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) for his remarks. At the same time. I take the opportunity to assure him that the points he has made will be taken into consideration.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 28 May, on motion by MrViner:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

2898 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Canciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (5.6)-ln the debate, which commenced last Thursday, we have already heard the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) and the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock). As usual, the honourable member for Kooyong unfortunately was very long in rhetoric and short in substance in his speech. He did not really refer in great detail to the secret ballot provisions which are the major part of these amendments to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. The new secret ballot provisions in the Bill can really be summed up in just one word- 'lunatic'. The secret ballot provisions introduced b~ the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Vmer) are or were a blatant election gimmick with which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) hoped to capture some easy votes at last year's federal election. As the old saying goes, you can fool some of the people some of the time but not all the people all the time. Without any hesitation I say again that these secret ballots are and were nothing more than an election gimmick.
Of course the people of Australia want to know the answers to several very important questions: Is there no provision like this in the present Act? How will these new provisions work? Are they practical? If a person goes on strike after a secret ballot has been held how does that person come off strike and go back to work? None of these questions are addressed in any detail in this legislation. I suspect that the Government and, in fact, the Minister have not addressed themselves to these questions either. The answer to the first question is that there is provision now in the Act under section 45 which allows the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to order a ballot of members to ascertain the attitudes of those members in an industry or work place if the Commission sees fit and considers that it will help in the situation or in the negotiations and settlement of the dispute or disputes. For the benefit of every honourable member and for people listening at home, I will read out part of section 45 of the Act so that we all know that in fact such provisions do exist although this Government keeps burying them slightly. The section states:
(1) Where-
(a) an organisation is a party to or concerned in an industrial dispute with which the Commission or some other tribunal acting in pursuance of a law of the Commonwealth is empowered to deal (whether or not proceedings in relation to the dispute are before the Commission or such a tribunal); and
(b) the Commission thinks that the prevention or settlement of the dispute would or might be encouraged or assisted b) ascertaining the views or attitude of the members, or of a section or class of the members, of the organisation or of a branch of the organisation in relation to a matter the Commission may order that a

vote of those members, or of the members included in that section or class, for the purpose of ascertaining their views or attitude in relation to that matter, be taken by secret ballot.
The honourable member for Wills said on Thursday that the Commission has used that section, although only on a handful of occasions. The section does exist. The power is vested in the Act now for the Commission to use. To quote from the words in the Minister's second reading speech, 'to build on this' we have these wonderful new provisions for secret ballots where only 5 per cent of people in a work place may make application for a secret ballot of all members; that is five people out of 100 or 5 per cent. The practicalities are that while negotiations are taking place, where in a work place 95 out of 100 members are in favour of industrial action of some kind because they feel they have a just cause, five people can make application to the Commission for a secret ballot and completely stifle the negotiations and an early settlement. Let us look at the practical implications that go with this. Negotiations are taking place between an employer and the employees. The rumour is that there could be industrial action of some kind. Five out of 100 members, that is the 5 per cent needed, decide to apply for secret ballot. Now what happens? The Minister's second reading speech states:
The Commission, constituted by a presidential member, will be required to order the conduct of a ballot . . .
So, the presidential member looks into the case and decides whether to conduct a ballot. We will get back to the question of what happens if the presidential member, a Deputy President of the Commission, decides against a ballot. We will assume for a second that he decides for a ballot. Then what happens? We have to draw up the ballot papers, get them all ready, go through the rolls and decide who is eligible to vote and who is not and when and how the ballot will take place. At this stage-it could be several days later-what has happened on the industrial front? Heaven only knows! Negotiations have more than likely become stifled and, in fact, become drawn out by the kerfuffie about the pending secret ballot. Let us get to the crunch. We eventually get around to having the ballot. What happens if the ballot decides that we are all going on strike? The possibility is that it has totally ruined any negotiations that have taken place. The Commission has had to intervene. We are back where we started. How do we get off strike and back to work if the negotiations have reached that stage? I assume that we have another secret ballot. After all, we had a secret ballot to go on strike. I suppose that we now have to have another secret ballot to come off

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2899

strike and to go back to work. All in all this process has probably taken nearly a week and done mote harm than good. The employees will not like it in general. The employers will not like it. It will hinder their operations and the possibilities of good and peaceful settlements much more than it willhelp them. The Commission will find it an absolute nightmare.
One very interesting thing about the Minister's second reading speech is that the Minister does not mention anything on the situation that I have just mentioned. His silence on the matter would suggest-this is how I read his speech-that in the majority of cases employees will vote against industrial action. I quote from the report of the Royal Commission on Trade Unions and Employers Associations 1965-68, from which the honourable member for Wills also quoted. There is some more very interesting information in this report. The Chairman of the Royal Commission was the Right Honourable Lord Donovan. The report was presented to the British Parliament in 1968. The references to 'official' and 'unofficial' in the report relate to the British system and not to the Australian system. In paragraph 426 this famous Donovan Royal Commission stated on the issue of compulsory strike ballots:
A number of witnesses have suggested to us that a secret ballot should be required before a strike can lawfully take place. This proposal is based on the belief that workers are likely to be less militant than their leaders and that, given the opportunity of such a ballot, they would often be likely to vote against strike action.

It seems that our present Prime Minister must have given evidence. In paragraph 427 the report stated:
It is clear that the scope of any legislation to this end, if it were to be effective, would have to be confined to major official strikes. A law forbidding strike action before the holding of a secret ballot could not be enforced in the case of smallscale unofficial stoppages, which make up the overwhelming majority of the total number of strikes.
The honourable member for Wills quoted the following words of this famous Donovan Royal Commission:
There is little justification in the available evidence for the view that workers are less likely to vote for strike action than their leaders; and findings from our workshop relations survey, already cited, confirm this. Experience in the USA has been that strike ballots are overwhelmingly likely to go in favour of strike action. This is also the experience of Canada, where strike ballots, are compulsory in the provinces of Alberta and British Columbia.
Paragraph 429 stated:
There are other objections to such ballots. Once a vote has been taken and has gone in favour of strike action, the resulting stoppage may delay a settlement by restricting union leaders' freedom of action.
This is exactly what I have just said. In Australia from 1975 to 1978 half the number of the strikes recorded by the Australian Bureau of Statistics were of one day's duration or less. I ask leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard tables to that effect.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

TABLE 2.6 INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES BY DURATION, AUSTRALIA, 1966-1978

Year

Length of strike

1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978

1 day and less
2 days, 1 day
3 days, 2 days 4 days, 5 days 5 days, 10 days
10 days, 20 days 20 days, 40 days 40 days and over

590 695 918 966 1,353 1,119 1,052 998 1,165 1,092 873 916 1,033

292 268 316 370 465 410 388 437 511 398 370 399 431

145 151 176 198 257 269 246 280 288 222 182 194 215

131 122 147 205 239 232 234 235 254 214 207 201 209

79 80 115 199 297 243 234 345 329 312 252 212 222

32 16 33 60 99 90 105 182 183 144 120 111 132

2

7

8 15 25 29 34 48 64 42 39 45 27

2

1

1, 3

6

5 13 15

8 11 12

8

Total

1,273 1,340 1,713 2,014 2,738 2,398 2,064 2,538 2,809 2,432 2,055 2,090 2,277

Source: ABS, Labour Statistics, 1978. TABLE 2.7 PROPORTION OF WORKING DAYS LOST IN STRIKES OF DIFFERENT LENGTH, AUSTRALIA, 1966-1978

Year

Length of strike

1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978

1 day, and less
2 days, 1 day 3 days, 2 days 4 days, 5 days

%%%%%%%%%%%%% 19.9 27.8 22.7 22.9 23.6 20.6 21.8 11.7 10.0 11.5 19.5 12.7 16.5
23.5 19.3 34.0 40.4 8.9 8.5 16.7 6.9 10.5 10.9 29.8 16.7 23.2 7.4 16.4 7.6 5.3 9.7 7.7 7.9 5.0 4.4 22.9 18.4 9.6 8.4 12.0 8.5 8.4 8.2 11.7 6.6 10.0 7.0 7.5 5.4 4.0 13.7 12.7

2900 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

Year

Length of strike

1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978

5 days, 10 days 10 days, 20 days 20 days, 40 days 40 days and over

%%%%%%%%%%

13.2 13.3 8.5 11.1 19.6 17.6 14.9 25.0 50.3 10.8

13.8 9.1 14.6 10.7 16.7 36.5 16.4 25.1 6.6 23.4

8.4 3.7 4.2 1.4 9.6 1.0 12.0 12.0 8.7 12.2

1.8 1.9

0.2 1.5 0.3 7.3 2.0 2.9

%%% 9.9 14.9 14.5 9.6 15.9 14.9 4.9 6.8 6.2 4.0 9.8 3.6

Total

100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0

Source: ABS, Labour Statistics, 1978.

Mr CHARLES-I thank the House. It would pay the Government and the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) to do some long and hard homework on industrial relations. These secret ballot provisions are absolute lunacy. However, I must say that they are in accord with the Government's record. I ask the Minister to look at clause 6 and proposed new sub-section (3D) of the Bill, which states:
Subject to this section, the Commission shall, upon an application made to it under sub-section (3A), order that a vote of the members to whom the application relates-
Later the proposed new sub-section uses the words 'to which the application relates'. I sincerely ask the Minister: What does that mean? Does that mean that people in one work place can make an application for their work mates in the same work place, or does that mean also that people in one work place can make application for people in another work place on the other side of the city? It is not very clear at all. Of course such questions have to be cleared up by regulations. I would prefer this matter to be cleared up in the Parliament now. If it has to be cleared up with regulations, of course, the regulations have to lie before both the Houses of Parliament. I suggest to this Government that there is quite a possibility that after 1 July those reg'llations will not be allowed.
This Government has a reputation for confrontation and divisiveness. It has a never-ending resolve to set one Australian against another. History will see this Government in that light~--make no mistake about that. These secret ballot provisions will continue this Government's policies of hampering and hindering good industrial relations and once again set Australian against Australian. Talking about that, may I get back to the situation that would obtain if a Deputy President of the Commission refused to grant a secret ballot. The Minister's second reading speech states:
. . . a refusal to order a place of work ballot must be reviewed automatically by the President of the Commission.
In other words, the Deputy Presidents will be watched over by the President, at present Sir John

Moore. What a position to place the President in. The Deputy Presidents of the Commission are all honourable and learned people of high integrity; yet in this case they are unable to make a decision without that decision and them being reviewed by the President. What an outrageous situation. To get one person to look over the shoulder of another is just not the way to help solve and further better industrial relations in any way, shape or form.
Like the honourable member for Wills, I was also outraged that the amendments relating to union amalgamations are not being introduced with the secret ballot amendments, as the Prime Minister and former Minister for Industrial Relations Street promised they would be. But we are used to broken promises from this Government and this Prime Minister. After the election the Minister for Industrial Relations announced that the Government had decided to introduce the legislation during the autumn session this year in order 'to meet the Government's commitment to introduce this legislation as indicated by the Prime Minister in his policy speech'. Despite all the assurances and the Government's alleged commitment to consultation, the legislation relating to union amalgamations has been shoved under the carpet. I do not suppose that this is any news to us, though, because had it been introduced it would have been the first piece of industrial legislation that the Fraser Government introduced with the support of both the employers and the unions. The proposed changes to the law relating to amalgamations were first raised by the Australian Council of Trade Unions at the National Labour Consultative Council meeting in April 1978. The changes were the subject of almost three years consideration by a specialist committee of the NLCC which comprised senior representatives of the Depart-- ment of Industrial Relations, national employers and the union movement. A unanimous proposal for changes to the amalgamation law was endorsed by the NLCC and forwarded to the

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2901

Government. The Minister for Industrial Re- (Mr Sinclair), is a disgrace to this Parliament. In

lations at the time, Mr Street, in announcing the fact, this is what the Minister for Communi-

Government's intention to introduce legislation to cations had to say on 22 May-just last Friday

effect the changes, stated:

week-in the middle of the very important and

It is now widely agreed that the current amalgamation prodelicate negotiations that were going on at that visions impose considerable constraints and can operate to stage and that are continuing at present in regard

delay or prevent what might otherwise be desirable to the Telecom dispute. This Minister, in an exer-

amalgamations.

cise in how to win friends and influence people in

This Government has now deferred the only conthe industrial world, addressed the National Party

structive piece of industrial legislation that it has conference in Queensland. He began his speech by

come close to introducing. In contrast, of course, saying:

the secret ballot provisions were not asked for by It has been an extraordinary week of head burying in the

the national union bodies or the national emsands of futility by a number of people on the industrial front.

ployers. The national employers do not particularly want this legislation. The Government knows it. The national employers can see the dangers that exist for them in this legislation, as I

He then referred to the Telecom unions. He continued:
They are both as groups set on a course of industrial anarchy through not pursuing claims along the announced and

mentioned earlier. This Government, with its abagreed lines under the announced and agreed umpire's rules.

solute resolve for confrontation and to create industrial problems rather than solve them, have once again set Australia on a course of industrial disputation. Now, as one who has been an executive member of a union for some six years, I can say quite categorically that it is impossible for officials of a union to tell members of a union to go on strike, place bans on the employer, or cause some other industrial action to be taken, if the members do not wish to take that action. Any sensible union official knows how his members feel. He can read the feelings of his members and, in fact, when the meetings of members take place he gets a very clear indication of what the members want. Any union official that tries to push his own views on the members against their massive membership reaction is just plain idiotic.

Imagine that-the umpire's rules! It is just like the umpire's decision which this Government accepted in regard to Public Service Determination 503! After months of negotiation and arbitration, the umpire brought down a decision and this Government disallowed it. It shot the umpire. Yet the Minister for Communications had the effrontery to mention the umpire's rules. The Minister for Industrial Relations also likes to play the game by his rules. In the Telecom debate oflast week he failed to address himself to the existing Telecom dispute at all.
These amendments-that is, the amendments concerning the secret ballots-were purely an election gimmick and have no practical validity at all. As history will very shortly prove, the introduction of these lunatic provisions and the com-

However, this Government continues to plete absence of the amalgamation provisions,

attempt to portray the image of the union official which would assist industrial harmony greatly, are

as some big bogeyman who leads the poor emjust more nails in the coffin of this Federal

ployees by the nose through thick and thin withGovernment. This Government should be con-

out any regard for their welfare. The truth is that demned in the strongest possible terms, although

it is this Federal Government that has little regard unfortunately we have become used to seeing this

for the welfare for the people of Australia. If it Government stagger from crisis to crisis. It is

did, it would not be bringing into this place legissurely staggering like a drunken sailor to a massive

lation such as we have before us today. It is totally defeat at the next Federal election and will con-

ridiculous and will hinder good industrial retinue on that path if it keeps introducing ridicu-

lations, as I have said before.

lous legislation such as that before the House at

Since the Fraser Government came to power in the moment.

1975 its approach to industrial relations has been Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (5.25)-

disastrous. In the majority of cases there has been There are three questions that need to be asked

absolutely no attempt by this Government to about the Conciliation and Arbitration Amend-

solve industrial problems peacefully and in a ment Bill which is before this House. The first is:

rational way. The manic behaviour of the Prime What are the main purposes of the Bill? The sec-

Minister-if I may borrow a phrase from the ond is: How are those purposes to be achieved?

honourable member for Kooyong-backed up by The third is: Are those purposes consistent with

the present Minister for Industrial Relations, the the spirit and intent of the provision in the Consti-

Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip tution which gives to this Parliament the power to

Lynch) and the Minister for Communications make laws with respect to the prevention and

2902 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

settlement of disputes of an industrial nature extending beyond anyone State by means of conciliation and arbitration? I now address myselfto the two main purposes of the Bill.
Firstly, the Bill seeks to give to members of an organisation, or of a branch, working for a particular employer and at a particular place of work the right to have their views taken into account by means of a secret ballot when directed or requested by that organisation or branch to engage in industrial action. Secondly, in cases where the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission forms the view that the majority of the members of the organisation or branch who have recorded a valid vote in a ballot ordered to be held under the proposed legislation were not in favour of engaging in the industrial action with which that ballot was concerned, the members are to be freed from compliance with a direction or request made by the organisation to engage in or support that industrial action; that is, the industrial action which is the subject of that ballot.
How are these purposes to be achieved? They are to be achieved by carefully regulated steps which must be understood if the Bill is to be dispassionately examined and not simply emotionally expounded. The steps are these: In the first place, there must be a direction or a request made on behalf of the organisation or branch or made under the rules of the organisation or branch. This Bill is not concerned with unofficial strikes, so we can put that matter to one side. The direction or request to engage in industrial action must be made to members of an organisation or branch employed by a particular employer at a particular place of work. We are not concerned with people across the way, as the honourable member for Isaacs (Mr Charles) seems to think we are. We are concerned with particular employees at a particular place of work. When the direction or request is given, and if the requisite minimum number of members employed by the same employer at the same place wish to do so, they may apply for a secret ballot. For what purpose? For the purpose of ascertaining whether they support the industrial action in question. That is the matter which seems to be so objectionable to honourable members on the other side of the House. What happens then? The next step is that the application is heard by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission constituted by a presidential member.
When the application is heard the Commission shall order that a ballot be held and give the directions unless it comes to one of four views. These are the matters that were entirely ignored by the

honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) and the honourable member for Isaacs. Firstly, if the Commission forms the view that cessation or prevention of the industrial action or the settlement of the matters giving rise to the industrial action to which the application for the ballot relates would not be encouraged or assisted by ascertaining the views of the members to whom the application relates-that is, those members at a particular place of work employed by a particular employee-the application is to be refused. In the second case, if the view is come to by the Commission that the industrial action to which the application relates has ceased, then again the application is to be refused. Thirdly, if the cessation of the industrial action is imminent and the Commission forms that view, then once again the application is to be refused. Fourthly, if the Commission forms the view that the industrial action to which the application relates is not likely to take place, again it is to be refused. Of course, this matter has to go ultimately to the President, but that d,oes not matter. That is simply a question of procedure. So there are four bases on which the application can be refused which would exclude the kind of vexatious litigant that the honourable member for Wills sought to draw out of his hat.
Next, if after a secret ballot has been ordered it appears that the dispute has been settled or the industrial action has ceased, or that settlement or cessation is imminent, or that the industrial action concerned is not likely to take place, then after the ordering of a secret ballot but before the vote, when one of those matters appears the Commission shall revoke the order for the secret ballot. That is the way in which the procedures for the hearing of an application and for orders made work. Now, what happens if a ballot is heard and not revoked? If that be the case, notice of the result shall be given to the organisation to which the members belong, the persons eligible to vote, and the employer. That seems perfectly sensible and perfectly straight forward. Next, if the Commission forms the view that the majority of those who recorded valid votes were not in favour of engaging in the industrial action with which the ballot was concerned a statement to that effect shall be given to the organisation, the employer, ,and those eligible to vote. Again, that is perfectly straightforward and perfectly sensible.
What then are the consequences when a ballot has been taken? The consequences for the ongoing process of work and conciliation and arbitration are, first, that the Commission shall have regard to the result. This simply makes clear the

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2903

view of the rank and file, not in the somewhat fanThe honourable member for Wills ended his quo-

tastic way that was put forward by the honourtations there. The article continued:

able member for Wills but as a sensible and clear guide of the views of the rank and file. Secondly,

In some cases, workers would have left the job before a ballot could be organised and the mechanics of a ballot would be

where the Commission forms the view that almost overwhelming.

amongst those who recorded a valid vote there was a majority who were not in favour of the in-

In the case of the 150,OOO-strong Amalgamated Metal Workers and Ship Wrights Union, it would be virtuaI\y im-

dustrial action in question, then the members are possible to conduct a poI\ of all its members.

relieved from compliance with requests or directions that they engage in that industrial action. The fundamental point is that those who are directly and immediately concerned should have a right to have a say about their own industrial
destiny.

There, Sir John was directing his attention to a secret ballot of an entire organisation. Next, the honourable member referred to the Donovan report of 1968, and he cited that as convincing evidence that the Government's approach was wrong. His knowledge of the English scene seems

A number of objections were raised to the Bill to have stopped in 1968. If he had turned his

by the honourable member for Wills, when he got attention to 1969 he would have found that the

around to addressing it. He spent about half of his Labour Government in 1969 proposed that in cer-

time talking about a provision which is not before tain circumstances there should be secret ballots. I

this House. His attitude to secret ballots is somequote from Great Britain Trade Union Immuni-

what inconsistent. On the same day and, indeed, ties 1981, paragraph 248, which states:

in the same speech he commended secret ballots when he said that 98 per cent of persons concerned in a certain ballot had voted in a particular

Another proposal, that the Secretary of State should be able to require a union to hold a secret ballot before a major official strike, was considered in 1969-

way-that is a very sensible thing for him to have said because it gave a clear indication of the views

That was the year after the Donovan'report-

of the members concerned-yet in the same in the Labour Government's White Paper, 'In Place of Strife'.

speech he found something wrong with the propThe White Paper said that it was 'a matter for concern that at

osition that there should be secret ballots.

present it is possible for a major official strike to be called when the support of those involved may be in doubt'. It

I put aside some of the general criticisms made by the honourable member for Wills and also by the honourable member for Isaacs, which were simply general by nature-assertions that the

proposed that the Secretary of State should have discretionary power to require the union or unions involved to hold a ballot on the question of strike action. The power would be used where the Secretary of State believed that the proposed strike would 'involve a serious threat to the economy or public

legislation is bad, that it is all wrong-and deal interest' and there was doubt whether it commanded the supwith some of the particular matters raised by the port of those concerned.

honourable member for Wills.

That was in the year following the Donovan re-

Firstly, he seemed to object to the fact that the Government was keeping an election promise. Secondly, he raised questions of practical difficulties. No doubt in some cases there will be practical difficulties. In other cases, there will not be practi-

port, something that the honourable member for Wills conveniently overlooked when he said that it was universal, as we understand him, that academic opinion was in favour of the proposition he was putting. Thirdly, if he was looking at aca-

cal difficulties. It has to be borne in mind that we demic opinions or, indeed, at industrial action, he are not talking of an organisation vote, we are might have cast his mind to what has taken place

talking of a vote taken of the employees of a particular employer. He then said, and this seemed to be the major thrust of his argument, that there had been a general condemnation by all academics of any standing, so far as one could gather,

in Germany for very many years. If he wishes to look at this, it is to be found at page 13 of 'Trade Unions in West Germany' in the Westview Press 1976. There we find-I summarise what is said that the German unions have adopted the prin-

of the kind of legislation that is before this House. ciple that a strike may not take place until there All one can say of what he said on that subject is has been a secret ballot and a 75 per cent majority that his coverage was incomplete and his commust be obtained before the strike can commence.

ments were utterly irrelevant. First, I will deal with his coverage. He cited what Sir John Moore had to say, and he quoted this passage from the Age:
Sir John also warned that compulsory ballots for unions contemplating strikes would not be as effective as many people believed in reducing strikes.

What the honourable member said was incomplete and, secondly, it was irrelevant. It was irrelevant because the question to which the authors to whom he referred were addressing their attention was that of compulsory secret ballots. That is not the question before the House. The question before the House is that of ballots at the request of

2904 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

members; ballots which are secret but not compulsory.
Let us recall certain fundamental facts about the affairs of registered organisations. Many of their officials are elected only every four years. Of course, that means that those organisations may get out of touch with the affairs of their members. Such elections are permitted under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act, but it is perfectly plain that the organisations can get out of touch, as the honourable member for Wills well knows. One of the reasons is, that it is perfectly plain that they can get out of touch because of the very high turnover of members in certain areas; for example, employees in shops. The size of organisations alone can put officials out of touch. One looks to the size of some of the unions such as the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union of 160,000 members; the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association of 145,000 members; and the Australian Workers Union of 130,000 members. How is it that the leaders of these unions will at all times be conscious of what is happening in all places and in the hearts and minds of all their members? Of course they will not! Of course they can get out of touch! Indeed, in many cases union members will have never had the opportunity to participate in the ballot for the very simple reason-I speak now of a ballot for the election of union officials-that they have joined a union between four-year ballots. Of course, in other cases members may feel that undue pressures have been brought to bear on them and they wish to have an opportunity to express a view that is free from pressure. Tn some cases strikes are brought about for purely political purposes-strikes that have nothing to do with the working interests of union members. A case that the honourable member for Wills would well understand is the possibility of directions being given in respect of uranium mining because that is contrary to the policy of the Australian Council of Trade Unions. It might be exceedingly relevant for the Commission to know the views of those members of unions who earn their living from mining. As I have said, that is quite contrary to the views of the ACTU.
I conclude by making the following comment: We have had secret ballot provisions in this country for many years. They are to be found in the Conciliation and Arbitration Act and in the New South Wales industrial and arbitration Act. I believe there is a provision in the Western Australian Act which deals with industrial matters. These provisions have given to a court or to the Commission power to order a secret ballot of their own volition. The provisions before the House are

essentially different. Those provisions open the way to members to initiate the procedure of a secret ballot themselves. I do not suggest for one moment that these provisions represent a panacea. They may be seldom used, but they give individuals a greater opportunity to have a say in their own affairs, something which honourable members on the other side of the House seem to resent. That accords with the intent of the provision in the Constitution which gives to this House power to pass laws in respect of conciliation and arbitration for the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes. How better, when the right time arises, to get a view of what the members really want than to conduct a ballot which is not ordered by a court or by any government but which is requested by the members?
It is right that trade unions should be an essential part of the fabric of our life, but it is right also that since their very reason for existence is to represent the individual interests of their members those members should have the right to vote on questions which directly and immediately concern
their very means oflivelihood.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (5.45)- The attitude expressed by the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) and his lack of knowledge as to how the trade union movement operates and what occurs in strike situations really indicate all that is wrong with this legislation. The Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill is ill-conceived and unnecessary. Rather than make any contribution to the settlement of industrial disputes it will compound the problems faced by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission in its daily task of trying to resolve issues of industrial confrontation. The principal spokesman for the Opposition, the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), has already indicated to the House that the Government has failed to introduce legislation to facilitate the amalgamation of unions, despite three years of work by both employer and employee organisations and the endorsement of the National Labour Consultative Council, despite the fact that the Bill is ready and available and despite the agreement of the employer groups and the trade union movement that such legislation is long overdue and vitally necessary to the proper develop-
ment of our industrial relations.
Instead of having a Bill which is designed to facilitate and make industrial relations in this community easier, as requested by employer and trade union organisations, where the work has been done and where the legislation is already drafted, we have this legislation for secret ballots in respect of industrial action in particular places of

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2905

work. Surely the Parliament is entitled to ask: 'What is the origin of this legislation?' There certainly has been no demand for it from the Commission. It has not been seriously argued for by any significant employer group in this nation and certainly no trade union group. When the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) or the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) referred this concept to the National Labour Consultative Council the Government was told by that body, which represents trade union and employer interests in this nation, that this concept was not necessary. I would have thought in that situation even the most ardent supporter of the Government might have said: 'If the trade union movement'-whom the Government suspects-'and the employers'- whom the Government loves-'are agreed that legislation of this kind is not necessary, perhaps we ought to heed their advice, or perhaps we ought to seek the advice of those members of the Commission who have to face these problems day after day'. Indeed the Parliament has had quoted to it both the views of academic writers operating full time in the industrial relations field and the views of so eminent a person in that area as Sir John Moore, the President of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission expressing their doubts as to the effectiveness of legislation of this type. Instead of having before us-as the Parliament is entitled to expect-legislation dealing with union amalgamation we now have this hotchpotch legislation which will not solve industrial problems but, indeed, will compound them.
Where does the Parliament look to find the arguments, the reasons, and the justification for this ill-conceived proposal? The only answer that we have been given by the honourable member for North Sydney was that this was the Prime Minister's promise; that is to say, the whole concept of this legislation is to be found in the Prime Minister's, somewhat narrow view of industrial relations. It is a view in which the Prime Minister's introversion is equalled only by his naivete and his 'macho' need for confrontation. He believes, as do many of his supporters, that every strike is the result of manipulation by radical union bosses-he does not even say communist union bosses-and that the victims of this manipulation, the ordinary, decent Australian male and female workers, will be saved from the results of this continual and ongoing manipUlation only by the intervention of this warm-hearted Prime Minister, and this legislation. He believes, as does the honourable member for North Sydney, a man much experienced in industrial relations-his experience shows when he addresses the Parliament--

Mr McVeigh-He is a good parliamentarian, too.
Mr HOLDING-He is probably modelling himself on the Minister for Housing and Construction, so that instead of one political dunce we will have two political dunces.
Mr McVeighSee what the electors say.
Mr HOLDING-I know what the electors would say about this legislation. We should consider the Government's view of men and women who go on strike. Has the Minister for Housing and Construction ever heard either the Prime Minister or the Minister for Industrial Relations say in this Parliament that there might be some justice in a strike, there might be a view that ought to be considered by the Government as to the rightness or the cause of those unionists resorting to industrial action? I have never heard that, and neither has any member of this Parliament. We are not likely to hear it. We are now asked to adopt this legislation because it is the Prime Minister's view that if we give all the decent, ordinary union members, men and women, who he behoves are being manipulated all the time, the right to this odd and secret ballot then the anonymity of that ballot will give them the courage to say 'no' to industrial action. That, at heart, is the underlying philosophy which is the reason for this legislation.
Apart from the social class condescension that underlines this view, this Parliament is being asked to overlook the fact that on almost every occasion a majority decision of workers in the work place is required before any industrial action is taken. Many industrial actions and stoppages take place without the immediate knowledge of the trade union executives or their full time secretaries and officers. They hear about the problems in the workshop, after the stoppage has taken place, when someone has to sort the matter out. It also overlooks that other essential factor in any strike action--that every worker involved in strike action votes continuously on a daily or weekly basis in respect of that strike, because he votes with his hip pocket. There is no industrial action, no stoppage of work, which does not ultimately involve some loss of wages and some financial hardship for those who take that decision. That being the case, we have to go to examples of this type of legislation being considered in other communities. The honourable member for Wills has already pointed out how the Donovan commission-that was a high-powered commission looking at the whole question of industrial relations-rejected this concept. This concept of strike ballots before legislation has

2906 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

been tried in those communities where the industrial relations system, unlike ours, is based upon the concept of collective bargaining. They do not have the processes of conciliation and arbitration and the intervention of judicial and semi-judicial procedures to try to resolve the industrial issues between the parties.
It is interesting to note that in both the United States and Canada during the war secret ballot strike legislation was introduced. The premises were exactly the same. The governments were in a wartime situation and wanted to minimise industrial strikes. Those governments, quite frankly, took the view that if there were strike ballots then industrial stoppages would be reduced. I wish to quote from an authoritative article which analyses the success of those proposals. It is an article by Mr F. R. Anton entitled 'Work Stoppages: Should Authorisation be Mandatory?' Having examined the origin of that legislation and how it worked, he concluded:
It is reasonable to assume that both the Canadian and United States governments enacted strike vote legislation in wartime to limit a union's right to strike, in the hope of minimizing the number of strikes and thus enabling war production to be maximized. Official statements made at that time support this assumption. But no available evidence indicates that such legislation reduced the number of work stoppages. For what it is worth, many of those who administered the strike vote in the United States held the view that such legislation tended to foster, rather than discourage, strikes. There were indications in Canada too that in no important dispute did workers vote against strike action. Moreover, the impression was gained that whenever strike votes were conducted on federal authority, the public tended to regard such supervised voting as carrying government sanction for a strike.
Here is an objective analysis of this type of legislation in a collective bargaining situation, in both the United States and Canada. What is the conclusion? It is this:
It is therefore significant that in spite of substantial pressures, neither of the central governments saw fit to extend the stroke vote requirement into postwar legislation.
I commend that article to honourable members opposite who obviously do not understand the complexities of our industrial and conciliation system, who do not understand the way in which stroke situations and industrial problems arise or the way in which they are resolved. What we put to this House-I do not think the Government will listen but we are bound to put it-is that this legislation will not make the solution of industrial stoppages any easier. It will compound the problem for the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. It involves some very naive concepts, including some very naive legal concepts. I do not know what a commissioner is supposed to do. He is required to recognise the result of a ballot. What occurs if a ballot is conducted in a work

place of 1,000 people and 200 people vote against the strike, 400 people vote for it and the others do not vote at all? Is a non-vote to be regarded as a vote in favour or a vote against? What position is a commissioner placed in when he is involved in trying to settle a dispute and there is an overwhelming vote in favour of a strike and its
continuance?
Mr Hawke-It shows the depth of feeling.
Mr HOLDING-It shows the depth of feeling. Will the commissioner say that, having regard to this depth of feeling, he will do nothing to resolve the situation? Supposing people in a work place overstate their case and demand $50 when they really want only $10 or $20. Does the commissioner say that he cannot have regard to the view that $10 or $20 is a proper figure on which to conciliate because the depth of feeling among employees has been shown to be so overwhelming that he must say to them that the only proper thing he can do to resolve the matter is to give them all they require? That is the kind of legal nonsense being perpetrated in this Parliament and heaped on to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. In the name of whom? Is it in the name of the employers? No. In the name of the trade union movement? No. Their responsible bodies have said that they do not require this legislation. This legislation is being heaped on to the Commission, creating incredible problems, not merely for those who are involved in the conciliation and arbitration process but also for employers and responsible trade union leaders, to suit the industrial fantasies of this Prime Minister and to satisfy the industrial viciousness of the present Minister for Industrial Relations. That is the reason for this legislation and that is the reason it ought to be rejected by this Parliament.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr PORTER (Barker) (8.0)-The main provision of this amendment to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act is to enable members of a union at a particular place of work to have a secret ballot in connection with a request that may be made of those members to take part in industrial action. In other words, if the union demands that its members at a factory go on strike the members of the union at that factory can request and take part in a secret ballot to decide whether in fact they want to go on strike.
Before dealing with the details of the legislation I would like to deal in the broad for a moment with the reasons the Government has been prompted to introduce this Bill. We have said many times, and it is worth repeating, that in the industrial relations field it is clear that each

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2907

member of the community has both rights and responsibilities. Further, the rights of the individual ought to be protected whilst at the same time the individual must meet his or her obligations. This legislation is designed to protect the rights of the individual in the work place. It may also be seen in the wider context to be protecting the community against industrial disruption undertaken by members of a union acting under direction rather than in accordance with their wishes.
There is no doubt that one of the most powerful weapons of the unions, and indeed an important right of the individual worker, is the right to strike. My concern, and I believe the concern of the community, is that the right to strike is no longer being used by many unions as a powerful weapon of last resort; rather, in the fragile field of industrial relations, it is being used as an initiating manoeuvre in order to soften up or lower the resistance of the employers to the unions' demands. At the same time, little account appears to be taken of the effects of such action upon those who are not directly involved in the dispute. Further, the right to strike has now been adopted by some unions as a political weapon to be used in political disputes outside the industrial relations area. I quote just one example. On 20 May this year an article in the Australian newspaper stated:
The ACTU last night threatened 'direct industrial action' against companies which moved to buy government enterprises put up for sale to the private sector. The ACTU President, Mr Dolan, is quoted as warning that action, which would involve strikes and possibly union bans on companies' products, could be taken in the areas of operation of any company which considers buying government businesses. This move by the unions is a direct attack on the implementation of decisions announced by this Federal Government in the report on the Review of Commonwealth Functions or, as it is known, the decisions of the razor gang. Those decisions were made by the properly and democratically elected government which was elected only late last year. The Australian Council of Trade Unions is apparently saying that the Australian people can elect whatever government they like but if the ACTU does not like the decisions of that democratically elected government then it, as a minority group in Australia, will use industrial muscle to prevent the implementation of that Government's decisions.
The same newspaper article reports that Mr Dolan said that union action taken against this Government's decisions would involve top level consultation between the Federal Labor Party and ACTU officials. So the Labor Opposition, not satisfied with the results of the election, is trying to stuff its socialist dogma down the throats of the unwilling public through the ACTU.
Not content with the use of its industrial muscle for political purposes, as the Sydney Morning Herald reported the next day:
The ACTU threw down the gauntlet yesterday to the Arbitration Commission and employers by deciding to press on

with its campaign for shorter working hours through productivity bargaining.It--
That is the ACTU-
reiterated its support for centralised wage fixing but rejected the Commission's new guidelines.
The article went on:
After yesterday's executive session, the ACTU President, Mr Dolan forecast that the next few months would see the stormiest period in industrial relations since 1947-49, when the Chifley Government sent soldiers in to work strike-hit coal mines.
The article then stated that Mr Dolan nominated Telecom Australia, Australia Post and the road transport industry as likely trouble spots. So the ACTU has threatened to use the strike weapon on one day against the Government and on the next day against the decisions of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. At the same time the unions have refused to take part in the proposed inquiry into wage determination and industrial relations. Instead of adopting a positive role they are embarking on a course of massive industrial unrest and disruption. It is my view that this is not a course of action which is accepted by the general public as being either desirable or correct. Within the Australian context I believe it is an abuse of the strike weapon.
This legislation will provide the opportunity for union members to express their wishes in relation to such demands made on them by their union executive. I believe that the people of Australia, employees, consumers, employers and small businessmen-are fed up with the number of strikes in this country. Employees, especially those working in industry, are sick to death of the constant threat and uncertainty which industrial disruption poses to their weekly pay packet. Employees, especially those with young families and a high level of commitments, are naturally and justifiably concerned about their. ability to meet their commitments in the event of industrial disruption. Their concern relates not just to being involved directly in an industrial dispute but also to being stood down as a result of being employed in a factory or business which is incapable of maintaining their employment because of an industrial dispute in a related area. Employers are loath to stand down workers. However, if there is no work for those employees they cannot keep them on for very long.
Consumers are another group of people who are inevitably affected by industrial disputes. It seems that many unions in their cavalier attitude towards the use of the strike weapon have no thought for their fellow employees or the consumers who may be affected by their decisions. Consumers, of course, have to pay more for goods

2908 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

because the cost of industrial disputes is built into a secret ballot either before or during a strike.

the cost of the final product. Consumers are often That figure of 5 per cent is subject to a maximum

directly and dramatically affected by industrial requirement of 250 members if there is a large

disputes. For example, travellers relying on Qannumber of members of the union in that work

tas Airways Ltd have been marooned around the place. There is also a minimum requirement of

world. On the domestic scene, we have a strike four people in a case where, for example, there

involving the domestic air services almost whenare less than 100 union members in a certain work

ever a holiday period is imminent. This was the place. Where a ballot has been requested and the

case both last Christmas and at Easter of this year. Commission orders it, it will be conducted by the

It is a classic example of the disruption to services Industrial Registrar or the Australian Electoral

which hits those least able to protect themselves. Office. The Commission will then be required to

Only last week there was a strike in both Sydney and Adelaide by railway workers. This strike was held without warning and with complete disregard for members of the public who had to get home from work that night.

have regard to the result of the ballot in its consideration of the matter. Additionally, and perhaps more importantly, when the result of the vote is against the action demanded by the union executive, the members are relieved of any obligation under the rules of their organisation to

Further, the high level of industrial disruption obey that direction or request for industrial

affects every member of the community through action. In other words, if a group of employees is

the damage it causes to the economy. Industrial not satisfied with the union demand to undertake

disputes affect business confidence and businessindustrial action, it can call for a vote. If the ma-

men's decisions to invest, and therefore the jobs jority is against the union recommendation, it will

and the standard of living of all Australians. The be unlawful for a union to impose or try to re-

level of disruption has affected our trading poscover a fine under its rules against a member not

ition. We are continually being made aware of participating in the industrial action which was

countries-such as Japan, a major customer of the subject of the ballot.

ours-because of the uncertainty of supply, being unable to rely solely on Australia for the goods which they desire to purchase from us. They are forced, therefore, to spread their purchases amongst other countries, and we are the losers. As I have mentioned, strikes and the like increase the costs of our goods, and thus we also become less competitive on the world market.

In addition, protection will be provided by amendments to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act in this Bill against victimisation, intimidation or coercion by the union of those members who apply for a secret ballot. The legislation extends not only to those in an identifiable location, such as a factory, but also to those who are required to report regularly to a place in connection with

This legislation is designed to assist in the protheir work, such as air hostesses or timber

tection of the rights of individuals and to protect workers. The Act applies not only to strike action

the community from industrial disruption. It will recommended or directed by the union but also to assist in the development of democratic proother industrial action such as go-slows or doing

cedures by introducing a mechanism by which the only some of the work normally undertaken. The

rank and file union member can express his at~i legislation is, therefore, an attempt by the

tude on a request put to him for industrial action. Government to ensure that the rank and file has

It will promote communication and consultation an opportunity to express its view in relation to a

between the union executive and its members. It is union request or demand for industrial action.

hoped that this will result in the union executive's The enactment of this Bill will not mean the

becoming more responsive to its members' feelend of industrial disputes. I do not believe it is

ings. Secret ballots will also avoid some of the possible for us to achieve that goal within our con-

bullying and standover tactics which, it has been stitutional power, except perhaps in some specific

alleged, have taken place in the past. They will emergencies. However, I hope that this secret bal-

also prevent the rigging of such ballots through lot legislation will lead to a reduction in the

the importation of members from other unions. I number and length of industrial disputes in this

hope that the Bill will reduce the abuse by milicountry for the benefit of all Australians. I

tant unions of the right to strike and lead to more strongly support the Bill and urge rank and file

responsible action by their leaders, who will be diunion members to exercise their rights under this

rectly answerable to their membership.

legislation to express their views.

The legislation provides that 5 per cent of the Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (8.15)-1 supmembers of a union at a work place can apply to port my colleagues in strongly opposing the Conthe Conciliation and Arbitration Commission for ciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill which,

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2909

in our view, further demonstrates the attempt by this Government to attack the trade unions and the living standards of workers. The general weaknesses in this Bill have already been aptly demonstrated by other Labor speakers. I shall concentrate my remarks on the values and attitudes on which this Bill is based. Union bashing by this Government and, to some degree, by the media has often taken the form of hysterical and irrational outbursts of the kind we have just heard. Recently, the Fraser Government has engaged in something more ominous-an attempt to undermine, subvert and destroy the union movement and thereby to water down the basic rights of workers to organise, unite and withdraw their labour.
Undoubtedly this Government seeks to take advantage of an atmosphere of antagonism which it has created through its continuous attempts to blame the economic problems of this nation on the trade union movement. Because of the cacophony of abuse being heaped on that movement and its leaders there is danger that the true meaning and real worth of the trade union movement will be forgotten. There is a danger, therefore, that the peopie of Australia will be hoodwinked into supporting attacks on those very organisations, the trade unions, which have been primarily responsible, throughout the history of the present economic system, for improvements in their standards of living and conditions of employment. That point needs to be made strongly to those Australian workers, whether in offices, shops or factories, who have become or are becoming apathetic about it. Without the solidarity of the union movement and the many struggles by workers of previous generations, wages would be much lower than they are at present; the majority of people would be living in dire poverty; hours of employment would be long; and conditions of employment would be atrocious.
Even a cursory look at the historical development of Western economies and the role of unions within them clearly proves this claim. In the nineteenth century, capitalist economies were riddled with crises of over-production of goods and under consumption by workers who could not afford them. In order to survive in that cut--throatworld, business leaders attempted to reduce wages. Where this succeeded it led to increasing poverty and misery for workers. They barely had enough to provide for food and shelter. The only way available to combat this tendency of the capitalist system was the organisation of workers into unions. 'Workers Unite' thus became the rallying call of the working class in its attempts to counter these oppressive conditions. Their major weapon

in that struggle was the strike, which is nothing more than the communal withdrawal by all the members of the union of their labour. The early unionists sought the protection of workers against the attempt to reduce their wages and to make conditions of employment even worse than they were. The corollary to this was to try to improve the wages and conditions of their members.
Historians have recorded the huge struggles that occurred in Australia in the 1880s and 1890s in which employers, supported by the State, by the Government, attempted to crush the development of unionism. In fact, in many cases the Government succeeded in beating workers into submission. These lessons of history have been forgotten by some of those who enjoy the benefits, in terms of wages and conditions, of those struggles and many others that came later.
Mr Barry Jones-They never knew them.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-My colleague said 'they never knew them', but they certainly are finding out more about them at present because they are having to struggle once again, because of the actions of this Government, to retain the kind of standards of living which they achieved before. It was at this time and because of this point that the unions also recognised that they would have to fight through the political and democratic process. I am pleased that this last point regarding the trade union origins of the Australian Labor Party is to be specifically included in the new platform of the party, if the Federal Executive's recommendation is accepted. This point reads:
The ALP has its origins in the recognition by the trade union movement of the necessity for a political voice to take forward the struggle of the working class against the excesses, injustices and inequalities of capitalism.
The present Government in its attitude to unions seeks to return to the nineteenth century situation when workers' organisations were weak and could be crushed by a joint alliance between big business and the government. The Government seeks to use force against the unions so that they cannot achieve any improvements in the wages and conditions of workers. With this secret ballot legislation the Government seeks to castrate the trade union movement. As I shall point out later, it will not succeed. Indeed, there is no doubt that this Government seeks to reverse the gains made by workers in recent years and to reduce the standard of living of workers.
In the last three years we have had constant statements by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) that it is essential to reduce real wages. This claim was echoed by representatives of big business in whose interests this Government continues to act. A paper by Greg Turnidge and Ainsley Jolley

2910 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

published last October by the Victorian Chamber of Manufactures they claimed:
. . . real wage reductions are an essential ingredient of the total economic policy package necessary to return the Australian economy to a completely healthy state.
Attacks of this kind on living standards of workers are the real reason behind this Government's legislation on secret ballots. It believes it can achieve a reduction in the number of strikes and other actions taken by workers in support of their claims through this legislation. Of course, this is based on a myth. The myth that underlines that claim is that workers somehow love to go on strike and that union leaders love to call out their members at the drop of a hat.
Mr Tuckey-You are the second one tonight.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-That kind of remark just goes to show the honourable member's intelligence. This proposition ignores the fact that workers who strike also suffer. They lose wages. The decision to go on strike is a serious matter which is not taken lightly. It is taken out of a sense of desperation that unless workers act to protect their livelihoods they will be victims of the same greedy impulses which reduced workers to absolute poverty in the last century. We still see those greedy impulses alive and kicking in Australia at present. From 1975 to early 1980 record levels of profit were achieved by many large, often foreignowned, corporations. Yet during this period real wages relative to inflation fell and so did the standards of living of workers. It is only in the last year because of determined actions by key unions and negotiations over increased productivity awards-because productivity increased dramatically-that some increase in real wages was possible.
As the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) pointed out, it is only this fact-the actions of the unions-which has allowed for growth in consumer spending in the last few months and growth in the economy as a whole. Thus we have the extraordinary situation where the Treasurer is claiming credit for achieving increased economic growth whereas in fact it is only the actions and the achievements of the union movement in the last year in increasing wages which have been the main catalyst of that growth. Is this Government and its Minister grateful for that assistance, for that achievement? Not on your life. They cannot stand the fact that workers have achieved some distribution of the wealth which is generated from workers' labour. This is the crux of the matter with regard to the conservative attitude to workers and unions. The Government is congenitally incapable of understanding a fundamental fact of economics-that it

is human labour, the mental and physical work of ordinary Australians, which creates wealth and which recreates the world and everything in it. The god of profit which they worship would be non-existent without the contribution of this human labour.
The union movement which is concerned to ensure that labour is adequately rewarded and exploitation is minimised is the movement which the Government seeks to attack. The legislation seeks to destroy the solidarity and unity of purpose of the workers and to prevent the achievement of those goals which I have just mentioned. It seeks to place special powers in the hands of that tiny minority of unionists who, because they have been indoctrinated by the media and others, seek to disrupt the process of negotiation and action to achieve justice. Significantly, none of these individuals ever, by the way, rejects a wage increase resulting from the action and strike activity of their fellows. These attempts further to control the trade union movement will fail not only for the specific reasons given by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) but also because of the overriding fact that no legislation, court action or penal provisions or arbitrary use of government powers will prevent the majority of workers from uniting to protect and improve their standards of living and the rewards of labour. It is about time the Liberal Party and other conservative parties recognised that fundamental fact. They cannot continue to attack the living standards of people and expect them to sit down and accept this. If the Government wants workers to behave in accordance with laws then the laws need to be reasonable. The Government does not have reasonable laws in industrial relations at present. This is another stinking law which is going to make industrial relations worse. The sooner the Government comes to accept this fundamental fact the quicker harmonious industrial relations will be created in this country.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (8.27)-The Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) in his second reading speech referred to promises of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and in particular to the Prime Minister's policy speech of September 1980 when he made three policy promises on industrial relations. I think those three promises are worth recording. The Prime Minister stated:
For the future, the Government proposes to:
Extend the secret ballot provisions to enable individual employees to apply for a secret ballot to express their views on strike action.
Legislate to facilitate the amalgamation of unions where there is a 'unity of interests'.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2911

In consultation with industry initiate a major campaign of advice and assistance to all levels of management on the conduct and practice of industrial relations.
the Government remains firmly committed to the principle of conciliation and arbitration.
We know what happened to the legislation promised to facilitate the amalgamation of unions. In fact, it was drafted, printed and shelved. So much for the promises. Of course this Government and this Prime Minister have quite a record on promises. In fact the Prime Minister has a unique record of promises made but never kept. His promises are now so infamous that they have even been set to music. The Prime Minister said in the 1977 campaign speech:

Let us deal with one aspect that is constantly raised by the Government. It was raised by the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) who piously said that everyone believes in the right to strike. How often do we hear this kind of thing? I want to come back to that aspect. We have heard constant attacks by the Government on the trade unions and on how irresponsible they are. We have heard a number of quotations from this side of the House from practitioners in industrial relations. I wish to quote from a speech by Dr Ian Sharp contained in the Practising Manager Vol. 1 (1) October 1980.
Mr Good luck-Is he a socialist?

We have ended the big tax ripoff.
The statement continues:
Interest rates have begun to fall and they will keep falling.
In a statement to Parliament on 22 February 1979 the same Prime Minister said:
The Government's success in winding back inflation has been a precondition for the substantial progress in reducing interest rates.
We have heard promise after promise broken and have not seen them come to fruition. No one can believe any more the promises of this Government. It is important that we reflect on these promises because the Government has reneged on its promise on the amalgamation of unions. It is all the more sickening when one realises that the legislation has been drafted, printed and, in fact, sighted by members of the Opposition. But the Government has not brought it in for its own reasons. So one cannot help being cynical about the legislation that the Government is trying to put through now.
No matter how this pathetic Minister for Industrial Relations may try to put a veneer of respectability on this legislation further to facilitate secret ballots in respect of industrial action, it can and will be seen for what it really is. It is a vehicle for pimps, scabs, malcontents and dobbers. It is perhaps typical that this Minister should bring it in. These scabs and pimps that the Government would know much of are there to cause disruption within the democratic trade union organisation. If anyone has doubts about this then he will have to look at the razor gang report and see just how many departments were slashed and note that the IRB, the Industrial Relations Bureau-or the industrial police force as it is is known in the trade union movement-this industrial gestapo, has been retained. It is rather ironic that in the report referring to the cutbacks there was a line to say that this Bureau would not be cut back.
I think it is worthwhile to reflect on the history of industrial relations in this country in particular.

Mr SCOTT-Some clown here says that he is a socialist. For the honourable member's information I advise that Dr Ian Sharp was a Deputy President of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission until 1978. So much for the ignorance that Government members are prepared to show! When dealing with disputes Dr Sharp stated:
In general, I do not think the Australian system can claim much success in preventing industrial disputes. I doubt, however, whether any system would have done much better or that we would have been willing to pay the price of total dispute prevention. This is, largely a matter of the make-up of the social community, of its attitudes and collective personality. Australia has a record of having more industrial stoppages than most other countries. However, despite this record it is not one of the top countries in terms of man days lost. The latest figures available for top international comparison of eighteen countries take us up to the end of 1978. They show that over the previous ten years, which include some pretty torrid years for Australia, the United States, Canada, Italy and India have almost consistently lost more working days per 1,000 employees than Australia.
I think that is sufficient to put the lie to the constant attacks on the trade union movement from the Government members. Of course, their own Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) put the lie to them when he was in Japan and when he thought he was out of earshot.
Mr Tuckey-To defend us.
Mr SCOTT-He certainly did not defend the Government when he exposed the lies that the Government members have been spreading.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member for Hindmarsh will resume his seat for a minute. My understanding of the Bill is that it is about the introduction of secret ballots. The honourable member has barely touched on that in his first seven minutes. I just thought that I ought to give notice that he ought to return to the Bill before his time has expired.
Mr SCOTT-At the outset-I think you were not in the chair at the time, Mr Deputy Speaker. I made specific mention of the second

2912 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

reading speech of the Minister and the promises of the Prime Minister that were referred to. That is what I have gone on from. I come to the present Conciliation and Arbitration Act and the provisions for secret ballots that have been in it for some number of years. Of course, we have heard from the Opposition side an explanation of just how often those provisions have been used and the results that have come from their use. We have heard from the Government side talk of the right to strike.
I will finish on this aspect because it is perfectly relevant. This Bill is further legislation to hamper and interfere with the democratic set-up of the trade union movement. Everyone believes in the right to strike.
Mr Tuckey-I don't.
Mr SCOTT-There is always an exception in every community. The editorial of the capitalist newspaper in Adelaide on 9 November 1974, in fact, was on the very question of the right to strike. Those who do not agree can certainly hold there own opinions. The editorial concerned the perfect strike. Public opinion unquestionably concedes the right of every free man and woman in a free society to withdraw his or her labour. It just draws the line at strikes. Perhaps we should try to design the perfect strike. The first essential is to get the profit motivation out of strikes. There is evidence that the public finds striking for higher pay, shorter hours and better conditions to be a distasteful display of materialism. A strike must not cause any loss of production or affect the country's supply of goods and services. Strikes should be arranged in the workers' own time rather than in the employer's. The strike must not cause any loss or inconvenience to customers. The timing of the perfect strike is very important. It would be disloyal to strike when the country is facing economic competition from overseas or at a time when a rise in wages would tend to increase prices. The strike should not be held under a Liberal-Country Party Government. This would be seen as political mischief-making. The strike should not be held under a Labor Government since it could be said to be stabbing one's own side in the back. It should not be an unofficial strike. The public frowns on unofficial strikes. It should not be an official strike because the public thinks that union officials should not encourage strikes. Therefore, taking all these points into consideration, the nearest we might get to the perfect strike would go something like this: A small, polite, well-behaved strike of company directors during one lunch hour in favour of lower wages for trade union officials. It should take place under an Australian Democrat Government just as soon as

America, the European Economic Community, Japan and our other principal economic competitors happen to sink into the sea.
I think that just about typifies the attitude of the Government. It says it believes in the right to strike. It knows that there is already in existence legislation providing for secret ballots. It must also know that a number of unions have written into their rules a requirement to have a secret ballot before they have a strike. More importantly Government members are not practitioners. They do not know what happens. In the realHfe situation the workers themselves at a factory gate meeting, usually at lunch time, determine whether they will take strike action. Often they will determine whether they will have a secret ballot. They do not have to be coerced. They do not have to have further legislation. They certainly do not have to have vehicles that provide for pimps, dobbers and troublemakers within the trade union movement who try to disrupt a democratic organisation.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (8.39)-We have heard from my colleague the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) about what is the perfect strike. I draw honourable member's attention to the fact that this is the seventy-first amendment-if I was counting rightly-to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act, and the fifteenth since 1975. It is obvious that this Government, whenever in trouble, resorts to union bashing to divert the people's attention from its inability to manage the country's economy. My colleagues who preceded me have already mentioned, and it is worth repeating, that this proposal was put forward as an election gimmick before the 1980 elections. The Fraser Government was threatened with defeat and it was desperately looking for something to cover up its mismanagement of the economy. Of course, [ did not envy its task as previous conservative governments used just about every trick under the sun to hoodwink the Australian people. The red arrows and yellow arrows of the Menzies era could not be resurrected.
The crying of wolf so ably used by the late Sir Robert does not suit the arrogance of our present Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). He resorted to sabre rattling instead, but the discovery of his wool earmarked for export to Russia reduced his credibility to nil. So the market researchers of the Liberal Party were called in to try to find some electoral diversion. They found that the monopoly-owned media has created an impression that many people in the community accepted the view that trade unions are irresponsible organisations. They advised the Liberal

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2913

Party that strikes are unpopular so if the Government promised to reduce the frequency of direct industrial action it may have a chance to restore its popularity. Hence the pre-election promise of the Prime Minister that is being followed now with the Bill which is before the House. By the way, this is probably the only promise-a part promise-that is being kept. It was a desperate attempt to pull the wool over the eyes of the Australian voter. It was conceived by desperate men who managed to hang on to power only by the skin of their teeth. It is no wonder that we now have a piece of legislation before us that is not based on the reality of an industrial situation but is calculated to divide or, to say the least, is based on a misconception.

industrial disputation. The Act that we now seek to amend has been amended about 70 times already, as I stated at the outset. I wish to quote from the speech made on this Bill by the former Minister for Industrial Relations, the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock). Page 2827 of Hansard states:
The Conciliation and Arbitration Act has been amended over 70 times since its enactment in 1904-14 times under the present Government. I have to say that this represents lack of direction and lack of consensus over many years on direction over time and the fallibility of legislation. This Act has surely reached saturation point. The cumulative effect of legislation on industrial relations is largely a matter of conjecture and often ill-informed assumption. There is a need for the Act to be simplified into a useful tool for the practitioner in industrial relations-not complicated by further legislation.

Of couse, we are not surprised by the divisive nature of this Bill as it has come from a government led by the most divisive Prime Minister since Federation. The secret ballot provision contained in the Bill is calculated to set one Australian worker against the other. It invites and encourages scabbing at the work places. In fact, it will have the effect of exacerbating industrial disputes instead of solving them. Members opposite are espousing the idea of reducing government involvement in every area where the Government should protect individuals and the community as a whole. The razor gang's proposals will reduce or abolish Federal Government responsibility for health, hospitals, migrant services, housing and so on. Yet the same Government vigorously insists that it should intervene in industrial disputes between workers and bosses. The only areas in which this Government is interested to intervene are those where by its intervention it can enlarge the high profits of corporations and at the same time reduce the ability of the workers to ensure for themselves a fair share of the cake. However, in this instance the Government's intervention is so inept that it is not welcomed even by the employers, 'whose interests it claims to represent. The employers know well that strike ballots will not reduce industrial disputation but will have a contrary effect.
The Government is an uninvited and unwelcome guest in this' area. The workers, the bosses or the Australian Conciliatiori and Arbitration Commission-those who are directly involved in industrial relations in Australia-have not suggested that amendments along the lines proposed by the Government are necessary or even desirable. There is absolutely no need for this legislation, as the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) pointed out when he spoke to the Bill. The Arbitration Commission, as well as the Government, has enough power to deal with any

This Government has yet to learn that industrial action cannot be managed by the bludgeon of legislation but has to be approached with common sense and conciliation. As far as the trade union movement is concerned, it is not opposed to secret ballots. They are used in union elections. The trade union leadership is elected in secret ballots. However, it would be silly to suggest that each decision made by that democratically elected leadership should be submitted to secret ballot. Let us look at who is proposing this. Our Prime Minister would not be keen to put his razor gang proposals to the secret vote of the people. On the contrary, last October he was hiding his intentions from the people. Whilst trade union leaders have a mandate from their members to fight for better wages and working conditions, the Prime Minister had no mandate from the people of Australia to abandon universal health insurance or the Government's responsibilities in areas of hospital financing and health care. He had no mandate to sell out publicly owned companies and land. The man who was sneaking in through a back door at Yarralumla is trying to teach workers democracy. What a hypocrite!
The right to strike is an important human right achieved by the workers in countries such as ours. If that right is taken away or limited by government interference we might as well pack our cases and join President Marcos or some other little dictator friend of honourable members opposite. It will be a sorry day for Australia when the Australian worker is not allowed, freely and without fear, to negotiate and, if necessary, to fight for better wages and working conditions. The Government is trying to tell us that strike ballots will reduce industrial disputation, that unions are not democratic and that their leadership does not consult with membership before and during industrial action. There is nothing further from the truth. Decisions to use the worker's ultimate weapon are

2914 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

not lightly made. The amendment to the Act represents a further intrusion by government into internal affairs of unions which will be strongly resisted by the Australian workers who will not tolerate provocative invitations to scabbing in the workplace.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (8.48)-1 could not sit down any longer and allow some of the remarks that have been made by the Opposition to go without somebody saying this: I do not think the Government went far enough with the Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill. The honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), who is seated at the table, made an accusation. I will use the word 'accusation'. Not so long ago he made a point that legislation to facilitate the amalgamation of unions was held up because of the conservative elements in this Government; it was held up by people who realised that the amalgamation of two of the strongest unions in Australia would put the people of Australia at risk. I use the example of the amalgamation of the Transport Workers Union of Australia with the Federated Storemen and Packers Union of Australia. We have had enough trouble with the transport workers in Tasmania as it is. The two unions coming together would stop the life of Tasmania. They have practically ruined Tasmania's economy. They have ruined the social fabric of that State. They have ruined most of the small businesses. Hotels are closing down there at the moment. You have the sheer hypocrisy to talk about the workers and the words 'conciliation and arbitration' .
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member will address his remarks through the Chair.
Mr GOODLUCK-Yes, I will come back to that. You have allowed---
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. The honourable member may not say 'you are guilty of hypocrisy' because he is in fact addressing the Chair. If he addresses his remarks through the Chair he will not attract so much opposition.
Mr GOODLUCK-I am very sorry, Mr Deputy Speaker. We have heard the word 'hypocrisy' mentioned. We have heard that we must look after the workers. We have heard that we must protect them. What about the poor people of Australia who are full up to the back teeth of the word 'conciliation'? I think the word 'conciliation' should be taken out of the dictionary. The trade union movement knows nothing of conciliation. When it wants something it uses the word 'power'. It will do everything within its reach and

power to get what it wants. It does not matter one bit about the rest of Australia; the people can suffer as a result of it.

The secret ballot provision contained in the legislation does not go far enough. We did not have the fortitude to go in a little harder because we were afraid to tamper with the great trade union movement. The people in the open arena are suffering as a result. When I go back to Tasmania, the ordinary worker who once supported the Labor Party says: 'Look, what about the trade union movement? What is it trying to do to us?' There is a famous industrial relations Minister in Tasmania. His mentality is such that in one of the newspapers over the weekend he is reported as saying that the Federal Government is to blame for the maritime strike, and that the maritime unions cannot conciliate with the Australian National Line because of the 35-hour week. He is beginning to use the lever of the 35-hour week. Once again Tasmania is being held to ransom by the powerful unions because they now want the 35-hour week. That is why the Government is legislating for secret ballots.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)- Order!

Mr GOODLUCK-That is the reason why we want to do far more to offset what the Labor Party is trying to do to Australia.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. It is my understanding that this debate is not about the 35-hour week.

Mr GOODLUCK-You allowed a lot of latitude to some of the honourable members
opposite.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I gave them fair latitude, but they were not talking about the 35-hour week.

Mr GOODLUCK-With great respect, I have said about all I want to say. The honourable member for Wills can smile, but if he came to Tasmania and debated the issue, as I suggested the other day that he should, he would be thrown out on his neck.

Question put:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes Noes . . .

64 . 47

Majority

17

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2915

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burt,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Howard, J. W. Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M.
Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Millar,P.C.
Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E. Jacobi,R.

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Los Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C.
Uren, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P'. H. McMahon, Sir William Killen,D.J.

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J. Bowen, Lionel

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Motion (by Mr Wilson)-proposed:
That tlie Bill be now read a third time.
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (8.58)-Because of the exigencies of time, we are not able to consider this

matter in Committee. However, I want to make a couple of comments at this third reading stage of the Bill which seem to be necessary if there is to be a proper understanding of the inadequacies of the legislation this House has been asked to pass. I draw the attention of the House to a quite basic inadequacy in clause 6, where the fundamental requirement is that the members of an organisation should have been directed or requested to take part in industrial action. One would expect that in this fundamental requirement to trigger the whole mechanism of the Bill, that is, that the members should have been directed or requested to engage in industrial action, there would have been some definition of what a direction or request is. That is something in respect of which the legislation is entirely silent. Much more disturbing is the provision in clause 6, proposed new sub-section (3D), which states:
Subject to this section, the Commission shall, upon an application made to it under sub-section (3A), order that a vote of the members to whom the application relates . . .
So the sub-section goes on. We have a situation where, in respect of the wording as it stands now, a group of members in one place of employment could make an application. It could be that that application would, in fact, relate to other members of the union in other places of employment. Of course, that is a quite ridiculous situation. Yet to clarify that appropriate regulations will have to be brought into being. As one of my fellow members on this side of the House has pointed out, that will be something that the Government cannot look forward to with any confidence in the future.
Perhaps more than anything else the things that indicate the totally one-sided nature of the Government's approach in this matter are the proposed changes to section 45C of the Act. Without going into the exact language of those changes, the substance of what is suggested is that if a ballot is, in fact, undertaken and the majority of those people taking part in the ballot are not in favour of participating in industrial action then, of course, they are not required to do so and the will of the majority in that respect is taken into account. They cannot in any way be forced to take action, and action cannot be taken against them. In other words, the Government presumably is indicating that, in that sense, the will of the majority as ascertained in a ballot should prevail. One would have thought in these circumstances-if one were in fact concerned with the principle of allowing the will of the majority to prevail-there would have been a provision to cover the obverse situation. If, in fact, the ballot were taken and the majority voted in

2916 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

favour of industrial action then there would be a requirement in those circumstances for the will of the majority to prevail. Those who were in the minority would be bound by the will of the majority as expressed in the ballot. Of course, it is indicative of the one-sided approach of this Government that the legislation does not so provide.
Because of the undertaking which my colleagues on this side of the House have arrived at with leaders on the other side of the House and because it is time to come to the end of this debate, it is impossible, therefore, to allude to all the detailed inadequacies of the Bill. As far as I am concerned, as that agreement is like an industrial agreement and is one which will be kept, at this stage I conclude by expressing my regret that the Government has inflicted upon the community a piece of legislation which is not only unnecessary but also will in the future provoke industrial conflict which would not otherwise have arisen.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a third time.
HEALTH ACTS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr MacKellar, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (9.4)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Bill is an omnibus Bill by which the Government seeks to make wide-ranging changes to four health Acts. These will give effect to the Government's philosphy and goals outlined in my recent statement to the House on health care services. As honourable members will be aware, the Government's overriding goal in the health area is that all Australians should have access to the high quality health care services we now enjoy in this country. But the achievement of this aim must be at a cost the individual and the community can afford. The Government believes that the most equitable and responsible means of achieving these goals is by means of a health policy that:
(i) requires the State and Northern Territory governments to take up their full constitutional responsibilities for the provision of health services;
(ii) ensures that those in genuine need receive special assistance to cover their hospital and medical bills;
(iii) results in other people contributing towards the cost of the health services they receive-either totally out of their own pockets or through health insurance;

(iv) ensures that health insurance is available to all people at a reasonable cost and directs the relevant government subsidies towards those who are willing to help themselves;
(v) recognises the importance of the community rating principle for a viable health insurance industry;
(vi) fully acknowledges the important role of the private sector of the health care delivery system, particularly private hospitals;
and (vii) seeks to ensure that users and providers of
health care services become more aware of the costs they generate.
The Bill now before the House will also:
(i) ensure immediate eligibility to receive basic insurance benefits for people taking out such cover with a registered health fund between I September and 31 October 1981 irrespective of any pre-existing illness
conditions; (ii) ensure that those people who lose their
entitlement to a pensioner health benefit or health care card and then choose to insure with a registered health fund can immediately become eligible for benefits at the basic coverage level; (iii) provide for the Commonwealth to pay all nursing home benefits and, so, take over responsibility for those nursing home benefits currently paid by health funds for insured persons; (iv) provide further protection to people in a nursing home against being unnecessarily charged for extras that would normally be regarded as part of nursing home care and, therefore, included in the approved fee; (v) expand the operation of the isolated patients' travel and accommodation assistance scheme; (vi) give effect to certain recommendations made by the pathology services working party which have been accepted by the Government; (vii) overcome a problem in the existing legislation which relates to the bulk billing of certain pathology services; and (viii) extend the Commonwealth's supervision of the production and supply of certain therapeutic goods.
The House will recall that in my statement of 29 April on the Government's new health policy I outlined new funding arrangements it is proposed to introduce for State health services. They are designed to ensure that the waste, inefficiencies and unnecessary duplication of

Health Acts Amendment Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2917

costly equipment in State public hospital systems A basic element of the Government's health

highlighted by the Commission of Inquiry into the policy is that the Commonwealth should provide

Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals are special assistance to cover the hospital and medi-

overcome. Such waste and inefficiency cannot be cal bills of those in genuine need, namely: persons

allowed to continue. It results in a needless burholding pensioner health benefit cards; migrants

den on all taxpayers and the Government would and refugees during their first six months in

be neglecting its duties if it failed to take appropriAustralia; people in receipt of unemployment and

ate action. The Jamison inquiry found that a special benefits with private incomes below the

major reason for such waste and inefficiency was pensioner health benefit limits; and people whose

the problem of divided responsibility between the incomes fall below certain specified limits plus

Commonwealth and State governments. The intheir dependants. The Commonwealth will ensure

quiry recommended that this should be corrected that these people will continue to have free access

by requiring the States to take up their full constito public hospitals by placing an appropriate con-

tutional responsibilities for the provision of health dition on the States and Northern Territory. For

services.

States other than South Australia and Tasmania

The Government's new health care funding arrangements will give the States greater freedom in the spending of Commonwealth funds previously provided for specific health purposes. The States will now be totally responsible for determining their own priorities in this area and appropriately

this is by a condition in clause 20 of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill 1981 introduced to the Parliament by the Treasurer last week. For South Australia and Tasmania the agreed arrangements will provide for such a condition to apply.

allocating resources. The new health funding arIn the face of recent media speculation as to the

rangements will do this. The relevant enabling position of pensioners under the Government's

legislation-the States (Tax Sharing and Health new health policy, I would like again to reassure

Grants) Bill-was introduced by my colleague, all those people who hold pensioner health benefit

the Treasurer (Mr Howard), on 28 May. Howcards and their dependants that there will be no

ever, an appropriate amendment to the Health Inchange in their position after 1 September next.

surance Act is necessary because South Australia The Bill now before the House therefore retains

and Tasmania have agreements with the Comthe existing arrangements for eligible pensioners

monwealth that operate until 30 June 1985 under and their dependants. These people will continue

which the Commonwealth cost-shares the agreed to be entitled to free private medical services

net operating expenses of their public hospitals. where their doctor bulk bills them and, as at

This is achieved by clause 18.

present, where such a person's doctor chooses not

The Government recognises that some States may seek to undermine the new health service funding arrangements by transferring traditional State functions in the nursing home area to the Commonwealth. It is recognised, for example,

to bulk bill, they will be entitled to a Commonwealth medical benefit of 85 per cent of the schedule fee, with a maximum payment-known as the 'gap payment'-of $5 per service where the doctor charges the schedule fee or less.

that some States could seek to reclassify public The Bill will introduce similar arrangements for

hospitals as State Government nursing homes. those other groups outlined above who are con-

This would result in the Commonwealth paying sidered to be in special need. They will be eligible

nursing home benefits for such people. To protect for free public hospital accommodation and treat-

the Commonwealth against such action clause 45 ment and free bulk billed medical services. They,

will ensure that State Government nursing homes in the majority of cases, will receive a health care

are not to be approved in future for the purpose of card before such treatment becomes necessary. A

paying nursing home benefits without considerCommonwealth medical benefit of 85 per cent

ation of the need for such homes in the same way will apply to bulk billed private medical services

that other nursing home proposals are considered. they receive. This compares with the present level

Similarly, States could seek to classify institutions of 75 per cent for those persons classified by their

now receiving their financial support as Commondoctors as disadvantaged. It is expected that the

wealth deficit-financed nursing homes. Such majority of people covered will be bulk billed and,

action would, again, be unacceptable to the Comtherefore, will not have to meet any gap payment.

monwealth. Clause 67 prevents such an action. Doctors are, of course, free to choose not to bulk

However, a ministerial discretion is provided in bill. Provision is therefore made in clause 8 for

appropriate circumstances where the Minister holders of a health care card to be paid a Com-

considers a transfer of a State financial responsimonwealth medical benefit of 85 per cent through

bility is not involved.

registered health insurance organisations in such

2918 REPR~SENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bill

circumstances-in the same way eligible pentaking out insurance, or maintaining one's cover,

sioners are-with a maximum gap payment of $5 after 1 September. Additional advantages will be

for each service, so long as the doctor charges no as follows: Commonwealth medical benefits will

more than the scheduled fee.

be available only to those with at least basic medi-

Honourable members will be aware that under the Government's new health policy, those people considered to be in a special need are being clearly defined for the first time. The Government has decided to take this action-and no longer leave this in the hands of individual doctors-because of a dual concern, namely: Bulk billed medical services provided under the existing disadvantaged arrangements are growing at a rate which would indicate that those services have been made available to persons who could not normally be regarded as disadvantaged and people in genuine need are not always able to gain the protection of

cal cover with a registered health fund; secondly, the Commonwealth Medical Benefit payable will be at a flat rate of 30 per cent and will apply to all items included in the medical benefits schedule; additionally, the total benefit payable to a person with basic medical insurance will be equal to 85 per cent of the schedule fee with a maximum gap payment of $10 where the doctor charges the schedule fee or less-this compares with the present level of 75 per cent and a maximum gap of $10; and, fourthly, a tax rebate of 32c in the dollar will apply for the cost of basic medical and/or hospital insurance with a registered health fund.

those arrangements. The Bill enables a person to These results will be achieved, except in re-

apply for a health care card on the grounds that lation to the tax rebate, by clauses 8 and 39 and

he or she fell within the low income category at will apply from 1 September 1981. The relevant

the time a medical or hospital service was prolegislation to give effect to the tax rebate decision

vided. The application may be lodged up to 13 was introduced by my colleague, the Treasurer,

weeks after the service was provided. In special on 27 May 1981. As the Treasurer stated in his

circumstances a longer period will be acceptable. second reading speech when introducing the In-

This means that it is not essential that people income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment

special need have a health care card before they Bill 1981, this rebate will be at a rate of 32c in the

receive a service. Of course these new arrangedollar and will apply to amounts paid on or after 1

ments for those in special need will not apply July 1981 for basic hospital and/or medical in-

prior to 1 September 1981.

surance cover from that date with a registered

The Government estimates that nearly two health fund.

million eligible pensioners and their dependants As honourable members will be aware, persons

will be protected in this way and that up to one taking out health insurance are normally required

million people will be eligible for special assistto wait two months before they are entitled to re-

ance under the new health care card arrangeceive benefits at the basic level. The Government

ments. I would point out to the House that it will has decided that this waiting period should be

not be necessary for these people to take out waived between 1 September and 31 October

medical or hospital insurance. However, if they next. The Government has also decided to put be-

want doctor of choice in a public hospital or wish yond any doubt that a fund should not apply a

to use a private hospital, they would, as is now the pre-existing ailment exclusion provision to people

case, need to take out hospital insurance. I would taking out insurance at the basic level during this

also point out that the Government recognises period. This will be achieved by clause 65. As a re-

that should any person lose his or her entitlement sult, no fund can refuse to accept any persons ap-

to a pensioner health benefit or health care card, plying for insurance cover at the basic level, no

he or she can obtain immediate cover by basic inmatter how seriously ill they might be when they

surance with a registered health fund. Clause 64 apply and no matter how long they may have

of the Bill will achieve this by requiring funds to suffered from the illness. This anti-discriminatory

waive the two months waiting period before measure also applies, of course, to women who

people taking out insurance are entitled to receive are pregnant.

both hospital and medical benefits at the basic level in such cases.

I would stress that the introduction of these legislative provisions should not be seen as a criti-

Under the Government's new health policy cism of registered health funds as a whole. The

those persons, and their dependants, not proGovernment believes that, generally speaking, the

tected by the special assistance arrangements funds act to ensure that their members receive

outlined above will be required to meet their proper protection against the high cost of health

hospital and medical bills. They may choose to do care. However it must be recognised that some

so by personal payment or through insurance. funds-very few in number-may not always act

There are, therefore, considerable advantages in in this way and so the Commonwealth must have

Health Acts Amendment Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2919

the means of ensuring that no insured persons are adversely affected by actions of a fund that are contrary to Government policy.
In order to further its aim of ensuring that insurance is available at a reasonable cost-and, at the same time, to provide greater protection for the aged and the chronically ill in relation to the cost of nursing home carethe Government has decided to take over full responsibility for the payment of nursing home benefits. The amendments to the National Health Act provided for in Part III of the Bill, together with complementary amendments to the Nursing Homes Assistance Act, will give effect to this decision. They will operate from 1 September 1981.
Since 1 October 1977 registered hospital benefits organisations have been required to pay, as part of basic hospital insurance, all nursing home benefits for their members. These benefits payable by the funds are equivalent in level to the benefits the Commonwealth pays for all patients in nursing homes who are not insured. The Government has decided that this arrangement is unsatisfactory for two principal reasons, namely: Nursing home patients are, in the strict sense, uninsurable through voluntary insurance in which guarante~d benefits without discrimination or exclusions are made mandatory; and the arrangement represents an inequitable liability for the bulk of people with hospital insurance. The Government believes that this decision will ensure a more equitable distribution of the cost of Commonwealth assistance to those in need of nursing home care. The Government also believes that this measure will further assist in containing the cost of health insurance.
The Government will also be providing additional protection for people receiving nursing home care by new provisions more clearly to prevent nursing homes from imposing a levy or compulsory additional charge on patients. Regrettably some nursing homes attempt to circumvent the present fee control arrangements by such measures. This practice will be prevented by clause 45. I would add that the great bulk of nursing homes do not attempt to pursue such practices, and these new provisions should in no way be taken as a reflection on the industry as a whole.
The Bill now before the House-by virtue of clause 59-also gives effect to the Government's decision to prohibit registered health benefit funds from operating optional benefit tables. These tables undermine the community rating principle under which the cost of health insurance is borne equally by contributors with such cover. The effect of this principle is to reduce the cost of

health insurance to the more needy sections of the community-such as the aged, the chronically ill and families with children. The operation of clause 59 will therefore strengthen the community rating principle. It will also simplify the present health insurance arrangements.
The Commonwealth fully acknowledges the important role of the private sector of the health care delivery system. The Government has received a number of submissions expressing concern at the financial problems facing private hospitals. It recognises that in the medium to longer term its overall health policy will assist in correcting this situation. However, immediate action is necessary to assist private hospitals in meeting the increased cost of servicing surgical beds. Surgical facilities in private hospitals should continue to be available to the community.
To achieve this goal a higher rate of subsidy-of $28 per day--is to be introduced for private hospital patients whose admission to hospital or subsequent treatment is primarily related to a surgical procedure. This is achieved by clause 20. The new subsidy will operate from the date the Bill receives royal assent. The existing bed day subsidy of $16 per day will be retained for non-surgical patients in private hospitals. It is proposed that the medical services in private hospitals that will attract the higher subsidy will be prescribed in regulations. The Bill also provides that the Minister for Health will have a discretionary power to review individual cases, and by regulation, to admit additional schedule items to the approved list.
The Bill now before the House contains a number of provisions related to the Isolated Patients' Travel and Accommodation Scheme, the Therapeutic Goods Act and several machinery matters. By virtue of clauses 41 to 44 inclusive, the IPTAAS Scheme is to be expanded in line with the Government's decision last year to include cleft lip and cleft palate patients under 22 years of age requiring orthodontic and associated treatment and other patients requiring specialist oral surgery. The extension of the scheme is to apply retrospectively from 1 January 1981 to coincide with the date of the inclusion of orthodontic treatment for cleft lip patients in the medical benefits schedule.
Part V of the Bill now before the House would amend the Therapeutic Goods Act. The amendments seek to keep Australia abreast with other developed countries and further exemplifies the Government's belief that it should have the capability of ensuring that the therapeutic goods available in Australia are safe, pure, potent and of

2920 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Health Acts Amendment Bm

good quality. Clause 72 of the Bill would amend the definition of therapeutic use to ensure that health care products and medical devices including contraceptive devices, pacemakers and artificial heart valves clearly come within the scope of the Act.
The Bill would also update the references to British publications which are the source of standards for goods for therapeutic use. Unless this is done, the standards upon which Australia has relied for so long would no'longer have effect. The Bill would authorise the Minister for Health to set standards by references to other published sources. Under the present legislation the means for obtaining essential information about the way biological products are made is not available. The Bill would provide a mechanism to allow the Commonwealth, when necessary, to seek information about the manufacture and testing of biological products. It will also 'provide a mechanism to regulate their release on to the market. As the need for a complete list of the medicines used in Australia has long been felt, the Bill would establish the national register of therapeutic goods and provide the power to acquire information regarding the composition of goods included in the register.
To safeguard the rights of manufacturers, the Bill will include appeal machinery. I draw the attention of honourable members to clause 85 which will provide for appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal against decisions of the Director-General that affect the commercial operations of a manufacturer. In addition, before the Director-General can seek information about medicinal preparations from a manufacturer for inclusion in the proposed register, those preparations must be declared by the regulations to be goods to which the register applies. The type of information must also be prescribed by the regulations. In this way the Parliament will have the opportunity to oversight the information which is being recorded. Similar arrangements will apply in relation to the expansion of the scope of the Therapeutic Goods Act. Before new health care products can be brought within its scope they must be prescribed.
The Bill also contains a number of clauses related to the rendering of pathology services. Clause 12 would correct an anomaly in relation to the assignment of benefits for pathology services. The Health Insurance Act now stipulates that in cases of bulk billing, a patient must assign his benefit at the time or after the service is provided. However, in the case of the majority of pathology services, the service is carried out sometime after a specimen is collected from the patient and the

pathologist has no face-to-face contact with the patient. The amendment will enable benefits to be assigned in advance of the actual rendering of the pathology service.
Clauses 9, 10, 28 and 34 to 37 inclusive of the Bill include a number of changes to the approved pathology practitioner provisions that were recommended by the pathology services working party. This working part was establis~ed by the Government in 1976 principally to review pathology arrangements and schedule fees and, benefits for pathology services. Its members included representatives from the Australian Medical Association, the Royal College of Pathologists of Australia, the Society of Pathologists in Private Practice, the Health Commission of New South Wales and Commonwealth departments.
Under the present arrangements medical practitioners requiring pathology tests to be performed must make their request in writing. The amendment in clause 9 will enable the Minister to approve requests in other forms so as to allow modern methods of data transmission to be used. In addition, the amendment would enable the Minister also to approve the use of alternative methods of modern storage media such as on microfilm and microfiche.
The effect of clause 10 is to require the Minister for Health to keep the Australian Medical Association informed in writing of any changes referred to the medical benefits advisory committee which involved variations to undertakings entered into by pathologists and for the Minister to be aware of the AMA comments before making such changes. The clause also provides for the AMA to be consulted ahead of the implementation of any recommendations by the medical benefits advisory committee which could lead to variations to undertakings.
Clause 28 sets out those practices which were regarded by the pathology services working party as being inconsistent with the generally accepted standards of professional conduct. The effect of this will be to reduce the incidence of the provision of unnecessary practices. In order to clarify for approved pathology practitioners those practices prohibited by clause 28 it will be necessary for them to enter into new undertakings with the Minister for Health. Clauses 34 to 37 provide for the transition from the present undertaking to the new undertaking to be carried out in an orderly fashion.
Other machinery or clarifying amendments that will be of interest to honourable members are as follows: Clause 60 would extend the provision~

Housing Assistance Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2921

in the National Health Act which presently permit the Minister to exempt an organisation from paying medical benefits for certain services also to cover benefits for hospitalisation in respect of these same services. The provision clearly defines the limits or exemptions and protects the rights of contributors who seek to transfer to another organisation because of the exemption.. Clause 47 will put beyond doubt that under section 43A of the National Health Act the Director-General may request the balance sheets and related statements of nursing homes, as well as other relevant accounts such as profit and loss statements.
Conclusion The Bill now before the House will give effect to the health policy changes I announced on 29 April 1981. The overriding aim of the Government's new health policy is to ensure that all Australians have access to high quality health care at a cost the individual and the community can afford. The Government believes that the most equitable and responsible means of achieving that goal is through a combination of special assistance schemes for those in genuine need and the fostering of private health insurance for other people. Honourable members should not lose sight of the fact that major Government subsidies, financed through the general taxation system, are provided to ensure that health insurance is available to the average family man at a reasonable cost. However, the Government rejects the concept of a tax financed universal health insurance scheme. The Government believes that such an approach to health financing does not contain sufficient inbuilt checks and balances designed to prevent overuse and abuses of the health care delivery system and, therefore, that such a system would inevitably lead to an increase in the overall cost of providing health services to the detriment of all taxpayers. Proper health care is vital to all Australians. But the Government's health policy must be both equitable and responsible. The Bill now before the House will achieve these dual goals. I commend the Bill to the House. Debate (onmotion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
HOUSING ASSISTANCE BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by MrMcVeigh:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr UREN (Reid) (9.29)-At the outset I want to protest and place on record my opposition to the Government's attitude in regard to the agreement under which the Commonwealth

will make money available to the States over the next five years for housing purposes. This Government is not even prepared to debate this matter when an allocation is made each year. The Government Whip, on behalf of the Government, told us that one hour will be allocated to debate on this legislation. This state of affairs shows the complete incompetence of the Government. The Parliament has been sitting for months. Opposition members have been waiting to debate issues. We on this side of the House want to debate legislation. Now an enormous amount of legislation is being introduced. I move:

That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:

this House is of the opinion that-

(I) the Bill should be withdrawn and redrafted because it fails to provide sufficient funds to meet the neglected housing needs of the Australian people and signals a further withdrawal by the Federal Government from its-
(a) responsibility to ensure, in co-operation with the States, Territories and local government, security of housing for all Australians, and
(b) direct responsibility for the housing of Aboriginal people;

(2) the Bill should provide-

(a) sufficient funds to housing authorities to ensure a significant reduction of the backlog on their waiting lists;

(b) sufficient funds to ensure a permanent reduction in the number of persons who are homeless or living in sub-standard accommodation;

(c) sufficient funds to allow the housing authorities to undertake a comprehensive survey of housing needs and the adequacy of the existing housing stock;

(d) sufficient funds to enable the housing authorities, in co-operation with the Commonwealth, to develop a strategy as part of overall urban and regional policy planning to ensure a social mix in housing estates as well as ensuring that public housing tenants have access to social and cultural amenities and job opportunities;

(e) sufficient funds to allow the housing authorities to expand and improve the stock of public housing while enabling them to continue an effective program of home ownership assistance for low and middle income earners;

(f) that the interest rates charged for home pur-

chase account 'on lent' to other lending

authorities should rise in line with capacity

to pay;

.

(g) that the rents of public housing tenants be related to capacity to pay and otherwise determined on an averaged cost-rent basis, and

(h) an adequate forward commitment of real funds to enable the States and Territories to properly plan their h,ousing programs, and

2922 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Housing Assistance Bill

(3) the opportunity should be provided for the Commonwealth Parliament to debate annually the appropriation to determine progress made in relation to the objectives of the Agreement.
The Housing Assistance Bill is a disgrace, a national scandal. It represents a further withdrawal of the Federal Government from its national responsibilities to ensure security of housing for all Australians. It is an intolerable withdrawal of its special responsibility to provide for the welfare of the Aboriginal people. It signals increases in hardship for the growing number of low and middle income earners. Further, it neglects the hundreds of thousands of people in need of housing security. Never before in the history of the Commonwealth and State Housing Agreement has the Federal Government given so little. Never before has the Federal Government been so mean and miserable. The new agreement is to last for at least five years, and this Bill will be debated for one hour. It will not even be reviewed during those five years. It cannot properly be called an agreement. It is an imposition. The Fraser Government has imposed on the States and individuals the burden of its misguided economic policies. This imposition represents a further transfer of public funds away from the needs of the people and towards the corporate sector.
This Government has singled out the housing sector, both private and public, but particularly the public sector, to bear the brunt of its regressive policies of transferring wealth away from the working people of Australia and their dependants. Next to unemployment, housing security is the most serious social problem in Australia. It is aggravated by the contractionary and regressive policies of the Fraser Government. The full extent of housing needs in Australia has been obscured by this Government's failure to provide regular detailed housing information. We are told that across Australia there are 80,000 families on the waiting lists of the housing authorities, but that is a real under-estimation of the real number of people in need of rental accommodation and home purchase assistance. In New South Wales alone, at the end of December 1980 over 36,000 families were on the New South Wales Housing Commission list. The New South Wales Minister of Housing has already made a clear statement that if the new Agreement goes through 40,000 families will be on the waiting list by the end of this year. Of course, the Agreement will be forced through by the Government with its numbers.
The Victorian Minister of Housing has estimated conservatively that at least 100,000 households are in need in that State. On the basis of the 1974-75 data, he has estimated that the

public housing stock in Victoria can cater for only 34 per cent of apparent needs. Since that time the number of people below the poverty line has increased as has the number of unemployed and homeless. The Victorian Housing Minister places due blame on the Federal Government's cutback in public sector housing outlays foJ' the deterioration in the Victorian housing position. Even the Victorian Government's irresponsible selling off of too large a proportion of its public housing stock has left it with mostly high rise units or houses in unsuitable areas. The waiting time in Victoria is some cases exceeds four years. It is a wonder that hundreds of thousands of people are not on the waiting list. People know that they hardly have a chance, no matter how long they wait. They know that what they will be offered probably will not be suitable for them in the long term.
Some 80,000 families on the waiting lists of the State public housing authorities around the country is an unacceptable number, but even that number does not indicate the full extent of the housing needs. Across Australia at present about 150,000 people are homeless. A quarter of a million people are living in caravans or temporary makeshift accommodation. In the city of Gladstone about one-quarter of the population is now living in caravans, and those figures do not take into account the new growth in Gladstone. They represent the backlog from the 1960s and 1970s. At the start of the so-called resource development about 25 per cent of people in Gladstone already are living in caravans and temporary accommodation. This will happen across the country wherever resource development occurs. People will live in squalor. This Government cannot and will not provide more detailed statistics, yet it will encourage the Department of Housing and Construction to develop a prototype of a mobile home, the size of a caravan, to be used to house workers and their families in the regions where resource development is taking place. Honourable members should have nO doubt that later the Government will put forward this type of accommodation as an alternative in our cities. Instead of providing decent public housing it will try to put people into temporary accommodation.
The problem of housing involves both the public and private sectors. Private rents are increasing beyond the means of the low income families, which are vulnerable to acute poverty as higher and higher proportions of their declining disposable incomes go in rent. I give one example, and I have witnessed this myself. In a terrace in the

Housing Assistance Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2923

inner city suburb of Stanmore in Sydney six rooms are rented for between $35 and $60 a week each. Most of the tenants are pensioners. The terrace has one toilet, with outside access for 10 people. Few of the rooms have hot running water. One male pensioner uses a methylated spirit lighter to cook his meals. The place has not been painted for 10 years. The ceiling leaks in a number of places and basic repairs have not been carried out despite the tenant's complaints. Unfortunately, this case is not an exception. There are thousands of over priced, overcrowded, sub-standard dwellings on the Sydney, Melbourne and Gladstone and other city rental markets.
A growing number of people have no choice but to accept what they can get. They dare not complain for fear they will be evicted. That is their problem. There are just too many people in fear they will be evicted if they complain and seek justice. It is not possible to get justice under this type of conservative government. it would not be difficult for me and for other members of the House to describe case by case moral neglect and exploitation in the private rental market. I am sure that if honourable members on the other side cared to look they would find case after case of intolerable hardship for pensioners, single parents, unemployed youth and other groups, but particularly for the young seeking homes. These people deserve more just and humane housing security.
Let us consider the home ownership side of the private housing market. After all this Government seems to be very proud that it is a government of private enterprise. This Government is content to parade figures from a few years back to show that the level of home ownership in Australia, by international standards, is high. The Government neglects to mention that home ownership is declining dramatically, particularly for people between the ages of 20 and 30 years. We have been given figures to suggest that the rate of lending for home purchase is increasing, but we are not told the whole truth. The rate of lending
of money to first home buyers is declining. An

increasing proportion of loans is going to people who already have homes and who arc seeking to renovate them, move into a higher priced home or acquire a second, third, fourth or fifth horne. We are not told of the effect of speculation in the housing market which is pushing up prices in the sought after areas of the capital cities, thus putting home ownership outside the reach of a growing number of people.
Some wealthy people are well housed. There are those smart people, who can afford to do it, who can get finance for a second home. They are paying high interest rates to get that second home, but in buying and renting out that second home they can get the interest rate as a tax deduction. Consequently, many people in Sydney, the smarties and the wealthy, instead of investing in gold are investing in real estate. People are suffering as a result because they cannot afford to pay the rent. This Government will not come clean about the factors which have increased the home loan interest rates which have been brought about by its obsession to hold down the domestic and public sector activities in order to allow the foreign corporations free rein in the Australian resource economy. The broad policies in the Australian resource economy are really the Achilles heel of this housing policy.
The Government is not prepared to face up to the fact that persons earning less than $15,000 a year-that accounts for around three-quarters of the people in the work force-cannot obtain sufficient funds to purchase a home. This Government will not face up to the fact that access to home ownership has declined from nine out of ten wage earners ten years ago to two out of ten wage earners today. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard several tables showing the levels of income required to service a housing loan of $30,000 at different interest rates and a deposit gap for home owners on average earnings trying to buy a home priced at $45,000, $55,000 and $65,000.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

- - - - - - -INCOME REQUIRED TO SERVICE A HOUSING LOAN OF $30,000

Termofloan

Interest rate

Monthly repayment

Weekly
income required
to service loan(a)

Propportion of
all male employees with
incomes less
than that required(b)

25 years 25 years 25 years 25 years

%

$

$

%

11.5

307.74

284

73.5

12.0

318.75

293

75.4

12.5

329.91

303

77.0

13.0

341.07

314

80.5

2924 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Housing Assistance Bill

Term of loan

Interest rate

"'--~----"--------

Propportion of

Weekly

all male

income employees with

required

incomes less

Monthly to service

than that

repayment

loan(a)

required(b)

30 years
30 years 30 years 30 years

%

$

$

%

1l.5

298.92

275

71.0

12.0

310.35

285

73.5

12.5

321.94

296

76.1

13.0

333.54

307

78.7

Notes: (a) assumes that maximum repayment does not exceed 25 per cent of gross weekly income. (b) based on weekly earnings distribution of all male employees, Australian Bureau of Statistics, Weekly Earnings Survey,
August 1980.

DEPOSIT GAPS FOR HOME BUYERS ON AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS FOR DIFFERENT HOUSE

PRICES AND HOUSING LOAN INTEREST RAT-E-S------------------

$

$

$

House price . Loan required (a)
Average weekly earnings (b)
Maximum allowable monthly repayment(c) Borrowinglimit(d)-
at 11. 5 per cent interest rates
at 12.5 per cent interest rate Depositgap(e)-
at 11. 5 per cent interest rate
at 12.5 per cent interest rate

45,000 40,500
277.70 298.50
30,140 27,970
10,360 12,530

55,000 49,500
277.70 298.50
30,140 27,970
19,360 21,530

65,000 58,500
277.70 298.50
30,140 27,970
28,360 30,530

Notes: (a) house price lc~s 10 per cent deposit.
(b) Australian Bureau of Statistics, seasonally adjusted, December 1980 (N.B. 70 per cent of all male employees have incomes less than average weekly earnings).
(c) assumes that maximum repayment does not exceed 25 per cent of gross weekly income and that term ofloan is 30 years. (d) maximum advance on borrowing capital.
(e) sum required by home buyer over and above deposit and first loan.

Mr UREN-I thank the House. The tables show that the person seeking a housing loan of
$30,000 over a 30-year term at 11 t per cent
interest rate requires a weekly income of $275. That excludes 71 per cent of the male work force in this country. With a one per cent increase to 12+ per cent-the rise likely under the policies of this Government-the weekly income required to service that loan would be $296 a week. That excludes 76 per cent of the male work force. It is shown that a person on average earnings who wishes to buy a house for $55,000, which is almost $30,000 below the medium price in Sydney, has a borrowing limit of $30,140. At an 1it per cent interest rate, that leaves a deposit gap of $19,360. If the interest rate is 12t per cent the deposit gap grows to $21,350. Where can a person find the remainder to make up that deposit gap? That is the impossible dream. That is the situation in regard to housing under private ownership in this country.
A couple could rely on their joint income to obtain a large loan or to secure a second mortgage of around 16 per cent and upwards. For most people such a decision would mean deferring a

family. For many it would involve a risk of overcommitment in the event of a partner losing a job. The point is that the pressures of the private home
ownership market are creating a higher demand
for rental accommodation. In the private rental market those on relatively high incomes are pushing the lower income tenants out as landlords see the opportunity to push up rents so that low income tenants are forced to grab what they can. As I have ~aid, we would see a much higher level of demand for public housing if there were sufficient suitable public housing stock available. The situation is similar to that existing in the labour market. If betler jobs were available the unemployment statistics would rise in the immediate term
as the hidden unemploment. Those too discouraged to worry about being included in the labour force statistics would come out of hiding. So it is in the public housing sector that present statistics underestimate by a factor of at least ten
the real number of people in this country waiting for homes. What has been the Government's re-
sponse? I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard several tables showing outlays by the Federal Government on housing since 1974-75.

Housing Assistance Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2925

Leave granted. The tables read as follows-
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OUTLAYS FOR ABORIGINAL HOUSING

current prices 1980-81 prices

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

$m

$m

43.4

80.9

43.4

70.3

40.9

58.5

35.0

46.4

39.7

49.3

65.8

72.7

62.4

62.4

less than 54.0

Source: Commonwealth Department of Aboriginal Affairs. Note: Constant prices derived from implicit price deflector, public gross fixed capital expenditure; assumes 10.5 per cent increase for 1980-81.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT GRANTS TO THE STATES AND NORTHERN TERRITORY FOR PENSIONERS AND OTHER PERSONS IN NEED

current prices 1980-81 prices

1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

$m
14.0 105.3 109.5 less than 54.0

$m
17.4 116.4 109.5 less than 54.0

Source: Statement No.3, Budget Paper No. I, 1977-8 to 1980-81 and tlousing Assistance Bill 1981 Second Reading Speech.

TOTAL FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO THE STATES

AND NORTHERN TERRITORY FOR HOUSING

AND ABORIGINAL HOUSING AND GRANTS FOR

PENSIONERS AND OTHER PERSONS IN NEED OF

-

HOUSING ASSISTANCE

Current prices

1980-81 prices

Real change on previous
year

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

$m
456.0 472.1 485.0 452.7 375.2 325.3 330.9 200.0

$m
849.5 764.8 693.6 599.8 465.6 359.5 330.9 200.0

%
-9.9 -9.3 -13.5 -22.4 -22.8 -8.0 -39.6

Source: Statement No.3, Budget Paper No.1, 1975-76 to 1980-81 and Housing Assistance Bill 1981 Second Reading Speech.

Note: Constant prices derived from implicit price deflector, public gross fixed capital expenditure; assumes 10.5 per cent increase for 1980-81.
Mr UREN-I thank the House. The tables bear close inspection. The Bill provides for a forward commitment in money terms, not in real terms, of $200m each year for the next five years in federal payments to the States and the Northern Territory for housing assistance. In today's prices, the real outlay on housing payments to the States and the Northern Territory, including Aboriginal housing, pensioner housing and assistance to other groups of people in need, equals $850m. In other words, taking the figures in real terms in 1974-75-the last full year Labor was in government-Labor made $850m available, and this Government is making $200m available this year. If we look at the inflation figure and take it as an average of 10 per cent over the next 5 years if the Government keeps this base rate of $200m then to get the same value the figure should be $292.8m at the end of the 5year term.
This Bill provides for less than one-quarter of the amount which Labor gave 5 years ago. The allocation will be eroded more and more by inflationary pressures under this Government. The Minister has told us that the allocation gives the States and the Northern Territory a chance to enable them properly to plan their housing programs. It gives them a forward commitment to increase stringency. It directs them to cut back on levels of housing services. It entices them to pull out of the Commonwealth-State Agreement. Let us consider some specifics. I was intrigued by the Minister's ignorance, if I may say so, in his statement on Tuesday, 26 May, in answer to a question by the honourable member for Bendigo (Mr Bourchier), the Government Whip, who professes to be very interested in housing. On behalf of the Government he has limited this housing debate to one hour. In effect the Minister said that claims of some States having to pay more back to the Commonwealth in capital and interest repayment than they were getting from the Commonwealth under this agreement were scurrilous. What are the facts? I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table showing the real net payments to the States for housing from 1974-75 to 1980-81.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

2926 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Housing Assistance Bill

Financial year 1974-75 1976-77 1978-79 1980-81 1974-75 1976-77 1978-79 1980-81 1974-75 1976-77 1978-79 1980-81 1974-75 1976-77 1978-79 1980-81 1974-75 1976-77 1978-79 1980-81 1974-75 1976-77 1978-79 1980-81 1974-75 1976-77 1978-79 1980-81

NET PAYMENTS TO THE STATES FOR HOUSING 1974-75 TO 1980-81 ($m constant 1980-81 prices)

Total Federal payments

State repayment
of advances

State repayment
of interest

Total State repayments

709.6 550.3 411.2 276.0
227.3
17~.2
136.4 92.3
180.5 144.5 106.9 67.9
103.9 82.5 60.9 38.2
69.1 52.5 38.6 27.9
80.6 56.6 42.5 33.9
48.1 34.9 25.9 15.8

Australia 34.7 34.7 37.9 35.6
New South Wales 12.3 12.2 13.2 12.3
Victoria 10.7 10.4 11.0 10.4
South Australia 4.3 4.5 5.0 4.8
Western Australia 3.1 3.1 3.3 3.2
Queensland 3.1 3.1 3.4 3.3
Tasmania 1.4 1.6 1.8 1.7

159.5 167.3 181.9 164.7 55.8 57.5 62.0 56.0 43.9 45.8 49.1 44.2 24.2 25.4 27.7 25.1 13.4 14.3 15.9 14.6 13.4 14.6 16.4 15.0
8.8 9.6 10.7 9.8

194.2 201.9 219.9 200.3
68.1 69.7 75.2 68.4
54.6 56.2 60.2 54.6
28.6 29.9 32.7 29.9
16.5 17.4 19.2 17.8
16.5 17.7 19.9 18.3
10.2 11.1 12.5 11.6

Net Federal payments
515.4 348.4 191.3 75.7
159.3 109.6 61.2 23.9
125.9 88.3 46.7 13.3 75.3 52.6 28.1 8.4
52.6 35.1 19.4 10.1
64.2 38.9 22.7 15.6 37.9 23.7 13.4 4.3

Mr UREN-I thank the House. The table net amount after both the interest repayment and the
capital repayment have been repaid. The net amount of Federal payments has fallen from $515min 1974-75to$75.7min 1980-81. This year
the States can use only one-seventh of the amount of funds that they had 6 years ago. This year the States are paying back $200.3m to the Commonwealth. A question was asked of the Minister by the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) this morning during Question Time. Because it was not a Dorothy Dix question the Minister could not answer. I had to take a point of order to say: 'You are only offering $200m a year
but, in fact, the States are paying $200.3m back to you'. Of course, this will continue each y, ear. The

housing situation is getting so bad that the Minister, like Pontius Pilate, wants to wash his hands of any of the real responsibilities for housing problems. In other words, what we are really looking at is a very acute position.
The $200m that has been made available this year will consist of $54m in a direct grant for Aboriginals and pensioners and $l46m of loan money. Next year, New South Wales will receive 31.1 per cent of the $146m of loan funds made available to the States and the Northern Territory; that is, $45m of which $32m will go to the Housing Commission of New South Wales and the remaining $13.5m to the building societies.

Housing Assistance Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2927

The New South Wales Housing Commission estimates that it will be paying back to the Commonwealth $56m in both interest and capital repayments. The New South Wales Government does not know how much of the $54m of grants for Aboriginal housing, pensioners and other persons in need it will receive next year. Under this Bill giving 'autonomy' to the States this is a matter for the Minister to determine on his assessment of need. How can the Minister make such an assessment when he does not have the necessary information? How can he argue that the States can plan their programs properly when they do not know what grants they will receive and whether they will receive topping up funds once the program is under way?
In South Australia the position is similar. South Australia will receive a 14.2 per cent share of the $146m loans, which is about $21m this year-a ~ut of over $4m on the previous year and about the same amount that South Australia will be paying back to the Commonwealth next year in interest repayments and capital repayments. South Australia has had a progressive housing policy under the Playford non-Labor Government and under Labor governments of building up its public housing stock. But that possibility in the future may well be undermined by the shift to per capita allocation of housing assistance which will erode the payments to South Australia even further. South Australia faces a future of falling Commonwealth payments and rising State repayments. It is the people of South Australia in need of housing assistance who truly will be the meat in the sandwich.
A special feature of this Bill is the inclusion of Aboriginal housing as a State responsibility. The Australian Government has reneged on its special responsibilities to the Aboriginal people and reduced the funds available for Aboriginal housing in real terms from approximately $81m in 1974-75 to less than $62.4m in 1980-81. Next year even less will be made available as only $54m is earmarked for special assistance. This includes not only Aboriginals but also pensioners and other groups in need. All will suffer as a result.
Public housing tenants will face further rent increases as the new agreement moves away from the inequitable concept of market related rents to the outrageous proposal for market rents in the public sector. In some magical way this Bill provides for a uniform national system of establishing market rents. How in heaven's name the Government can do that I do not know. The cost of housing differs so much from city to city and from State to State. In Victoria the sheltered group has

called this move a conspiracy against public housing tenants. It is a sad case of policy based on the backward theory that the tail wags the dog. In 1979 over 40 per cent of public housing tenants in Victoria were in rental arrears. The number has increased since. An increasing proportion are more than 10 weeks in arrears. The rate of increase in rental rebates exceeds the rate of increase in rents received in all States. The sad thing about this is that the people getting into arrears are facing insecurity and the fear that has been created because of the enormous debt burden thrown on them by the policies of this Government. Under these conditions the States have smaller rather than larger surpluses with which to finance public housing improvements and expansion. All the policy of market rents means is that the needy and the poor are subsidising the very poor and the very needy. There remains no evidence that middle income tenants have departed from public housing or that eligible low income earners have increased their entry into this area. All the evidence points to the increasing fear and insecurity on the part of public housing tenants-an effect which is contrary to the objective of providing housing security for people in need.
This Bill also provides for rental assistance to be given to private sector tenants. I say with due respect to those people that subsidising public housing rentals is no real solution. The major solution is that we have to make sure that we make more money available to build public sector housing so that form of rental is available. It represents a waste of public expenditures to invest taxpayers' monies in the pockets of existing multiple home owners without the public gaining any tangible return of the investment through an increase in the size and quality of public housing sector stock. Already we have seen the public housing sector reduced to a minimal proportion of the total housing stock in Australia. In 1974-75 public dwelling commencements totalled 19,000. In 1979-80 they were down to almost half that number at 10,500. The public housing sector is a crucial element that provides balance, stability and security in the housing market.
Labor is committed to increasing the access of people to private home ownership. We are clearly committed to that policy. If we can ever get a person on the first rung of the ladder to private home ownership we want to do that. In conclusion I say, as I said at the beginning, that this Bill is a disgrace. This Commonwealth and State Housing Agreement is a scandal. The next Federal Labor Government will renegotiate this agreement and create a new agreement. We will do that after we

2928 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

New Business after 11 p.m.

have discussions with the States. The only way we will really begin to solve the problem is by discussion between the national government and the States, the private sector and local government. That is the only way that we really can decide the great social problem of housing in this country.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mf Jarman)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Duffy-I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak.
Debate (on motion by Mr Chapman) adjourned.
NEW BUSINESS AFTER 11 P.M.: ADJOURNMENT OF THE HOUSE Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (10.0)-1 ask leave of the House to move:
That Standing Order 48A, adjournment of the House, and Standing Order 103, 11 o'clock rule, be suspended for this sitting.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)- Is leave granted?
Mr Uren-Before I give leave 1 ask whether there has been any discussion with the Manager of Opposition Business (Mr Lionel Bowen) on this issue.
Mr McVEIGH-I understand so. Mr Uren-It is news to me, Mr Deputy Speaker, that the Opposition ever agreed to the suspension of the 11 o'clock rule. Traditionally we have always opposed it. The fact of the matter is that earlier tonight I was arguing-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I do not want to stop the honourable member saying-Mr Uren-I am speaking against it. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Either leave is granted or it is not granted. Mr Uren-I am on a stall. I do not want to have a division. I do not want to waste the time of the House but I want to get the green light from the Manager of Opposition Business. 1 will not give an agreement to any Government member that we will suspend the 11 o'clock rule. This Government has made such a hell of a mess of its whole legislative program, It has been wasting time-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Chair is not in a position to allow the honourable member to speak. Mr Uren-What is the position? Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. The

Chair is not in a position to know what agreements are made but I feel quite sure that the debate will continue if leave is granted.

Mr Uren-I am waiting for a sign.

Mr Hurford-Leave is not granted. There has been no arrangement. There have been no negotiations.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Leave is not granted.

Mr McVEIGH-I move:

That Standing Order 48A, adjournment of the House, and Standing Order 103, 11 o'clock rule, be suspended for this sitting.

Mr UREN (Reid) (l0.3)-We oppose the suspension of the 11 o'clock rule. The Parliament has been sitting for weeks. We have been waiting for the Government to bring forward legislation so that we could debate that legislation. But because of the disunity and division within the Government ranks it has not been able to bring the legislation before the House, Therefore, we have had to wait around here and we have had to bring forward matters of public importance for discussion.

Motion (by Mr Bourcbier) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(MrDeputySpeaker-Mr A. W. Jarman)

Ayes

. 63

Noes

48

Majority

15

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. \V, Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Burr,M.A. Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D.M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher,P. S. (Tellor) Giles,G.O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom, RJ. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J.

Howard, J. W. Hunt,R.J.D.
Hyde,J.M.
Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C.
Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean,R.M. McVeigh,D. T. Millar, P. C. Moore, J. C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M.
Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey,C. W. Whit.,P.N.D.

Housing Assistance Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2929

AYES
Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Wilson, l. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham,B. T.
Darling, E. E.
Dawkins, J. S. Dulfy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Chari.. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLcay,Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, p, F. Morrison, W, L. Mountford, 1. G. Scholes, G. G. D. SC<ltt, 1. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T.
Wallis,L.G. West,S.J.
Willi',R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

HOUSING ASSISTANCE BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr CHAPMAN (Kingston) (10.10)-1 thank the Opposition for bringing so many honourable members into the House to listen to my remarks this evening, I certainly welcome this legislation, the Housing Assistance Bill 1981. The Bill is an affirmation that the present Federal Government consistently recognises those most in need and is always working to improve their situation, whether in regard to housing or other needs. It helps to provide housing to those who are unable or cannot afford to purchase their own homes. The Bill also strongly reinforces the Federal Government's policy of minimum interference in State government affairs. The majority of funds are provided by way of untied moneys. This is a positive demonstration of the Government's commitment to federalism.
I strongly reject the comments made earlier in this debate by the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren). They lacked both substance and logic. I recall the debate in 1978 on the Housing Assistance Bill 1978, which introduced the housing agreement that is due to expire on 30 June this year. That legislation gave effect to what was then a new three-year housing agreement. I took the

honourable member for Reid to task for his comments during that debate. His comments tonight show he has not learnt anything during the last three years. It is worthwhile referring briefly to that debate. The honourable member for Reid claimed that our 1978 legislation would not reduce the backlog of families waiting for housing commission or housing trust homes. The backlog was then around 100,000 homes. However, under that legislation, over the last three years of this Government's administration the backlog has been reduced to 85,000 homes. So the predictions of doom and gloom made by the honourable member for Reid were not fulfilled over that period. Therefore, the comments he has made this evening concerning this legislation should similarly be taken with a grain of salt.
In his remarks tonight, the honourable member for Reid claimed that no detailed information is provided concerning housing in Australia. But since 1978 this Government has ensured that an annual report on housing has been provided to the Parliament. Each year we have provided the most comprehensive report on welfare housing produced in Australia. He claimed that no provision was made for those who find themselves in a homeless situation. But the State housing authorities are able to provide urgently rental housing on a priority basis to those shown to be homeless.
The Australian Labor Party does not support the present Government's positive attitude to housing. It takes the view that the more money the Government spends the better off all members of the community will be, including those most in need. That is a complete fallacy. The experience of the last decade clearly shows that the great bulk of the community is better off if government spending, and therefore taxation, is kept to a minimum so that people are left to spend their own incomes according to their own preferences, free of bureaucratic interference.
Mr Porter-Hear, hear!
Dr Edwards--Hear, hear!
Mr CHAPMAN-I thank the honourable member for Barker and the honourable member for Berowra for their support. Government spending can then be directed to those in real need, who are unable to provide for themselves in any way. The detrimental impact of the housing policy of the Labor Party is reflected in its miserable record in the era it was in office. Housing interest rates soared as high as 11 per cent, which was a 4 per cent increase over the three years it was in office. In marked contrast, the Fraser Government has largely stabilised interest rates

2930 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Housing Assistance Bill

over the last three years, the highest rate being 12.5 per cent, an increase of only 1.5 per cent in the five years it has been in office. This compares with the 4 per cent increase during just three years that Labor was in office.
Under the Labor Administration, the cost of building materials rose by over 60 per cent. Waiting lists for welfare housing increased to 104,000 families. The Labor Party also discriminates very clearly against home ownership for single income families. In its policy for home ownership put to the people before the last election, it stated that a means test of only $16,000 would apply to single income families seeking assistance. However, the means test for two-income families would be $24,000. That is clear discrimination. A single income family with any number of children would not have been able to receive a grant if its total household income from that one breadwinner was over $16,000, but a family with two breadwinners would have been able to receive assistance, whether it had children or not, if its income was under $24,000. The honourable member for Reid has left the chamber, so his concern about housing, as I said earlier, can be taken with a grain of salt.
Mr Porter -He can't take it.
Mr CHAPMAN-He certainly cannot take it. The electorate quite correctly rejected such an iniquitous proposal with its resounding defeat of the Labor Party at the last election. I might ask whether the Labor Party has rethought its policy on those matters as a result of its defeat.
This Bill is the major instrument for the implementation of the present Government's welfare housing policy. The Commonwealth is providing $285m to the States and the Northern Territory for the purpose of welfare housing in 1980-81. The Commonwealth has also offered to guarantee to provide a base level of $1 ,000m over the five years from July 1981 to assist the States and the Northern Territory in the provision of welfare housing. Additional funds will be allocated each year under this proposed arrangement as part of normal budgetary procedures. So, contrary to the comments of the honourable member for Reid, the $200m to be provided each year is a minimum amount to be provided and not the maximum, as he perhaps would have had us believe. The Bill is an effective demonstration of the Fraser Government's commitment to the provision of adequate housing for the people of Australia and of encouraging the widest possible enjoyment of home ownership.
Mr Robert Brown-That is not so.

MI' CHAPMAN-It is so. Such a program of Government assistance as is provided in this Bill continues to be an important requirement. At the present time some 85,000 people or families throughout Australia are on the waiting list for government-funded rental accommodation. Of these, some 19,000 live in my own State of South Australia. However, the present Government has made significant progress in reducing the massive backlog which developed during the era of the Whitlam Labor Government. From a backlog of something less than 80,000 when the Labor Party came to office, the backlog soared to 104,000 when it left office. This was a direct result of its disastrous economic management, which had a dual effect. More people became dependent on welfare and the cost of housing soared. To reduce this backlog of 85,000 over five years is a creditable performance by this Government. Similarly, over the same period this Government has increased the stock of lettable government housing from 194,000 to 210,000. In South Australia the backlog of applications has been reduced from 23,000 to 19,000, while the stocks of lettable dwellings have increased from 38,000 to 42,000. Despite a continuing need, the Government's policies are commendable. This legislation will continue that favourable trend.
While encouraging home ownership, the Government recognises that there are those who, because of their circumstances, cannot afford to buy a house. However, some 72 per cent of homes are owned or are being purchased by their occupants. Australia has one of the highest levels of home ownership in the world. It used to be even higher. It is a tragedy that the percentage fell during the period that Labor was in office. The success of the Fraser Government in containing inflation and interest rates in comparison with the way they soared between 1972 and 1975, and also by way of current comparison with most industrialised countries around the world, has helped home ownership grow again. Over the last five years an extra 600,0000 Australian families have acquired their own homes.
Home ownership is a stabilising influence in the community, so it is vital that home purchase assistance be maintained and strengthened by this Government. The 1978 housing agreement was a progressive step forward towards this. When it expires in June, the new arrangements this Bill provides will be more beneficial to needy people than was the case before. Whether people are able to purchase their own homes or must continue to rent, the Government has an obligation to help them. The Fraser Government is fulfilling that obligation. With the proposed program's two-fold

Housing Assistance Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2931

purpose of a home purchase assistance program funds through private lending institutions. Once

and rental housing assistance program, needy again the Commonwealth will leave it up to the

people will have more chance of eventually States to determine lending practices-and their

attaining full home ownership.

flexibility, as well as repayment variations, in the

Obviously there are those people who would event of hardship.

prefer to rent accommodation because of age or As regards rental accommodation, the Fr.deral

special housing needs. Within the general group of Government in the 1978 agreement pursued an

needy people in our community, which this legisattitude of making States charge market related

lation assists, special assistance is provided for rents for public rental dwellings, with rental re-

disadvantaged groups. Aborigines, pensioners and bates for people unable to afford market related

invalids will benefit from the $54m a year which is rents. However, the new agreement offers a policy

earmarked for rental accommodation only. The of market rents instead of the market related rent

remainder of the $200m per annum-that is, policy required by the 1978 agreement. Income

$146m in advances-will either be applied for related rebates applied to market rents are the

rental or for home purchase at 4+ per cent per fairest deal for those people with housing needs.

annum which, it should be recognised, is some 8 As a result, under the 1978 agreement those who

per cent below the prevailing interest rates. This received rebates were often those in receipt of

compares more than favourably with the 2 per social security type benefits, such as widows, age

cent interest rate concession which the Labor or invalid pensioners and single parent families.

Government gave when it was in office and the 4 Also receiving benefits were those single income

per cent concession which the 1978 legislation two-parent families where income was at a low

provided. The honourable member for Reid delevel. This will continue under this legislation.

scribed this as a miserable contribution. I would However, the provision is that those whose cir-

suggest than an 8 per cent concession, as against a cumstances improve substantially will be subject

2 per cent concession, is a remarkable level of as to the payment of rents reflecting increased ca-

sistance. It should be emphasised, of course, that pacity to pay. Once again, the Government recog-

the States will be at liberty to allocate all those nises that it is necessary to concentrate on the

nqn-earmarked funds between rental housing asneeds of those who most warrant assistance. It is

sistance and home purchase in the proportion also significant that the aid given to those people

they determine as appropriate.

for home purchase is determined upon need.

Thus the Government has a progressive yet sensible approach to housing. It recognises that if we are to use the taxpayers' money, it must be used wisely and carefully. Most importantly, the Government's housing policy ensures that the

Under the 1978 agreement-in 1979-80 for

example-73 per cent of loans were made to

households with a total income of less than $239

per week. The new legislation continues that

approach.

.

taxpayers' money is directed to families in the The Bill further increases flexibility given to the

community in real need of help with their housStates and ensures that the objectives of the orig-

ing. But the Government is one which recognises inal 1978 housing agreement will not be altered.

the contribution of the individual to society. It The three new objectives in the current Bill are

strongly encourages home ownership, recognising also commendable in that they recognise the fed-

its benefits. If the individual is able to provide for eralist aims of this Government. In accordance

himself or herself, he or she should be encouraged with the aims of the International Year of Dis-

to do so. Whilst this Bill concentrates on welfare abled Persons, design, style and siting of public

and public housing, it is necessary to take note of housing will, as far as practicable, reflect the

the well being of the private housing sector. needs of handicapped people. States will also have

Ninety per cent of householders satisfy their housregard to energy savings which can be made by the

ing needs in the private sector. The private housdesign style and siting of the public housing. In ad-

ing market serves Australia well. I urge the dition, tenants in public housing will be

Government to continue to recognise that fact.

encouraged to become involved in public housing

As a part of aiding people to achieve home ownership it is noteworthy that the Government is making funds available through lending agencies at concessional interest rates. It is operating in

policy and in estate management. This provides a way to enable more individual involvement in determining how living conditions might be inspired directly by those living in public housing.

the market system to achieve its aim of optimum The 1981 agreement enacted by this legislation

home ownership. Australians who aspire to own will provide for sales of rental dwellings to ten-

their own homes will benefit from the concesants. It will also continue the policy of dwellings

sional rates and from the efficient disbursal of being sold for cash. With such a cash sale policy,

2932 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Housing Assistance Bill

States will be able to replace housing and maintain the levels of accommodation available for rental. People will be eligible to purchase houses and can apply for housing loans under the home purchase assistance program. Tenants who purchase houses will be rewarded if they make improvements to their properties because States will adjust the market value of dwellings accordingly.
In conclusion, the Bill will do much to help those on low incomes who are, therefore, in need of welfare rental housing or who desire to purchase their own homes but who are unable to afford to purchase on the open market. On that basis I strongly support the legislation.
Mr DUFFY (Holt) (1O.23)-The amendment moved by the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) goes to the heart of the problem of welfare housing in Australia. The Housing Assistance Bill does not provide sufficient funds to meet the neglected housing needs of the Australian people and signals further withdrawal by the Federal Government from its responsibility in this area. Federal expenditure on housing peaked in 1974-75, and real expenditure has been cut back each year since. As a result, public housing construction rates continue to decline and waiting lists and waiting times continue to increase. The problem is exacerbated by the inability of the private sector to assist, as indicated by a survey conducted by the Real Estate Institute of Australia this year which showed a high demand for private rental housing and flats, with low vacancy rates. The main features of the 1978-79 Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement and the present Bill are statements of principle, but the basic requirement of adequate funds has been ignored.
The statements by this Government that its policy is directed at giving scope for a wide range of innovations in policy and, in the words of the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) 'The current Bill increases the flexibility given to the States and continues the process of ensuring that assistance is directed to people in need' are absolute nonsense as those so called statements of principle are stated simultaneously with drastic cutbacks in funding. This, as was stated so clearly by the honourable member for Reid, is the core of the problem. The lack of appreciation by this Government of the grave problems in welfare housing is clearly demonstrated from the Victorian Liberal Party document 'Federalism-Is It Working?' There are two particularly relevant quotes from that document. Firstly, if one supports the need for restraint on government expenditure there is still the question why housing has been singled out to

receive such an unprecedented attack. Secondly, public housing is the only category to have suffered a fall in Commonwealth outlays in real terms. It is difficult to understand why this should occur, as housing directly stimulates the economy and provides capital works for the private sector. The Government has been slated in dramatic terms by a Victorian government of its own failed, outdated philosophy.
The facts must be spelled out in a plea to the Government to reverse its policy. On 26 March this year figures released by the Government showed that applications for rental accommodation in Australia through State authorities totalled 83,391 at 31 December 1980. This represented an increase of 11,479 over the 1978 figure and 10,927 over the 1979 figure. According to the Government's figures, the waiting list in Victoria was 13,861-an increase of 1,805 over the 1979 figure. To be more specific on the Victorian position, in 1980 the Westernport Regional Housing Council prepared a working paper for the Ministry of Housing. This research showed that in the Westernport area rental stocks of houses and flats totalled 2,045 for a population of 388,000-that is, rental houses and fiats as a percentage of population was 0.5 per cent. The consequences for the Westernport area have been devastating. The waiting list for 17 of 22 estates with family dwellings is indefinite; for two estates, three years; for a further two estates, one year; and the other estate is reserved for armed services. The waiting lists for 21 of 27 estates with elderly persons' dwellings are indefinite; for three estates, four years, and for the further three estates, 12 to 18 months.
This tragic situation is reflected in other specific areas in Victoria such as the Ministry of Housing figures for the Dandenong district where over 3,000 people are waiting for home purchase. There is a 4-year to 5-year wait for rental of a twobedroomed home, over 3 years for a threebedroomed home and 4 years to 5 years for a ground floor fiat. In April 1981 the Westernport Youth Refuge prepared a further submission to the Ministry of Housing. This allowed that in all the municipalities in the Westernport region a desperate need existed for housing for young people on low incomes. The submission concentrated On the two areas of greatest need-Dandenong and Frankston. The term 'youth homelessness' covers a wide range of needs, and the age of young people involved ranges from 14 to 25 years. The submission by the Westernport Youth Refuge focused on young people seeking long term individual accommodation. The emergency housing service which the refuge has been

Housing Assistance Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2933

forced to provide is having great difficulty in achieving a quick turnover of residents because there is no long term housing for them to move into. Stays of 9 to 12 weeks are becoming common, and these young people are in need of secure, low cost housing.
The facts outlined by me tonight clearly show a desperate need for welfare housing in Victoria for young people, those in the middle age group and the elderly. Unfortunately, it is necessary to spell out to this Government some specific case studies which were conducted by the Westernport Youth Refuge to emphasise the tragedy over which this Government and its Liberal counterpart in Victoria presided. Some examples from the Westernport Youth Refuge submission are as follows: Firstly, a 19-year-old girl left Tasmania to look for work. She went to stay with a family friend in Lang Lang. This is only a temporary home and is unsuitable in any case because of lack of public transport and employment opportunities. She would like to live by herself in a one-bedroomed flat or in a bungalow. Her income is $53 a week, and as she has been paying board she has no savings. Secondly, a 16 year-old unemployed male, forced to leave home, is receiving $36 a week. His weekly budget does not and could not leave any money over for rent. Thirdly, a 23-yearold male, sleeping in railway stations around Melbourne for 2 weeks prior to residing at the youth refuge, was not receiving benefits at that time but now receives $53 a week. Fourthly, a 20-year-old female living in Sydney decided to travel to Melbourne with a male friend. She was living with him. She was forced to leave because he beat her. She went to the Commonwealth Employment Service and then to a local Community Youth Support Scheme and was referred to the refuge. She is planning to move into a two-bedroomed flat with a friend she met at the refuge. The refuge is being forced to pay the bond and the rent in advance because she cannot afford to do so. Fifthly, a 16-year-old female, forced to leave home after severe beatings from her father, arrived at the refuge with two black eyes and severe body bruising. Her sisters and mother had been subject to similar beatings over several years. She left home and her mother was sympathetic to the girl living in a private board situation. Once again, it is impossible for her to afford to do that.
These are actual case histories. Instead of the Federal Government making adequate finance available to the State of Victoria and the Victorian Government properly applying such funds, supplemented by its own funding, this human tragedy will continue. This must be the case with

reductions in funding by the Federal Government, coupled with the incompetence of the Victorian Government, clearly demonstrated by the appalling housing conditions in Victoria and highlighted by the commission of inquiry into the Victorian Housing Commission land deals. Instead of facing the issue, the Federal Minister for Housing and Construction and the State Minister have engaged in public abuse, the State Minister suggesting that the Federal Government should abolish the Department of Housing and sack its Minister. Not to be denied, the Federal Minister, in his reply, accused the State Minister of unwarranted Canberra bashing and unreasonable bellyaching. While the two Ministers engage in an argument about how much Victoria contributes to welfare housing, the people who are suffering are treated as pawns in the dispute. The shadow Minister for Housing in Victoria, Mr Ian Cathie, has requested both Ministers to justify their claims on the figures contributed by Victoria to welfare housing. Clearly both Ministers cannot be correct and the time has come to put up or shut up. We eagerly await their replies to Mr Cathie on this matter.
Never before in the history of Australia has a Federal government given so little to the crucial area of housing. This agreement fixes total Federal housing expenditure at $200m for each of the next five years. That figure, in itself, is bad enough but inflation will erode the real value of such funds year by year. The allocation of the same level of funding in money terms for each of the five years of the agreement guarantees that the real value of Commonwealth assistance will decline in each year of the agreement. Assuming an inflation rate of 10 per cent in each year of the Agreement, to maintain the same real value in 1985-86 the allocation for that year would have to be $292.8m. Under this agreement the amount from the Commonwealth in 1985-86 will remain at $200m, that is, only 70 per cent of what is needed to maintain real value using 1981-82 as the base year. In fact, by the next year some States will be paying more to the Commonwealth in capital and interest than they will receive. Not only are Australians facing insecurity in employment but, because of the policies of this mean and miserable Government, they are also faced with the tragedy of an appalling lack of housing for those most in need. The answer to the question 'Federalism-is It Working?' is clearly no. This is an issue which even the Victorian Liberal Party is capable of understanding. This Government has proved itself incapable of developing a housing policy.

2934 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Housing Assistance Bill

It has been necessary to go through those matters very quickly because of the time allocated for this debate. Any government that seriously puts a Bill such as this before the House and then allows the amount of time to debate it that it has allowed, when one considers that the Bill involves a housing agreement for the next five years, is guilty of a contemptible performance and clearly indicates its contempt for people in desperate need in the area of housing.
Mr EWEN CAMERON (Indi) (10.34) The Housing Assistance Bill endorses the concept that welfare housing should promote the principles of energy conservation and concern for the every day needs of handicapped persons living in that housing. It is to these particular aspects of the legislation that I would like to address my remarks. In the International Year of Disabled Persons it is fitting indeed that this Government should pay particular attention to the needs of the disabled. There are 1.4 million people in Australia who suffer some form of disability affecting their mobility. Many of these people are occupants of welfare housing, and it is to this group that the innovations encouraged by this legislation are relevant. People who are handicapped but mobile, using wheelchairs or walking frames, or who suffer from bad arthritic conditions or other physical disabilities, have an important basic need for easy access to their home. Steps or stairs should not make access to the home or within the home too difficult. Ramps can be used instead of steps. This provision would also benefit mothers and children with pushers and prams. Rooms should be easily accessible, doors should be wide enough for wheelchairs to pass through and multiple level and high rise buildings should be discouraged when we are providing housing for the handicapped. People in wheelchairs or using walking frames require ready access to public transport. It is most important for public housing, whenever possible, to be conveniently sited near public transport and shopping centres.
Specific design characteristics in houses can greatly improve the standard of living for handicapped or disabled people. Light switches often create difficulties for the handicapped person. They should be placed at a suitable level and consist of a large rocker-type switch which could be operated by any appropriate limb, or part of a limb such as an elbow. Lower switch levels would also be useful for young children who find it very difficult to reach and operate the common type of light switch. Power points are usually located on skirting boards, making them very difficult to reach from a wheelchair, difficult for the aged to reach and almost impossible for a person using a

walking frame to reach. This difficulty could be easily overcome by raising power points to waist level, a simple and inexpensive change in any housing design. Cistern buttons and taps in bathrooms and toilets can cause difficulty for disabled people. They should be easily accessible and of careful design. Rails in bathrooms for the elderly and arthritic are a small additional attachment which could be installed in all houses.
The structural design of stoves is another area where simple changes could make a big difference to disabled persons. Usually stove controls are located at the rear of the stove and at a level which is too high for a person in a wheelchair to operate. The design and installation of a stove with controls at the front or side could overcome this inconvenience. Levers instead of knobs to operate doors would be a great advantage, especially for people disadvantaged by arthritis. A paralysed person is not usually able to turn a door knob; however, such a person is able to move a lever or push through a swinging door arrangement. Few of these design suggestions are expensive, and this legislation gives every encouragement for public housing authorities to implement them. Suitable access into and within houses will enable the disabled in our community to live in their own homes rather than face the possibility of having to move into special accommodation. Families will be able to remain together with full encouragement being given to disabled people to live as nearly as possible a normal life.
The second area in this Bill which I would like to discuss concerns measures to reduce energy consumption in housing. The second reading speech of the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) refers to the States having regard for energy savings which are appropriate in an energy conscious era. Public housing authorities have the responsibility for including cost efficient, energy-conscious features in their buildings or alternatively providing financial incentives to people who install energy saving devices. To facilitate this energy consciousness it is essential for occupants to be allowed maximum discretion over their own use of energy. They should be able to control thermostat settings or close off sections of the building which are not in use. That means that individual occupants would be responsible for the cost of energy consumed in their dwellings, thus encouraging more energy consciousness. This also supports the principle of the user paying for the services provided.
Siting and site planning are important parts of the total concept of energy conservation. Trees and plants should be planted to provide maximum shade during hot summer conditions

Housing Assistance Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2935

and minimum shade during cool winter conditions. To illustrate this point, deciduous vines planted on the northern and western sides of a house provide shade and protection from the sun during the hot summer whilst in the winter, with the loss of foliage, the house is allowed the benefit of the winter sun. In cool climates buildings should be set back from the northern site boundary so as to minimise overshadowing from trees, buildings and other structures on adjacent sites. Buildings designed for temperate climates should have the long elevation of the building facing in a northerly direction. Large glass areas facing north allow for the sun to warm the house in winter and can be protected from the hot summer sun by blinds or other means. It is desirable to plan living rooms and kitchens to be on the northern side so that they receive maximum benefit from the winter sun. The ideal house should have a large amount of its living area facing north with a great deal of natural light entering the house through large windows.
Insulation is another area of house construction which deserves special consideration by public housing authorities. Appropriate ceiling and wall insulation retains warmth in the winter and helps keep the house interior cool in the summer. It is an added cost in construction but the benefits in terms of energy savings far outweigh the initial cost. Floors constructed of concrete provide better insulation and allow for heat retention and, when covered with a heavy carpet or rug, play an important part in maintaining an even temperature throughout the dwelling. Windows fitted with opaque, closely woven, close fitting drapes or blinds help to retain heat in the house during the winter and provide protection from the summer sun.
Consideration should be given to the provision of cost and energy efficient appliances such as solar hot water units. If housing authorities avoid the installation of heating appliances which rely solely on petroleum based fuels cost savings are achieved and the limited reserves of fossil fuels are conserved. These few suggestions give some indication of the possibilities that exist to conserve energy if sensible planning is employed in housing design. All dwellings in Australia should be looked at in terms of conserving energy. It is particularly significant that the Commonwealth Government in its assistance to welfare housing through legislation places so much emphasis on the disadvantaged person and the conservation of energy. I commend the Bill to the House.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (l0.42)-Over the last few Budgets the Federal Government has effected a redistribution of housing subsidies away from

lower income groups. It has introduced matching arrangements to cover up its withdrawal from public housing expenditure. If we look at the Federal allocations for public housing in all States over recent years we will see that $400m was allocated in 1977-78; $330m in 1978-79; and $260m in 1979-80. In 1980-81 the amount went up to $285m but in that year for the first time an amount for the Northern Territory was included. In 1981-82 we see a further reduction to $200m. Worse still, we are debating a 5-year agreement. The Parliament should debate this important issue annually and should provide a forward commitment of real funds so that the States can plan their housing programs instead of having this stop-go racket. This legislation makes a mockery of the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh), who in his second reading speech on the 1981 Housing Assistance Bill said:
OUf policy is to ensure that every household in Australia is able to obtain adequate housing within its capacity to pay.
This takes one back to 1977 when the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) stated:
Once the election is over, we will start to move to the consummation of a 2 per cent reduction in interest rates-and that means about $500 a year to someone on an average home loan.
We are aware of what happened to interest rates. They continue to go up. Our expectation in respect of a policy which will ensure that every household in Australia obtains adequate housing is certainly going down.
The poverty inquiry established that 25 per cent of one's income should be the maximum allowed for rent in order for families to meet their costs adequately. What is there in the 1981 Bill of the Minister for Housing and Construction which will help families to overcome the problem of high rents, high interest and the resultant misery from inadequate housing? Where is the provision for families on low incomes to buy their own home? I tell the Minister for his information that the average cost of renting a housing in the Melbourne surburbs of Northcote, Blackburn, Windsor, Oakleigh, Frankston-in fact every suburb in Melbourne; I would think this situation is probably duplicated throughout every State in Australia-is between $60 and $70 a week. So families are paying between 45 per cent and 52 per cent of their income in rent in the private sector, not the 25 per cent as recommended by Professor Henderson. It is estimated by Shelter, a group in Victoria, that there are at least three times as many households with incomes below the poverty line living in private rented houses as there are in total Victoria Housing Commission rental dwellings. The $200m provided in this Bill

2936 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Housing Assistance Bill

will not do anything even to touch this tremendous gap. There is a crisis in public housing in Victoria which I am sure applies in other States. Public housing rental units in Victoria in 1980 numbered just over 40,000. In the same period Department of Social Security figures showed that 95,241 Victorian pensioners were receiving the $5 a week supplementary rent allowanceand that is a pitiful amount. A further 89,960 people were benefit recipients not eligible for rent assistance but obviously on very low incomes. Many pensioners and beneficiaries therefore must be renting in the private sector, which further indicates that public rental houses and fiats are in desperately short supply. All in all, about 145,201 people need low cost housing in Victoria alone. A real increase was needed to subsidise low cost housing. Once again, the Government has opted out of the public sector as it does consistently.
Those renting in the private sector who are already on or below the poverty line are further disadvantaged by the high rents. There are no figures available on the number of families on low wages who are also in need of low rent housing. This is probably the greatest social problem of the 1980s. The demand for low cost housing is increasing at a time when the Federal Government is trying to get out from under all or any responsibility to the people of Australia, not just in housing but in health and education as well. It is doing so under the guise of fine words-I quote the Minister-such as:
The States will have complete freedom of choice in allocating all untied advances and grants between home purchase and rental housing assistance.
What choice do they have when they are starved of money? What hypocrisy the Minister speaks. On page 3 of the Minister's second reading speech we see that money for Aboriginal housing will be integrated into the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. We all know that this is just one more way in which the Federal Government opts out of its responsibilities. The attitude of the Federal Government is: Pass it over to the States and forget it. Perhaps the Minister hopes the problem will go away just as the Government hopes that the problems of community health centres, the women's refuges and the rape crisis centres will go away. I support the amendment moved by the honourable member for Reid (Mr Dren) which states that the Commonwealth must take direct responsibility for the housing of Aboriginal people. No one can say that this Minister lacks humour. On the second page of his second reading speech he said:
. the design, style and siting of public housing will . . . reflect the needs of the handicapped. This

objective is particularly appropriate in this International Year of Disabled Persons . . .
Does the Minister not know that disabled persons are still waiting for the $700,000 that the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) has been talking about for the past nine months? This amount is to be used, among other things, to modify their homes. They know, as we on this side of the House know, that they cannot have any faith in promises from this Government. Government members seem to feel that if they mention the International Year of Disabled Persons they have done their share. It is all words and not action.
Low and moderate income earners in Victoria are facing a housing crisis and high rents are forcing many of them into financial difficulties. This is exacerbated by the growing incidence of homelessness among youth. The Victorian Housing Commission is in need of substantial new allocations of funds to assist the large numbers of people who are unable to find adequate accommodation in the private rental market. I would also say it is in need of a new Minister and some new administration so that the funds that are available can be allocated where they are needed and not disbursed on such scandals as we had over the land deals some years ago.
The present waiting list for public housing is long. Yet there is a great underestimation of the need. Housing officers can attest to the great number of people in dire housing need who do not apply to the Commission because the housing that is available is not appropriate to their needs, be-' cause of the long delays in obtaining it, because of the enormous distances that would be involved in travelling to and from work daily or because mostly high rise housing is available. Who wants to bring up one's children in high rise fiats? Because of the severe Budget cuts, the amount of housing provided over past years has been greatly reduced. The Budget cuts must be reversed if the urgent housing needs of the people are to be met. In fact, I suggest that the public housing sector has to be stabilised and given, by this Government, the type of attention it got during the three years of the Whitlam Government, when the needs of the people on low incomes and the dreams of the people of Australia of owning their own homes were recognised by a government which believed in Australia for the people.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (lO.SO)-Since the Second World War the Federal Government has awarded money to the States for welfare housing. In 1978 we saw an agreement which was to last for three years. That agreement had a number of anti-social features. The agreement which has been put forward in 1981 is even worse than the

Housing Assistance Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2937

1978 agreement, and it is expected to last another five years. The financial cuts imposed upon the States in the area of welfare housing are savage and unprincipled. They are in line with the general anti-social attack of this Government upon the poor and upon people who are not able to afford private housing. Since 1975, when $371m was made available, the situation has deteriorated. Last year only $276m was made available. The Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) has now told us that the Government will make available only $200m as a base payment. The situation is even worse when we take into account the effects of inflation and repayments from the States to the Federal Government.
Firstly, let us look at the effects of inflation. When we convert to 1981 prices, we find a steady and constant deterioration in Federal funds to the States for public housing. In 1975, $584m was provided. I will not read out all the figures, but in each year, in 1981 prices, there was a fall in real terms. In 1978, only $411m was provided; in 1979, $296m was provided; in 1980, $276m was provided. The base payment next financial year will be $200m. The Minister has said that interest rates, repayment provisions and terms are fairly generous. An interest rate of 4.5 per cent over a period of 53 years in low interest advances for rental assistance, home purchase assistance, and now a rental subsidy in the private sector is fairly generous. Of course, the Minister neglected to say that those terms should be generous. Nevertheless, even though the terms are generous, the repayment provisions affect the situation adversely. As Federal assistance declines in monetary terms, the responsibility of the States to repay previous loans increases. In 1974, $515m was made available to the States on a net basis. The amount fell to $191m in 1978. It decreased further to the extremely meagre sum of $75.7m in 1980. The breakdown of the figure for 1980 indicates that the total payment was $276m, repayment for advances was $35.6m, repayment of interest was $164.7m, and total repayments were a massive $200m. In effect, only $75.7m out of the sum of $276m was made available to the States.
Mr Milton-Shameful.
Mr WEST-It is shameful, I agree. In 1974 total repayments were only 27 per cent of the total made available to the States and 73 per cent was actually spent in the area of public housing. Today that position has exactly reversed. Of the payments made to the States, 73 per cent has to be repaid to finance previous debts. The Minister said that this year from the base payment of $200m $54m will be available for disadvantaged

persons such as pensioners and Aboriginals and $146m will be available for housing assistance fqr other people. That is the sum that has to be repaid.
I refer to the Aboriginal situation. The Minister said in his second reading speech that, from now, grants to the States for Aboriginal housing will be integrated into the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. We learn that $54m has been earmarked for Aboriginals, pensioners and other disadvantaged people. I put on the record, as someone who went into this area fairly deeply when I had shadow ministerial responsibility, that the Department of Aboriginal Affairs last year made $22m available for grants-in-aid to Aboriginal housing associations, $10m in State grants and $7.3m for Aboriginal hostels, a total of $39.3n:i. This was a cut of 43 per cent in real terms since 1975-76, but a further $22.1m was earmarked for Aboriginal housing from the general welfare housing grant. This year what will the position be? I would like an answer from the Minister, who said that he would integrate State grants for Aboriginal housing into the general welfare hous" ing grants. I repeat that last year $lOm in State grants and $22m in welfare housing grants wa:;; made available for Aboriginal housing, a total of $32m, and $31m was made available for pensioners. In 1980-81 a total of $63m was made available to the States for housing for Aboriginals and pensioners. Next financial year the figure will be $54m. Quite frankly, it needs to be at least $70m to be commensurate in real terms with the allocation made last year. I am very puzzled on this point. The Government needs to increase considerably the amount made available in top-up payments.
I hope I have demonstrated that these payments are completely unacceptable. The cuts are too great. They are despicably mean and they will contribute to unemployment. The Government acts in this way, firstly, for ideological reasons. It is committed to the so-called private sector. Secondly, the Government wishes to make cut-backs in Federal payments for the provision of social infrastructure to allow for the expansion of public financing of State infrastructure to provide the ports, power stations, railway lines, gas pipelines and so on to service the so-called resource development boom. Power stations alone in New South Wales and Victoria are supposed to require $10 billion, according to Commonwealth estimates, over the next seven or eight years. In New South Wales $2.7 billion is needed for three power stations in the Hunter Valley and in Victoria $3.2 billion is needed for the Loy Yang A and B power stations over the next five years. These massive

2938 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Housing Assistance Bill

sums will be borrowed mostly through the Loan Council. Yet this year, after taking repayments into account, the States will be given less than $70m to spend on public housing.
Let me refer to the position in boom centres like Gladstone. In Gladstone now 8,000 people out of a total of 24,000 people are living in caravans. New parks are booked out even before they are completed. I was in Gladstone recently. People are paying private residents to park their vans in backyards. No wonder that Housing Commission construction has fallen in this terrible

situation. For example, the cuts that have occurred, despite the need in places like Gladstone, must be taken into account. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table prepared by the Parliamentary Library showing the number of housing commission houses and fiats completed by State housing authorities year by year and State by State since 1950.
Leave granted.
The table read asjollows-

HOUSES AND FLATS COMPLETED BY STATE HOUSING AUTHORITIES

Year ended 30 June

New South Wales

Victoria

Queensland

South Australia

Western Australia

Tasmania

Total

1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1'964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

No.

%

No.

3,403 17.2 2,454

3,520 17.0 2,699

3,842 15.6 2,970

4,441 16.7 3,238

5,177 18.8 3,590

5,254 17.8 3,960

3,655 13.5 4,152

3,030 13.1 2,580

3,695 14.0 2,414

3,177 10.6 2,560

3,502 10.5 2,594

3,153 8.7 2,217

4,722 14.6 2,400

4,342 13.9 2,022

4,364 12.9 2,324

5,482 13.7 2,688

5,390 13.2 2,686

4,337 11.8 3,116

5,223 12.6 2,214

4,277 9.5 2,131

4,605

9.5 2,650

4,633

9.2 2,887

5,218 10.6 2,737

3,429 6.9 1,982

2,601

5.4 1,505

3,752 8.4 3,016

7,068 19.6 2,849

3,428 9.6 2,531

2,688 7.9 2,539

2,920 8.4 1,835

1,904 4.5 1,213

%

No.

%

No.

%

No.

% No.

%

15.5 1,013 10.7 1,782 36.3

992 27.5 312 10.8

12.5 1,230 11.9 3,059 45.5 1,288 23.6 620 15.8

12.1 2,076 17.5 3,118 40.4 1,173 17.3 752 18.7

14.7 2,314 21.7 4,126 45.9 1,595 19.8 566 17.0

16.1 2,105 23.1 3,555 46.6 2,270 30.0 467 17.7

16.1 2,047 24.9 3,268 44.0 2,955 32.4 475 18.8

17.4 1,754 23.1 3,238 41.5 2,436 29.2 579 20.9

12.2 1,912 25.9 3,140 42.3 1,191 22.1 541 18.9

10.7 1,504 19.6 3,032 38.0 1,417 22.3 458 17.6

9.9 1,781 20.1 3,142 35.8 1,206 19.9 410 15.1

9.9 1,452 14.6 3,174 33.1 1,072 17.1 430 16.1

8.4 1,746 16.5 3,314 32.3 1,327 20.7 469 17.6

lOA 2,006 19.9 3,250 33.4 1,408 22.2 492 19.3

8.4 1,798 18.3 2,891 28.0 1,883 26.0 531 20.4

8.6 1,876 17.1 2,858 24.9 1,979 23.1 555 20.7

8.5 1,744 12.8 3,317 25.8 1,836 19.8 586 21.4

8.8 1,702 11.6 3,247 26.6 2,153 24.2 544 21.9

9.7 1,643 10.1 3,228 29.8 1,611 16.1 595 20.2

6.5 1,716 10.5 2,375 26.9 1,403 11.5 699 19.3

5.8 1,678 9.8 1,898 21.8 1,717 10.5 604 19.7

6.8 1,703 9.9 1,712 16.9 2,190 11.2 536 15.9-

7.7 1,730 9.7 2,213 18.0 3,386 20.0 632 21.6

7.7 1,734 7.9 2,201 16.6 2,499 16.8 561 18.5

5.2 1,795

6.8 1,618 12.3 2,139 14.6 642 20.3

4.1 1,407

5.2 1,339 10.4 2,000 12.5 583 16.5

8.1 2,256 10.1 1,589 12.3 1,150 8.0 751 21.7

8.3 1,994 9.1 2,276 16.3 1,137 7.6 829 22.5

6.7 1,439

6.0 2,144 13.9 1,105

5.2 792 19.6

7.6 1,713

7.2 2,291 19.6 1,562

9.0 906 23.3

6.6

604 2.5 1,857 22.1

745 5.1 810 23.2

4.5

436

1.5 1,408 16.9

764 4.8 790 21.9

No.

%

9,956 17.6

12,416 18.1

13,931 17.5

16,280 20.5

17,164 22.3

17,959 22.0

15,814 20.4

12,394 18.4

12,520 i7.0

12,276 14.9

12,224 13.9

12,226 13.2

14,278 17.0

13,467 15.8

13,956 14.8

15,653 14.2

15,722 14.4

14,530 13.3

13,630 11.7

12,305 9.7

13,396 9.8

15,481 11.3

14,950 10.8

11,605 8.0

9;435 6.5

12,514 9.3

16,153 12.2

11,439 7.9

11,693 9.1

8,771

7.5

6,515 5.2

NOTES
1. Includes houses and flats built with (a) Housing Agreement monies and (b) other monies but excludes dwellings built (or purchased) with Home Builders' Account monies.
2. There is a break in the series at 1972-73. Figures up to and including 1972-73 include 'alterations and additions' to dwellings. 1973-74 and subseque.nt years refer to new dwellings only.
3. The total figure excludes the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory. 4. The percentages shown are the proportions of total houses and flats built in the respective State. Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service from information obtained from the Commonwealth and State Housing Departments Authorities.

Mr WESrI thank the House. Honourable members will see that the percentage of State housing commission dwelling completions as a percentage of total dwellings completed has fallen from 22 per cent in 1955 to 5.2 per cent in 1980. That is in total. In several States the position is far worse. As a percentage of total completions of houses and fiats, in Queensland the completion rate by the Housing Commission was only 1.5 per
cent. It was 4.5 per cent in New South Wales and 4.5 per cent in Victoria. It is no wonder that

80,000 families are on waiting lists in Australia for housing commission accommodation, despite the artifically reduced nature of the list due to the imposition of a severe means test for eligibility. People practically have to be pauperised before they are accepted for inclusion on the housing commission lists. There are 40,000 such people in New South Wales, including 1,700 people in my own electorate of Cunningham in the Illawarra. In New South Wales in 1980 there were only

Housing Assistance Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2939

1,900 completions which was 2.3 per cent of existing total stock in New South Wales. In 1979-80 18,000 people were admitted to the waiting list for homes and 9,800 people were allocated dwellings. Of course, many of these dwellings had already been erected for many years. There is little chance that these homeless and poorly housed people will get public housing or housing in the private sector under this Government.
Land and construction costs in the private sector are just too high in a situation of declining Federal finance to the States for public housing. In Sydney and my own town of Wollongong it is not possible even to look at a place for less than $70,000 or $80,000. Even a middle or high-middle income earner cannot afford that amount.
Mr MeVeigh--That is a State Government responsibility.
Mr WEST-It is this Government's responsibility. It is not only the State Government's responsibility but also the Federal Government's responsibility. What chance have these people got?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member will address the Chair.
Mr WEST-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. Perhaps the Minister will restrain himself from making inane interjections. What chance have people got of saving $80,000 for a modest threebedroom house, with interest rates from banks at 11 per cent or 12 per cent and interest rates for building society loans at 12 per cent to 13 per cent? People who are lucky enough to be able to afford and get the savings bank loan would have to pay $240 a month. With the high interest rates under this coalition on a loan of $30,000 a person would have to pay $240 a month. What chance have these people got? They would have to earn at least $1,000 a month before they qualified or were considered for a loan.
I want to mention some further matters and then I will conclude. I do not want to take up the time of the House for too much longer. I think I am entitled to raise these points seeing that it will be another five weary years before the Housing Agreement comes before the House again.
Mr Uren-We will do something about it in 1983.
Mr WEST--l am assured by my colleague the shadow Minister that we will do something about this tatty agreement in 1983 as a matter of priority. There are several matters in the Agreement itself that we are dissatisfied with. Firstly, I refer to the policy of market rents, with the system of special rebates. I ask: Who determines the market

that the Government forces the States to adhere to? The real estate agents? The shortage of housing itself is the main contributing factor. In effect this Government is contributing to the housing shortage by horrendous cuts in the public housing sector. When rents go up as a result of these cuts the Government demands that the States charge the new thus induced market rents. The Government then further allows the States in this Agreement to subsidise people forced to rent at these exorbitant rentals. It will finish up that not one single house will be built in the States. That further contributes to unemployment.
The Opposition urges that the amendment be passed forthwith by this House to ensure that adequate funds are allocated to the States for public housing including, and not forgetting, housing for pensioners and that the Commonwealth accept its responsibility to fund Aboriginal housing by Federal grants to Aboriginal housing associations and not to bureaucratic State organisations which do not know what the Aboriginal people want. In conclusion we demand that this Bill be withdrawn. This absolutely horrific Bill starves the States in the great area of public housing. The Opposition cannot tolerate the fact that this Agreement is to serve the needs of the States for the next five years. The Bill should be immediately withdrawn and redrafted to take into account those sentiments expressed by my colleague the shadow Minister.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (11.7)-In supporting the amendment to the Housing Assistance Bill moved by the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) I wish to draw attention to some matters which are of grave concern in my electorate and which are reflected in most other electorates in the outer suburbs of the capital cities of Australia. I have not much time so--
Mr Howe-It is outrageous too. It is a very important measure.
Mr MILTON-Indeed, as the honourable member said, the situation is outrageous. I have not time to go into the figures which I would like to have presented to the House. There has been a drastic cut in funds for housing resulting in appalling consequences for homeless people in the outer eastern region of Melbourne. Community workers in the region are experiencing great difficulties in satisfying the demands for accommodation, especially from single parent families and homeless youth. High rents and the limited amount of private accommodation available for rent in the region are forcing many low and moderate income earners into financial and housing difficulties. For unemployed youth the position is

2940 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Housing Assistance Bill

even more desperate. The chances of obtaining fiats in this area for all of these people are virtually nil. Most people seeking accommodation must look for houses to rent. This requires a $400 to $500 bond plus a $90 deposit for the electricity connection. For the young unemployed living on a pittance of $36 a week unemployment benefit such accommodation is completely unobtainable. I would like to refer to an example to demonstrate such circumstances, but that would take too long.
In consequence of these appalling policies the homeless are directing their anger against their local councils whereas their real enemies are the Liberal controlled State and Federal governments. Even the State housing Minister in Victoria has been so frustrated by the Commonwealth housing policy that he has called for the resignation of the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh). The Minister's only answer to the State housing Minister has been to suggest that the Victorian Government is ignoring its responsibilities to the poor and the needy. I agree with the Minister for Housing and Construction that the Liberal State Government of Victoria has placed the poor and needy at the bottom of its list of priorities. However, the fact cannot be escaped that the reduction in Commonwealth funds provided for welfare housing indicates that the Federal Government has also completely disregarded the problems of the homeless. The Age editorial of 19 May aptly described the recent slanging match between the Commonwealth and the Victorian housing Ministers. It stated:
Sometimes both sides of an argument are clearly wrong.
What is clear is that the 'user pays' philosophy of both Liberal led governments shows a callous disregard for poor and needy people. Another matter I wish to draw to the attention of the House tonight is the desperate financial situation which many home buyers in my electorate are facing. Over the past 15 months there has been a one per cent rise in interest rates, resulting in an increase of $60 a month in average mortgage payments for home buyers. Housing has been pushed into the commercial field. In consequence interest rates are rapidly escalating as financial institutions battle to win money from investors. The high costs of mortgage repayments have been forced on to the public by the Government's deregulation of bank interest rates. Four out of five residents in my electorate own or are purchasing their homes with the aid of mortgage agreements. Many have both first and second mortgages, the second mortgage being subject to very high interest rates. For some of my constituents there

has been a 25 per cent increase in mortgage repayments over the past 15 months. Their incomes are not sufficient to meet the additional costs. In consequence, they have been forced to place their homes on the market for sale. The responsibility for such desperate measures can be laid directly at the door of the Federal Government as a result of its irresponsible economic policies. Housing has to compete with resource projects and capital works programs for funds. There is a clear case for the introduction of a Commonwealth funded interest subsidy scheme for lower income familities.
Finally, I draw attention to the plight of women and children who suddenly find themselves homeless because of a breakup of marital relationships. In the vicinity of my electorate are located two women's refuges which carry out an excellent job in providing temporary accommodation for such homeless families. Unfortunately, there is virtually no welfare housing in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne. Because of their economic circumstances these women have to seek permanent accommodation through the Housing Commission. Thus, even if they are successful in reaching the top of the waiting list, they must then accept a high rise fiat, which social workers all agree is totally unsuitable for small children. What these homeless families need are welfare houses located within the outer suburban community. Only in such locations will they stand a chance of resuming a normal and meaningful life. As the amendment indicates, the Federal Government has a responsibility to provide sufficient funds to the States to ensure that the housing needs of these broken families are met.
While I am on my feet I would like to express my unqualified support for the demonstrations in King's Hall by representatives of the women's refuges. We are a people's House and this Government is treating--
Mr Ian Robinson-Shame on you.
Mr MILTON-It is shameful all right. We are a people's House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member is no longer being relevant to the Bill. I ask him to address himself to the Bill.
Mr MILTON-This is a people's House. This Government is treating the homeless people with a callous unprecedented indifference. It is fitting that their protest should be heard inside this chamber. I strongly support the proposed amendment, which if adopted will ensure that help is provided for home buyers on low incomes and the homeless in their present desperate circumstances.

Housing Assistance Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2941

Mr HOWE (Batman) (ll.13)-It is quite shameful that the Housing Assistance Bill, which covers five years of housing policy--

Motion (by Mr Hodges) proposed:

That the question be now put.

Mr Howe-It is shameful that five years of housing policy should be given a single hour of debate.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Batman will resume his seat.

Mr Howe-It is totally outrageous that in a Bill as important as this we have only one hour's time for debate within this House.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Batman.

Question put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

62

Noes

47

Majority

15

NOES
Cass,M.H, Charles, D, E, Child,J, Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E, E, Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M,J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. y, Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J, L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B,L, Humphreys, B, C, (TeIler) Hurford, C. J, Innes, U. E,

Kent, L. Klugman, R, E,
McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford,1. G, Scholes, G, G, D,
Scott, J, L. Theophanous, A, C, Uren, T. Wallis, L.G, West,S.], Willis,R,
Young, M, J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMllhon, Sir \Villiam Killen, P. J,

Campbell,G, Keating, P. 1. Kerin, J. C.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Question put:

That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr Uren's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

62

Noes

47

AYES
Adermann, A, E, Baume,M, E. Birney, R, J, Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J, M, Braithwaite, R, A, Brown,N,A, Burr,M,A,
Cadman, A. G, Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J, J, Chapman, H. G, p, Coleman, W. p, Connolly, D, M, Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J,D,M.
Edwards, H. R. Fife,W,C, Fisher, p, S, Giles, G, O'H. Good luck, B. J, Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N,J. Hodges, J, C, (Teller) Hodgman, W. M, Howard, J, W,

Armitage, J, L Beazley. K, C. Blewett, N, Bowen, Lionel Brown, John
Brown, Robert

NOES

Hunt, R, J, D, Hyde,J,M, Jarman, A. \V. Jull,D.F, Katter,R,C, Lloyd, B, Lusher, S, A. MacKellar, M, J. R. MacKenzie, A. J, (Teller) McLean, R, M, McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore, 1. C. Newman, K, E. O'Keefe, F, L Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C, Ruddock, p, M, Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P. D. Shipton, R F, Sinclair, J. McC, Spender, J, M, Street, A, A, T.mbling, G, E, J, Thompson, D, S, Tuckey, C, W. White, P. N, D, Wilson, J. B. C,
Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R, J,

Majority
AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume,M.E. Birney, R.]. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J, M, Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N. A. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A, G, Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,]. J. Chapman, H, G, p, Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D, M, Cowan,D,B, Dean, A. O. Dobie, J, D, M. Edwards, H. R. Fife, W,C, Fisher, p, S, Giles, G, O'H. Good luck, B. J, Groom, R. J. Hall, Steele Harris, G, McD. Hicks, W.O. Hodges, J, C, (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W,

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C, Blewett, N,
Bowen, Lionel

NOES

15
HUnt, R, J. D.
Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W. JuIl,D,F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B, Lusher, S. A, MaCKellar, M, J. R. MacKenzie, A, J. (Teller) McLean, R. M, McVeigh,D. T, Macphee, I. M. Moore,J,C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F, L. Peacock, A, S, Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M, E, Shack,P.D, Shipton, R, F, Sinclair, I.McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G, E. J, Thomson, D, S, Tuckey, C, W, White,P,N.D, Wilson, I. B. C,
Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry

2942 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Housing Assistance Bill

NOES
Brown, John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham,B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. I. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L Humphreys, B. C. (feller) Hurford, C. J. Innes,U.E.

Jones, Charles Kelly,R.I.
Kent,L. Klugman, R. E.
McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les
Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, I. G. Scholes, G. G. D.
Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wallis,L.G.
West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.L.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Killen,P.J.

Campbell,G.
Keating, P. J. Kerin,J.C.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Message received from the Administrator recommending appropriation announced.

In Committee

The BilL

Mr HOWE (Batman) (l1.27)-It is absolutely outrageous that the Housing Assistance Bill, which involves a five-year agreement-

Motion (by Mr Bourchier) put:

That the question be now put.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Han. Ian Robinson)

Ayes

60

Noes

47

Majority

Adermann, A. E. Baume, M.E. Birney, R. 1. Bourchier, I. W.
Bradfield, J. M.
Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, :Ewen Cameron, Tan Carlton, I. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P.
Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G,
Dobie, J. D. M.

AYES

13
Howard,J. W. Hyde,J.M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller) McLean, R. M. McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, J. M. Moore,I.e. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.

AYES
Edwards, H. R. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom, R. J. HaIl,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C.W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N.
Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E.

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo
McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F, Morrison; W. L Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D.
Scott,J. L. Theophanous, A. C.
Uren, T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J.
Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William
Killen,D.J.

Campbell.G. Keating, P. J. Kerin,J.C.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill agreed to.

Bill reported without amendments; report adopted.

Third Reading
Motion (by Mr McVeigh)-by leaveproposed:
That the Bill be now read a third time.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (11.35)-Mr Deputy Speaker--
Mr Bourchier-I move:
That the question be now put.
Mr Milton-The Bill is to apply for five years.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)Order! The honourable member for La Trobe will resume his seat.
Mr Milton-Therefore, it is very important for me to have the opportunity--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for La Trobe will--
Mr Milton-To say a few words to this Bill.

Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2943

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I warn the honourable member for La Trobe.
Opposition members intel'jectingMr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order. Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Speaker--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Reid will resume his seat. I remind honourable members that if they wilfully defy the request of the Chair, let alone the instructions of the Chair, they invite a consequence. The question is that the question be now put. All those of that opinion say aye, of the contrary no. I think the ayes have it.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The question is that the Bill be now read a third time.
Mr Uren-The noes have it. A division is required.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-It is the opinion of the Chair that the Opposition did not call for a division in the time that might reasonably be allowed. The question is that the Bill be now read a third time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a third time.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION (SEA DUMPING) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by MrThomson:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (11.38)-The Opposition, whilst believing that there must be some amendments, welcomes the introduction of the Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill to ratify the 1972 Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter. However, we question why it has taken eight years to ratify the decisions which Australia signed in 1973. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the definition of 'dumping' contained in that Convention.
Leave granted.
The definition read as jollows-
For the purposes of this Convention: 1. (a) "Dumping" means:
(i) any deliberate disposal at sea of wastes or other matter from vessels, aircraft, platforms or other man-made structures at sea;
(ii) any deliberate disposal at sea of vessels, aircraft, platforms or other man-made structures
at sea.
(b) "Dumping" does riot include:

(i) the disposal at sea of wastes or other matter incidental to, or derived from the normal operations of vessels, aircraft, platforms, or other man-made structures at sea and their equipment, other than wastes or other matter transported by or to vessels, aircraft, platforms or other man-made structures at sea, operating for the purpose of disposal of such matter or derived from.the treatment of such wastes or other matter on such vessels, aircraft, platforms or structures;
(ii) placement of matter for a purpose other than the mere disposal thereof, provided that such placement is not contrary to the aims of this Convention.
Mr WEST-I thank the House. A resolution made at the third consultation meeting in 1978 stated that incineration at sea was an interim measure for waste disposal pending development of environmentally better solutions and that the intention of the adoption of mandatory provisions for the control of incineration at sea is not to increase the amount of wastes incinerated at sea for which there are practical land-based methods. This point should be extended to all methods of waste disposal at sea. It is not the ideal receptacle for all wastes. We must examine alternative waste disposal methods, increased recycling of wastes, and more efficient resource utilisation. Whilst there have not been many horror stories on the results of dumping of toxic chemicals into the sea from ships, there have been many examples of shore-based dumping into the ocean, most notable being the dumping of mercury into the sea off Minamata Bay in Japan. The residents ate fish and other marine life that was heavily contaminated with mercury. A~ a result the acute mercury poisoning from which they suffered became known as Minamata Disease. By April 1977, 1,076 residents of Minamata were certified victims of the disease and 3,000 others were awaiting examination.
Needless to say mercury, as well as cadmiumanother environmental poison which became publicly prominent from massive health problems in Japanese waters-are both in Annex I and are totally prohibited from being disposed of in the ocean. Other metals such as arsenic and zinc are in Annex II and will require special permits for dumping. The zinc contaminated oysters of the Derwent Estuary in Tasmania gained notoriety early in the 1970s when one was analysed and found to contain 26,000 parts per million of zinc. It should be noted that the Electrolytic Zinc Co. of (Australasia) Ltd is the only company in Australia regularly to dump wastes into the sea-in 1,500 metres of water south of Hobart to be precise. It would like to move, no doubt, to shallower waters for cost reasons. Toxicity tests, which are being carried out for that company on

2944 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill

its wastes, are being done in the United States, on an American species of fish, not those normally found in the dump area. Any research carried out to determine the suitability of the application for dumping permits should be relevant to Australian conditions.
This legislation will apply to all vessels, platforms and planes in Australian waters and to all Australian vessels and planes in any part of the sea. Of course the definition 'Australian waters' means territorial seas, that is, three miles seawards from a given base line. Dumping or incineration of certain substances is prohibited whilst the disposal of other toxic materials needs a special permit and disposal of an other types of material requires a general dumping permit. I think it is important that we get details of the prohibited list on the record. I ask for permission of the House for Annex I of the Convention, which bans dumping of substances such as mercury, cadmium and high level radioactive wastes into the sea, to be incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The Annex read as follows-
ANNEX I
1. Organohalogen compounds.
2. Mercury and mercury compounds.
3. Cadmium and cadmium compounds.
4. Persistent plastics and other persistent synthetic materials, for example, netting and ropes, which may float or may remain in suspension in the sea in such a manner as to interfere materially with fishing, navigation or other legitimate uses of the sea.
5. Crude oil, fuel oil, heavy diesel oil, and lubricating oils, hydraulic fluids, and any mixtures containing any of these, taken on board for the purpose of dumping.
6. High-level radio-active wastes or other high-level radioactive matter, defined on public health, biological or other grounds, by the competent international body in this field, at present the International Atomic Energy Agency, as unsuitable for dumping at sea.
7. Materials in whatever form (e.g. solids, liquids, semiliquids, gases or in a living state) produced for biological and chemical warefare.
8. The preceding paragraphs of this Annex do not apply to substances which are rapidly rendered harmless by physical, chemical or biological processes in the sea provided they do not:
(i) make edible marine organisms unpalatable, or
(ii) endanger human health or that of domestic animals.
The consultative procedure provided for under Article XIV should be followed by a Party if there is doubt about the harmlessness of the substance.
9. This Annex does not apply to wastes or other materials (e.g. sewage sludges and dredged spoils) containing the matters referred to in paragraphs 1-5 above as trace contaminants. Such wastes shall be subject to the provisions of Annexes IT and III as appropriate.

Mr WEST-I thank the House. A second list requiring special permits includes substances such as arsenic, lead, zinc and so on and low level radioactive wastes. I seek the leave of the House for Annex II to be incorporated in Hansard.

Leave granted.

The document read as follows-

ANNEX II

The following substances and materials requiring special care are listed for the purposes of Article VI (1) (a).

A. Wastes containing significant amounts of the matters lis ted below:

arsenic lead copper
zinc

and their compounds

organosilicon compounds
cyanides fluorides

pesticides and their by-products not covered in Annex I.

B. In the issue of permits for the dumping oflarge quantities of acids and alkalis, consideration shall be given to the possible presence in such wastes of the substances listed in paragraph
A and to the following additional substances:

beryllium
chromium nickel vanadium

and their compounds

C. Containers, scrap metal and other bulky wastes liable to sink to the sea bottom which may present a serious obstacle to fishing or navigation.

D. Radio-active wastes or other radio-active matter not in-
cluded in Annex I. In the issue of permits for the dumping of this matter, the Contracting Parties should take full account of the recommendations of the competent international body in this field, at present the International Atomic Energy
Agency.

Mr WEST-I thank the House. We applaud the total ban placed on toxic substances such as mercury and high level radioactive wastes but question whether Annex II is tight enough. The Convention referred to in this Bill allow the dumping into the sea of materials such as arsenic and low and medium level radioactive wastes. We do not and will not accept this practice.

Mr Ian Robinson-What about the black lace? Does that go with it? I like your coat.

Mr WEST-The honourable member does not know what this is all about. I can see by the look on his face that he would dump anything into the sea. The Convention referred to in this Bill allows the dumping into the sea of materials such as arsenic and low and medium level radioactive wastes. I repeat that we do not and will not accept this practice. There are two other main areas of concern. The Bill, as I will show, does not adequately cover dumping by other nations on our continental shelf. For the benefit of honourable members opposite, I mention that this will be a bit

Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2945

complicated when I get into it. Clause 9 provides for the States to pass mirror legislation if they so wish and to assume full responsibility for enforcing the laws of an international convention. This reflects just one more consequential inanity arising from the off-shore sellout legislation of May 1980 as amended last week, wherein the States rule the waves, and under them too for that matter, as far as the 3-mile limit or the territorial sea. We see this off-shore package not as a milestone in co-operative federalism but as a miserable hotchpotch involving increased and bigger government administration of every law concerning the continental shelf and any further laws the Federal Government may wish to enact. How many more Bills will it pass where it will invite the States to mirror the legislation? It is unnecessary, complicated big government from a Government that professes to be believers in smaller government.
I will now examine various clauses in this legislation and foreshadow some amendments to be moved in the Committee stage. Clause 3 repeals the Beaches, Fishing Grounds and Sea Routes Protection Act 1932-61 which allows for regulation of discharge of normal shipboard waste, a type of waste specifically not covered by the Convention and the legislation. The Government should now seek to control discharge of such wastes by other legislation. Clause 5 excludes coverage of disposal of wastes from off-shore mining.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-I am reluctant to interrupt the honourable gentleman, but it may be timely to remind him and the House for that matter that the second reading debate addresses itself to the principles of the Bill. Specific references to clauses should be made in Committee when each clause is before the Committee. Perhaps we can be jointly accommodated if the honourable member for Cunningham makes reference to the matters contained within the clauses but does not identify or refer to them in specific terms as clauses.

code there is no common environmental code between the States, and disposal of mining wastes mayor may not be properly regulated. When the Coastal Waters (State Powers) Act is proclaimed, part of the Fraser sell-out of the High Court decision for control over the territorial sea-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will refer to the Prime Minister as such.
Mr WEST-I am sorry. Perhaps I should have said the Fraser Government sellout. When its control over territorial seas and waters falls to the States, the lack of precision and uniformity as applies to environmental assessment legislation on on-shore mining projects will be extended to cover mining on or under the sea floor. If this Federal Government is so keen to hand over its powers to the States it should at least ensure that the common mining code is extended to a common environmental code.
I am concerned also that the Bill allows for State legislation to be passed surrendering this Bill's jurisdiction over the States coastal waters. Such a situation will lead to eight pieces of legislation and the possibility of non-compliance by one of the States to the strict letter of the Convention. As I have noted, the Opposition feels that this situation will lead to unnecessary bureaucracy and should be scrapped. A number of clauses in the Bill describe offences under the Act and the penalties which can be levied for illegal dumping or incineration at sea. I wish specifically to refer to the matters raised in clauses 10 and 11. Clause lO states:
Where, otherwise than in accordance with a permit, any wastes or other matter-
This is very pertinent and absolutely central to my contribution-
(a) are, or is, dumped into Australian waters from any vessel or aircraft; or
(b) are, or is, dumped into any part of the sea from any Australian vessel, Australian aircraft or Australian platform,

Mr WEST-What I was trying to doMr Ruddock-Incorporate the whole lot. That way the speech will not be so long. Mr WEST-If the honourable member opposite wants to stop here all night I will comply with exactly what he is saying and go through the whole business again clause by clause in the Committee stage. I am concerned at a situation which excludes coverage of the disposal of wastes from off-shore mining operations. Whilst the Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill and Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill purport to have a common mining

the owner and the person in charge of the vessel, aircraft or platform and the owner of the wastes or other matter are each guilty of an offence against this section.
The effect of clauses lO, 11, 12 and so on is to require foreign ships registered with nations which are signatory to the Convention to acquire a permit from the Australian designated authority to dump in Australian waters; that is, the territorial sea for 3 miles. But the Bill only requires those ships to obtain a permit from their own designated authority before dumping on the Australian continental shelf outside the 3-mile territorial sea. Similarly, because of what is set out in clauses 10 and 11, foreign ships-I think the Minister for

2946 REPRESENTATIVES 2 June 1981

Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill

Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) will understand this-registered with nations not party to this Convention must, under the Convention rules, obtain an Australian permit to dump in our territorial sea. But, they are not under any control on the continental shelf outside the 3-mile zone. It is essential that all acts of dumpingwastes into the waters of the Australian continental shelf are regulated by Australian law. There is adequate precedent for Australia to assert its jurisdiction over dumping above the continental shelf. In 1972 at the London dumping convention Australia and New Zealand issued a joint statement which, in part, said:
It is the understanding of Australia and New Zealand that this Convention in no way detracts from the rights of a coastal State to take action in areas under its jurisdiction, and in particular from the rights of the coastal State to take action for the purpose of protecting the resources of its continental shelf.
We have asserted our sovereign rights over the continental shelf and have declared the 200-mile wide fishing zone. Article VII (1) 1 (c) of the Convention was intended to provide for coastal state jurisdiction in a zone adjacent to the coast. At the time, agreement on the extent of this zone could not be reached but Article 13 in the Convention on the Law of the Sea referred to this point. Articles 210 (5) and 216 (1) (a) of the draft Law of the Sea Convention, recognise the right of a coastal State to control dumping in waters above its continental shelf. Article 210 (5) states:
Dumping within the territorial sea and the exclusive economic zone or onto the continental shelf shall not be carried out without the express prior approval of the coastal State, which has the right to permit, regulate and control such dumping after due consideration of the matter with other States which by reason of their geographical situation may be adversely affected thereby.
Article 216 (1) states:
Laws and regulations adopted in accordance with this Convention and appJicable international rules and standards established through competent organisations or diplomatic conference for the prevention, reduction and control of pollution of the marine environment from dumping shall be enforced~
(a) by the coastal State with regard to dumping within its territorial sea or its exclusive economic zone or onto its continental shelf.
This is not a contentious issue. We have ;rlways argued strongly for this right. The delay in finalising the Law of the Sea Convention, directly attributable to the delaying tactics of the new United States Reagan Administration, should not prevent Australia from asserting jurisdiction over dumping on our continental shelf. It is a matter clearly consistent with the proposed Law of the Sea Convention as outlined in the articles I have read to this House. Only last week the Australian Government asserted this jurisdiction in making

its regulations regarding the Capricornia section of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park. The regulations prohibit the disposal of wastes in the sea from ships without permission from the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority in the Capricornia section, both within and beyond the territorial sea. Clearly the Government needs to protect our fisheries as well as the seabed, which we claim to be Australia's, from pollution resulting from sea dumping. There is no justification for not asserting jurisdiction over all dumping on Australia's continental shelf.
The Government projects a curious inconsistency when implementing legislation to control pollution of the sea. Its recent Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill bans oil discharge within 50 miles from land and then limits discharges to 60 litres per mile. Yet, under last week's amendments to the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act, oil exploration and drilling will be allowed 30 miles from the Great Barrier Reef, and probably a lot closer if the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) has his way. Under this legislation the Government will allow foreign ships to discharge arsenic, zinc, radioactive wastes and so on onto our continental shelf. So long as it is further than 3 miles from Australian shores it can be done, in the case of nonsignatory nations, without a permit from anyone and, in the case of fellow signatory nations, with a permit from their own designated authority. This Bill must be amended to extend Australian jurisdiction over all dumping at sea to the edge of our continental shelf.
I want now to refer to a provision in this Bill which deals with the, dumping of radioactive materials into the sea. There should be no such sea dumping of nuclear wastes and the relevant clause should be replaced with another clause which prohibits sea dumping of low and medium level radioactive waste as if they were listed in the same category as those substances in Annex 1 of the Convention. The Australian Labor Party is opposed to the dumping of any radioactive material into the world's oceans. This Government had a chance to prohibit this but it is showing its true colours andlooking to the day when it will bring nuclear power plants and enrichment plants to Australia and will be able to drop the consequent radioactive rubbish into the seas off Australia. Article IV sub-section 3 of the Conventionon the prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of W!}stes and Other Matter states:
No provision of this Convention is to be interpreted as preventing a Contracting Party from prohibiting, insofar as that Party is concerned, the dumping of wastes or other matter not mentioned in Annex I. That party shall notify such measures to the Organisation.

Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill

2 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2947

So, what I propose in the amendments I am foreshadowing are entirely feasible and acceptable to all nations that are signatories to this Convention. At present, only high level radioactive wastes, usually those wastes which come from the reactor cone or from the reprocessing of spent fuel, are listed in Annex 1 and are prohibited from being dumped into the ocean. Are we to follow Japan's lead? Japan is preparing to dump 45,000 barrels of radioactive waste into the Pacific north of the Mariania Islands. American scientists claim deep ocean currents and migrating marine life could spread accumulated radioactivity to both Japan and Micronesia. Clearly Australia is taking this line in not opposing sea dumping of radioactive wastes. In a letter written in answer to my representation to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, the Minister stated that Australian officials talking to the Japanese mission which came to Australia to placate fears about the dumping of radioactive wastes into the Pacific advised the mission that 'Australia considered it essential that the disposal of nuclear waste in any environment, and in particular the Pacific Ocean, should be undertaken only in compliance with the strictest safety measures and in full accordance with the relevant international agreements on the subject'. The Minister's letter is in answer to my representations regarding opposition to the dumping of Japanese nuclear waste in the seas off the Mariania Islands, and I seek leave to have it incorporated in Hansard.

Leave granted.

The document read as follows-

MINISTER

FOR

HOME AFFAIRS AND ENVIRONMENT
PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600

Dear Mr West,

21 May 1981

I refer to your personal representations of 6 February 1981
to the former Minister for Home Affairs .and Environment, the Hon. R. J. Ellicott, QC., M.P., on behalf of the Wollongong City Council and the Environmental Heritage Committee of Wollongong, Shellharbour and Kiama concerning the dumping of radioactive waste in the Pacific Ocean. I take
note of the views expressed.

The Australian Government has been informed that Japan intends to proceed on a trial basis with the dumping of lowl~vel nucle~r waste in the North Pacific in 1981. Japan has gIVen certam assurances that the dumping operation will be carried out under stringent safety and environmental controls as laid down by relevant international agreements.

Australia has made it clear that it is, opposed to the Pacific region becoming a dumping ground for the indiscriminate and uncontrolled disposal of nuclear waste. A Japanese technical
misSion, which visited South Pacific countries to explain Japan's proposed operation, held discussions with officials in
Canberra during August 1980. It was during these discussions that Australia's views on the matter were made known to the Japanese. Officials advised the Japanese mission that

Austr~lia consid.ered it essential that the disposal of nuclear waste 10 any enVIronment, and in particular the Pacific Ocean, should be undertaken only in compliance with the strictest safety measures and in full accordance with the relevant inter- !1~tional a%l'eements on the subject. Australia has taken a posItion to thIS effect at meetings of the South Pacific Forum.

Mr Stewart West, M.P., Member for Cunningham, Parliament House, CANBERRA, .A.C.T. 2600

Yours sincerely, IAN WILSON

Mr WEST-I thank the House. For those honourable members who did not follow the information in the letter, it said that Australia feels it is all right for the Japanese to dump their wastes in the ocean. Of course, the Japanese have been inadvertently doing so, close to home, from their own nuclear reactor at Tsuruga. The United States of America has dumped radioactive cannisters in the north-east Pacific from California to the ~awaiian Islands and up to Canada, and is looking to the seabed as a permanent resting place for its decommissioned nuclear submarines. I ask all honourable members on the other side of the House to consider the implications of nuclear waste being dumped into the oceans of Australia. This legislation is not being amended to prohibit dumping of all nuclear wastes in the oceans. It may be that honourable members opposite will not be affected. But have no doubt that future generations will be affected and will pay the price of the negligence. There is as yet no solution to the permanent disposal of radioactive wastes. There may never be. Perhaps the solution is physically and scientifically impossible. The oceans, therefore, must not be used as an alternative dump.

The Opposition supports this legislation but ~ill move amendments at the Committee stage to Improve and strengthen the Bill. It is unacceptable for the Australian Government to propose legislation 'which will allow the dumping of radioactive wastes into the sea. People over the centuries have used the oceans of the world as a sink for their wastes and poisons. They are now realising that it is not a bottomless pit in which rubbish can be dumped without any ill effect. Over 3,500 million years ago the seas spawned the first living cell from which all life on earthdinosaurs, mammals and, in the last mere 500,000 years, man himself-has evolved. In the last 50 to 100 years the seas have suffered more pollution directly attributable to human folly than they have suffered in all of the previous four billion years of their existence. The convention measures are supportable. But Australians and this House can give a further lead to the world by passing the Opposition amendments in the Committee stage of this Bill tonight.

2948 REPRESENTATIVES 2 and 3 June 1981 Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill

Wednesday, 3 June 1981
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (12.1 a.m.)-Mr Speaker--
Motion (by Mr Hodges) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
Clauses 1 to 3-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 4 (Interpretation).
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (12.3 a.m.)-I move:
(\) Clause 4, page 2, lines 27 to 33, omit the definition of "Australian waters", substitute the following definition:
" 'Australian waters' means-
(a) the territorial sea of Australia and any sea that is on the landward side of the territorial sea of Australia, other than any part of the sea that is within the limits of a State or of the Northern Territory; or
(b) the territorial sea of an external Territory and any sea that is on the landward side of that territorial sea,
and includes any area of sea that is declared by the regulations to be included in Australian waters for the purposes of this Act;".
A new definition of 'Australian waters' is provided for in the legislation. The seaward side of the territorial sea of Australia or of an external territory may be declared by regulation to be Australian waters for the purposes of the Bill. I want to point out that some reference was made in the second reading debate to the fact that certain dumping could take place beyond the outer boundary of the territorial sea. Australian vessels and aircraft which might seek to dump in or over the sea anywhere in the world will come under the legislation. The legislation also controls out to the outer edge of the continental shelf the dumping from an Australian platform.
The legislation restricts the capacity of foreign vessels to dump and requires the operation of this legislation out to the outer boundary of the territorial sea. Some concern was expressed by the Opposition during the second reading stage of the Bill about the fact that foreign vessels could dump between the outer boundary of the territorial sea and the outer edge of the continental shelf. Firstly, I want to draw the attention of the Committee to the fact that the ships and aircraft of the 41 countries that are parties to the London dumping convention would not be permitted to dump in that area unless they had the permission of their own governments under legislation which complied with the convention. It is understood that under the present accepted international law,

nations which are parties to the London dumping convention are required to legislate in the form of the Bill which is now before the Committee.
There could come a time when the circumstances will change and, as a result of very difficult negotiations, a new international law of the sea regime will operate. Recognising that circumstances may change, the Government proposes that a new definition be added to the Bill as originally introduced so that the Bill may be expanded by regulation to cover the dumping operations of foreign vessels and aircraft in the area between the outer edge of the territorial sea and the outer edge of the continental shelf. I am aware that the Opposition is proposing to move an amendment under which the legislation would cover right out to the outer edge of the continental shelf. I can indicate at this stage that the Government is not prepared to accept that amendment. However, it is responding to the concern that has been expressed by changing the definition in the Bill to enable adjustment to be made by regulation to extend at some later stage the operation of the legislation beyond the edge of the territorial sea in relation to foreign vessels and aircraft.
Amendment agreed to.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (12.8 a.m.)-Clause 4 deals with a number of definitions which clearly identify what this Bill applies to. Perhaps one of the most important of these is the description of the convention which Australia is implementing. We welcome the ratification of another international convention. This gives me the opportunity to make the criticism that one of the problems members of national parliaments have is keeping in touch with international conventions that have been ratified and implemented by their parliaments. The Executive Government holds such conventions pretty close to its collective chest. It is very difficult for us to know what response there has been to conventions, such as the one involved in this Bill, which are decided in international forums. One of the matters raised at a weekly meeting of an informal group of parliamentarians attending the United Nations, which I chaired, referred to conventions such as the one before us. Mention was made of the difficulties that members of national parliaments have in finding out what national governments were doing about conventions. Each year the United Nations produces an account of conventions which have been ratified and conventions which have yet to be ratified by various countries. The
list is a long one. The delays in ratification of conventions are long. Yet parliamentary consciousness of their existence is abysmally low and public awareness is practically nil. I think executive

Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill 2 and 3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2949

governments have a responsibility to improve this situation.
However, the definitions in this clause illustrate some of the problems that my colleague the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) has outlined so well. The ships of countries not party to the Convention can dump substances prohibited by the Convention outside Australia's territorial sea. The Australian permit as it applies to foreign ships, whether their countries are party to the Convention or not, is necessary for dumping only in Australia's territorial waters. Further, included in the details is the permitting of the dumping of low level or medium level radioactive waste. One can query the adequacy of this provision and express concern at the possible concentration of such substances through the ecological chain, with adverse effects at the end of the chain or even earlier.
It has been necessary to define the types of enforcement and monitoring procedures that will operate. It is obvious from the definition of an inspector that, whilst clause 26 provides for persons to be appointed as inspectors, members of the police force will be used. We know that the extent of Australia's coastline and territorial seas causes many problems of inspection and monitoring in other areas such as drug smuggling and illegal immigration. My colleague the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison) the other day raised the matter of defence. It is difficult to believe that the same sorts of problems will not arise here. I have no confidence that inspectors will be available in appropriate numbers or with appropriate facilities to enforce the proposals.
How will the permit which has to be granted operate? At the moment neither the Federal Government nor the State governments have effective information-gathering bodies giving a real picture of the volume or weight of the substances listed in Schedules 1 and 2 to this Bill; neither are their sources of production or storage details adequately known. We cannot provide adequately for the identification and disposal of substances on land in Australia, let alone at sea. What will the permit system involve? What will be its mechanics? What checking will there be? Will it be as simple to bypass the system as it is now to bypass the permit system for the disposal of hazardous wastes on land in the various States? We do not know how much has been done in regional efforts, which were referred to at the Stockholm Conference. Paragraph 86 (c) of the report of the Stockholm Conference refers to the need for regional efforts to bring all significant sources of pollution within the marine environment, including radioactive pollution from nuclear surface

ships and submarines and, in particular, in enclosed and semi-enclosed seas, under appropriate controls. It recommends the complete elimination of deliberate pollution of oil from ships. We have dealt with that matter before. How much progress has been made with this Convention in the regional sense, or are we acting in isolation? What negotiations have there been with countries such as New Zealand, the various Pacific Island nations, Papua New Guinea, Indonesia, and so on? Has that task been effectively carried out?
In the same area, there should be national control over land-based sources of marine pollution, to which my colleague referred. Do we place too much emphasis on the fact that we are an island continent? Have we effectively checked land base sources or do they hold the possibility of a concentration in an ecological chain that I referred to previously? Earlier I referred to the problem of information about the source of production of toxic substances, their storage in Australia and the lack of effective and up to date data. Yet in Stockholm so many years ago this matter was referred to quite bluntly and clearly. I quote paragraph 87 of the Stockholm conference report, which states:
It is recommended that Governments:
Provide to the UN, FAO and UNCTAD, as appropriate to the data-gathering activities of each, statistics on the production and use of toxic or dangerous substances that are potential marine pollutants, especially if they are persistent; . . .
From an inquiry that the Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation is carrying out, it is obvious that the data on the source of production, the volumes, the weights and where they are stored, are thoroughly inadequate; just as the method of by-passing the permit system is so simple in any State. To talk about the permit system here without adequate provision being made for inspectors or for monitoring, will completely beg the question. If we are to be fair dinkum about it we also have to consider that part of the London dumping convention is included in this Bill. Schedule 1, Annex III, C, 4 states:
The practical availability of alternative land-based methods of treatment, disposal or elimination, or of treatment to render the matter less harmful for dumping at sea.
I want to ensure that this will not be forgotten. It would be tragic if the implementation of the Convention which this Bill carries out was to be used as a device to excuse the Australian Government from action along these lines. Yet what mechanism exists to carry it out? In the matter of waste disposal in Australia, the cry is predominantly: 'Land fill, land fill, land fill'. If the waste is the least bit unpleasant, the Government says it must be dumped out of sight. State governments cannot

2950 REPRESENTATIVES 2 and 3 June 1981 EnvironmentProtection(SeaDumping)BilI

handle it. I remind honourable members of the controversy about using the Darghile forest as a toxic waste dump in Victoria, which was abandoned, and of the present public agitation over the toxic waste site suggested at Avalon.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Clause, as amended, agreed to. Clauses 5 to 8-by leave-taken together, and agreed to. Clause 9 (Declaration by Minister in relation to coastal waters of a State, et cetera) . Mr WEST (Cunningham) (12.18 a.m.)-The Opposition opposes clause 9. I do not want to take up too much time on this because in my speech at the second reading stage, I outlined in a broad sense many of the reasons for these amendments. Obviously, the reason why clause 9 should go is that the Government has been foolish enough to betray our national heritage and to betray the histor~c decision of the High Court of Australia, WhiCh ruled that the Commonwealth had power over the seas and what lay beneath them from the low water mark to the edge of the continental shelf. It followed that the Government made that historic sell out deal with the State Premiers, cul~ minating in the passing of that so-called off-shore package on 1 May last year. I am sorry to say that all State Premiers and governments collaborated against the High Court decision after 10 years of Australian Labor Party struggle on this matter. As a result of all that has transpired we have all the problems that now arise in Queensland in regard to the declaration of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park. Mr Bjelke-Petersen and his Government can see that if they can only frustrate the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) about the declaration of the Park and the Cairns section, the Coastal Waters (State Powers) Act 1980 will be declared. It provides for possibly at least 3 miles out to sea for a given base line. At that time the Minister will be in all sorts of trouble because the State Government will continue to say that the boundary of the Marine Park ought to be at least 3 miles out to sea rather than the low water mark so it can have control of all the coast along Queensland and perhaps allow oil drilling there. These are some of the problems that have arisen from that historic sellout of May Day 12 months ago. Just because the Government did that does not mean that every time legislation that has something to do with off-shore matters comes up in this House the Government has to continue this folly and say: 'Let us mirror the legislation

now even though it is about the ratification of an international convention on dumping at sea', Why the devil do we have to mirror that sort of thing which is clearly a national responsibility? Why do we say to the States: 'If you deal with the legislation we will get out of the area altogether and rely on you to police it'? The international convention of London on dumping at sea does not expect the Federal Government to say to the States: 'Here is the Bill. If you say you will police our international obligations we will get out of the area altogether and forget it'. That is not the position as it should be at all in regard to clause 9. Clause 9 should go. I urge the Government to vote for my amendment.
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (12.23 a.m.)-I draw the attention of the Committee to the point that this is an historic Bill implementing an historic agreement which is a demonstration of cooperative federalism. It demonstrates that the States and the Commonwealth can reach an agreement to bring into operation a regime of law which protects coastal waters and enables the States to exercise control in certain ways subject to the terms of the agreement entered into. The control of marine pollution through dumping and the ratification of the London dumping convention has been the subject of detailed discussions with the States and the Northern Territory as part of the overall discussions on off-shore arrangements. In line with the general provisions of the off-shore constitutional settlement to give each State powers with respect to adjacent territorial sea it was agreed that the Commonwealth legislation would apply in respect of dumping outside the territorial sea and that it would also apply in respect of dumping inside the territorial sea if the State does not wish to legislate.
Time will tell whether any State or whether all States wish to legislate. If they wish to legislate their legislation will apply, but it will apply only so long as the legislation complies with the London dumping convention. What this Parliament is doing is legislating to cover all the seas from low water mark to the limits that we have discussed in earlier debate on this Bill. Clause 9 gives effect to' the arrangements entered into between the Commonwealth and the States. It is for the States to determine whether, for their own purposes, they wish to legislate. Their legislation must comply with the conditions of the London dumping convention otherwise the Commonwealth legislation will be brought into effect again.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (12.25 a.m.)-I ask the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) a very simple and blunt question.

Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill 2 and 3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2951

There is a contradiction between international law and municipal law. I think the Committee ought to address itself to the following question: Irrespective of agreements between the States and the Commonwealth, is the .Commonwealth in fact responsible for the implementation of the agreement in compliance with the London convention on dumping? I assume that it is, because international jurisdiction does not recognise States per se. It recognises a State in the sense of the Commonwealth of Australia. That is the conflict between the two sections ofIaw.

Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (12.26 a.m.)-It is recognised in international law that States in an international sense often have a Federal system of government. There is acceptance and understanding of the manner in which Federal clauses can be involved in the implementation of international conventions. Having said that, I emphasise that the Federal legislation will operate to comply with the London dumping convention and that legislation will be pushed back, as it were, only if the State legislation itself complies with that convention. Otherwise, the Commonwealth's legislation will move back to the low water mark, as it will do when this Bill first comes into operation.

Question put:

That the clause be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes

61

Noes

46

Majority

15

Adermann, A. E. Baume,M.E.
Birney, R. J. BourchierI J, W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A,
Brown,N.A.
Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron. Ewen Cameron, Ian
Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M.
Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S.
Good luck, B. J. Groom,R,J. Hall,Steel. Harris, G. MeD.

AYES

Hyde,J.M. larman.A. W. lull. D. F. Katter. R. C. Lloyd.B. Lusher. S. A. MacKellar. M. I. R. -MacK~e. A. J. (Teller)
McLean. R. M. McVeigh,D. T. Macphee,!. M.
Moore, J. e.
Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S, Porter, J. R.
Robinson, Ian Rocher, A, C. Ruddock. p, M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P, D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender,J. M. Street, A: A. Tamb\ing, O. E. J.
Thomson, D. S.

AYES
Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D.
Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkin., J. S. DutTy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Froe,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. I.

Innes, U. E. Jacobi,R. Jenkin., H. A. lohnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J.
Kent,L. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J, L.
Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Killen,D.J.
Nixon,P.J.

Campbell,G. Keating,P.J. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Clauses 10to 17-by leave-taken together.

Mr WEST (Cunningham) (12.32 a.m.)-by leave-I move:

(2) Clause 10, page 5, line 5, at the beginning of the clause insert 'Subject to section 22,'.

(3) Clause 10, page 5, lines 7 and 8, omit paragraph (a), substitute the following paragraph:

'(a) are, or is, dumped into Australian waters or into the sea above the continental shelf of Australia or of an external Territory from any vessel, platform or aircraft; or'.

(4) Clause 11, page S,line 16, after 'waters' insert 'or into the sea above the continental shelf of Australia or of an external Territory'.

(5) Clause 12, page 5, sub-clause (I), at the beginning of the sub-clause insert 'Subject to section 22,'.

(6) Clause 12, page 5,lines 28-30, omit paragraph (a), substitute the following paragraph:

'(a) is loaded on any vessel, platform or aircraft in Australia or in Australian waters or in the sea above the continental shelf of Australia or of an external Territory for the purpose of being dumped into the sea or being incinerated at sea; or'.

(7) Clause 12, page 5,line 31, omit 'or Australian aircraft', substitute ',Australian aircraft or Australian platform'.

(8) Clause 14, page 6, sub-clause (I), at the beginning of the sub-clause insert 'Subject to ~ction 22, '.

(9) Clause 14, page 6,line 14, omit paragraph (a), substitute the following paragraph:

2952 REPRESENTATIVES 2 and 3 June 1981 Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill

'(a) a vessel or platform in Australian waters or in the sea above the continental shelf of Australia or of an external Territory;'.
(10) Clause 17, page 8, line 40, at the end of paragraph (b) add 'or in the sea above the continental shelf of Australia or of an external Territory'.
Clause 10, which is the key to all this, states:
Where, otherwise than in accordance with a permit, any wastes or other matter-
(a) are, or is, dumped into Australian waters from any vessel or aircraft; or
(b) are, or is, dumped into any part of the sea from any Australian vessel, Australian aircraft or Australian platform . . .
I move the amendments to this clause because the effects of the clause are abundantly clear. Even ships of foreign nations which are signatories to the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter only need an Australian permit from our designated authority to dump in territorial waters, that is, within three miles from a base line. Once they get outside that area they only require a permit from their own designated authority. That means a ship from France, the United States of America or any other nation could dump, according to its own permit system, four or five miles off the Australian coast. The situation is even worse for ships registered in a port of a foreign nation that is not a signatory to this Convention because outside the 3-mile limit they do not need a permit from anyone. They can simply dump what they like.
This Government has, as I have said, a curious ambivalence when it comes to controlling our offshore waters. It finds no contradiction at all in moving amendments to the Seas and Submerged Lands Act which claim one million square miles of territory in the Coral Sea to the outermost edge of the continental shelf, not for the purpose of preventing dumping at sea by foreign ships but for the purpose of issuing oil exploration permits and, if oil is found, drilling licences, and then we are told by the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) that he will protect the Great Barrier Reef by not giving a commitment to drill within 30 miles of it. Thanks for nothing! The point with regard to clause 10 is that we find no difficulties whatsoever in claiming the sea out to the continental shelf for fishing purposes, or oil drilling, but when it comes to asserting our national sovereignty as far as preventing the dumping of waste is concerned the Government is not interested.
I conclude by saying, as I outlined in the debate on the motion for the second reading of this Bill, that there is absolutely no contradiction in what I am proposing and what is proposed in the draft law of the sea. If it were not for the belligerence of the incoming Reagan Administration, which

jammed up this draft at the last possible moment, as outlined by one of my colleagues the other day, perhaps we would already have a clause to back up my assertion that this Government ought to be claiming that this Convention law operates to the outermost edge of the continental shelf. I am fully aware that the Minister has foreshadowed an amendment to clause 41 that, in effect, picks up and accepts what I am saying. Later he will say that an amendment to clause 41 will set out that the Government can do in future by regulation exactly what I am proposing tonight when it suits
its purpose.
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (12.38 a.m.)-It is not true to say that the Government is not interested in this question of the responsibilities of foreign ships and aircraft beyond the outer boundary of the territorial sea. The amendment assumes that the draft law of the sea is the law of the sea. It is not yet the law of the sea and this legislation takes account of the international law as it is today. The main purpose of this Bill is to enable Australia to control marine pollution through dumping and incineration by giving effect to the London dumping convention. The intention of the Bill is not to assert to the maximum permissible degree the right of Australia to control dumping and incineration by foreign vessels beyond our territorial
waters.
The assertion of such jurisdiction raises issues not directly connected with the convention but which relate to the larger question of coastal state jurisdiction over the sea and seabed and the current state of development of the Law of the Sea. Any assertion by Australia of dumping jurisdiction over foreign vessels beyond the territorial sea could be challenged at international law as the extent of the outer limits of the Australian continental shelf for the purposes of the 1958 convention on the continental shelf is not a matter that can be regarded as free from controversy. It should be noted that whilst the 1958 convention on the continental shelf recognises certain rights of coastal states over the continental shelf, namely the right to control the exploration and exploitation of the resources of the continental shelf, it expressly preserves the 'high seas' status of superjacent waters. It is a potentially controversial question whether and in what circumstances the exercise of a claimed high seas right by foreign vessels would be subject to control by the coastal state under the 1958 convention. It is therefore considered by the Government that the proposed amendments to the definition of 'Australian waters' provide a valid alternative to the amendments moved by the Opposition in that

Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill 2 and 3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2953

they foreshadow an assertion of dumping jurisdiction beyond the territorial sea and will allow the Government to move swiftly to extend the jurisdiction of the Bill to take account of future international developments.

Mr HOWE (Batman) (12.40 a.m.)-I wish to address myself to this clause but, by way of preface-I appreciate that it is late-one cannot emphasise too much the importance of the Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill and the enormous threats that do exist to the environment, particularly as a result of the development of complex chemical substances, heavy metals and radioactive substances which many countries have not as yet found an effective way of disposing of. In those circumstances, as the honourable member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins) pointed out, where solutions simply do not exist-

Motion (by Mr Bourchier) put:

That the question be now put.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes

60

Noes

46

Majority
AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baumc,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman,A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.D. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Howard,J. W.

14
Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar,M.J.R. MacKenzie,A. J. (Teller) McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Mooro,I.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H.

NOES

Innes, U.B. Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones. Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J.

NOES
Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D.
Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S.
Duffy, M. J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurfod, C. J.

Kent,L. McLeay, Leo
McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris, P. F.
Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C.
Uren, T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS
Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Killen,D.J. Nixon,P.J.

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendments negatived.

Clauses agreed to.

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 19 (Grant of permit).

Amendment (by Mr West) negatived:

Clause 19. page 10, line 26, after 'section' insert 'and to section22'.

Clause agreed to.

Clauses 20 and 21-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.

Clause 22 (Radioactive wastes or other matter).

Mr WEST (Cunningham) (12.50 a.m.)-I move:

Clause 22, pages 13 and 14, omit the clause, substitute the following clause:

Radioactive wastes or other matter

22. (1) The dumping at sea of any radioactive wastes or other radioactive matter, being dumping to which this section applies, is prohibited.
(2) The incineration at sea of any radioactive wastes or other radioactive matter, being incineration to which this section applies, is prohibited.
(3) The loading of any radioactive wastes or other radioactive matter for the purpose of being dumped at sea or incinerated at sea, being loading to which this section applies, is prohibited.
(4) This section applies to dumping at sea and incineration at sea carried out from or by-
(a) any vessel, platform or aircraft in or into Australian waters or in or into the sea above the continental shelf of Australia or of an external Territory;
(b) any Australian vessel, Australian aircraft or Australian platform in or into any part of the sea.
(5) This section applies to loading on or onto
(a) any vessel, aircraft or platform in Australia or in Australian waters or in

2954 REPRESENTATIVES 2 and 3 June 1981 Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill

the sea above the continental shelf of Australia or of an external Territory; (b) any Australian vessel, Australian aircraft or Australian platform in, or in the territorial sea, of a country that is not a party to the Convention. (6) The owner and person in charge of the vessel, platform or aircraft on or from which loading, dumping at sea or incineration at sea in contravention of this section is carried out and the owner of the wastes .or other matter so loaded, dumped or incinerated are each guilty of an offence against this section, punishable on conviction by a fine not exceeding (a) if the person is a natural person- $50,000; or (b) if the person is a body corporate- $100,000.
I have already drawn attention to the problems that have arisen from clauses 10, 11 and 12 regarding signatory nations needing only their own permits to dump radioactive materials within three miles of our shores and the fact that under this legislation non-signatory nations do not require any permits at all to dump within three miles of our shores. It is obvious then that, in the case of signatory nations, low level radioactive wastes could be dumped under their permits within four miles of our shores. Non-signatory nations could dump anything, including high level radioactive waste, within four miles of our shores. Japan is obviously a signatory nation, yet it has already indicated that it will dump 45,000 drums of low level or medium level radioactive waste in the Pacific Ocean. I am absolutely amazed that the Government will not accept my amendment, considering the actions that are going forward.
I say to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) that I am amazed that the Government has not firmly told the Japanese Government that Australia will not stand by and accept that it is Japan's right to dump radioactive wastes of any sort in the ocean. Of all the nations, one would expect Japan to have some extra sensitivity in this matter. When the Minister was asked questions about the Government's attitude to the Japanese proposal for dumping off the Mariani Islands he said, and I will read from a letter which I advise all honourable members to read in Hansard tomorrow because it was incorporated in my speech on the second reading of the Bill:
Officials advised the Japanese mission that Australia considered it essential that the disposal of nuclear waste in any environment, and in particular the Pacific Ocean, should be undertaken only in compliance with the strictest safety measures and in full accordance with the relevant international agreements on the subject. Australia has taken a position to this effect at meetings of the South Pacific Forum.

is no safe method known to science for the disposal of nuclear wastes. I might add that plutonium, which is a derivative of high level radioactive waste from spent uranium oxide, can exist and be harmful to man for up to half a million years. There is no way we can get around that. There is no way we can get around the fact that no nation has yet been able to decommission a nuclear power station. A period of 100 years has to elapse before the core of these stations can be touched. In the United States nobody has yet been successful in cleaning up the results of the Harrisburg disaster. When they finally get around to cleaning it up, it will cost at least $2 billion. They cannot work out who should be responsible for cleaning it up and who should pay the price. How can we be sure that nuclear nations, committed to nuclear power stations because of the inability of their scientists to work out a way to dispose of nuclear waste, will never dump waste, even of a high level into the ocean? At the very least, Australia should declare that in no circumstances will we ever dump radioactive waste into the seas anywhere and that those nations which will not comply with that declaration will be prevented from disposing of such waste on our continental shelf.
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (12.56 a.m.)-The London dumping convention prohibits the disposal of high level radioactive material listed in Annexe I of the convention and places strict controls on the disposal of other radioactive material listed in Annexe II of the convention. This Bill gives effect to these provisions. The effect can be seen in clauses 19 (2) and 19 (5) together with the first Schedule to the Bill. In the issue of permits for the disposal of radioactive material not listed in Annexe I, the convention contracting parties are to take full account of stringent guidelines developed by the International Atomic Energy Agency which is the recognised international authority in this field. Clause 19 (6) (a) of the Bill specifically provides for consideration of these guidelines. These provisions in the Bill indicate Australia's willingness to comply with the strictest international measures laid down for the control of sea dumping of radioactive materials. In view of that fact and the fact that this Bill aims to enable Australia to comply with the London dumping convention, the amendment just moved by the Opposition is not acceptable to the Government.

The Government has given the Japanese a virtual Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (12.57 a.m.)~The carte-blanche to dump the stuff by not telling it amendment to clause 22 of the Bill, as proposed firmly that we disapprove of the dumping. There by the Opposition, suggests a course of action

Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill 2 and 3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2955

which only a completely irresponsible government would reject. I therefore hope that Govern-
ment members in this House are not just conscientious enough but also are realistic enough to see
that to allow the dumping of radioactive matter as
close as three miles off the Australian coastline is entirely against the national interest and, in fact,
could have disastrous effects on us all. The exist-
ing clause 22, as proposed by the Government, gives the Minister the power to issue a permit for
dumping or loading radioactive matter, stating
special conditions to be adhered to if he deems the matter to be 'so radioactive as to require special
precautions to be taken'.

Question (by Mr Bourchier) put:

That the question be now put.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes

59

Noes

46

Majority

13

NOES
Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D.
Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Ureo, T. Wallis,L.G.
West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS
Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Killen,D.J. Nixon, P. J.

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J.
Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. R.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question put:

That the clause proposed to be omitted (Mr West's amendment) stand part of the Bill.

The Committee divided.

The Deputy Chairman-Mr G. O'H. Giles

Ayes

59

Noes

46

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume,M.E. Birney,RJ. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R A. Brown,N.A. Bungey,M.H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowao,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C.
Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cohen,B.
Cross, M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E.

NOES

Hyde, J. M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie,A.J. (Teller) McLean, R. M. McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, i. M. Moorc,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.
Innes, U.E. Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F.

Majority
AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume,M.E. Birney,R.J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. Good luck, B. J. Groom, R. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Howard, J. W. Hunt,R.J.D.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert
Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D.

NOES

13
Hyde,J.M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller) Mci.ean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, i. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, i. B. C.
Innes, U. E. Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.

2956 REPRESENTATIVES 2 and 3 June 1981 Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill

NOES
Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S.
Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Milton,P.
Morri',P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes,G.G.D. Scott,J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Urenl T. Wallis,L.G.
West,S.J. Willis,R.
Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H.
McMahon, Sir William Killen,D.J. Nixon,P.J.

Campbell,G.
Keating, P. J. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Clause agreed to.

Clauses 23 to 28-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.

Clause 29 (Boarding of vessels, &c., by inspectors) .

Amendments (by Mr West)-by leave-

proposed:

.

Clause 29, page 16, line 11, at the end of paragraph (c) of sub-clause (1) add 'or in the sea above the continental shelf of Australia or of an external Territory'.

Clause 29, page 16, line 28, after 'waters' insert 'or in the sea above the continental shelf of Australia or of an external Territory'.

Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (1.10 a.m.)-This clause highlights, as do the other clauses we have been dealing with, the complete inadequacy of this Bill to protect the people of Australia. The Bill allows the dumping of low and medium level radioactive wastes in waters within three miles of the Australian coast. This Parliament should be legislating to make dumping of such waste by persons from any country in Australian coastal waters an offence.

Mr DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! I cannot hear what the honourable member for Lilley is saying. However, I have doubts about whether she is referring to the amendment. I invite her to get quickly on to it, considering the hour.

Mrs DARLING-I feel that this is so important to the Australian people that it should be considered even at this late hour.

Mr DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. The honourable member will not raise matters unless they are related to the amendment, or I will have to rule her out of order.

Mrs DARLING-I point out that the proposed amendment was in keeping with the Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of wastes and other matter, to which Australia

is a signatory, along with 44 other nations. Article IV, paragraph 3 of that Convention states:
No provision of this Convention is to be interpreted as preventing a Contracting Party from prohibiting, insofar as that Party is concerned, the dumping of wastes or other matter not mentioned in Annex 1.
The article allows countries to prohibit the dumping of substances as long as the organisation is notified of such prohibitions. The prohibition of sea dumping of nuclear matter is of particular importance to me, as a Queenslander. The unique reef off the east coast of Queensland must be protected. The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park (Capricornia Section) Regulations make dumping of wastes from a vessel or an aircraft, an island or fixed structure within the Capricornia section an offence. Under the Act, dumping of waste by Australians is regulated, but not that of foreign countries.
As the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) has pointed out the reef should be protected to the extent of the continental shelf, but it is of even greater importance that people be protected. Protection should be given to all Australian coastal waters. The radioactive pollution of Australian waters has horrific implications for us and for future generations. The probability of such pollution should not be underrated. The Queensland Premier, for one, is feverishly in favour of the extension of the uranium industry in Queensland but his enthusiasm goes beyond the bounds of reason. His determination to proceed with the project, despite the decision by a mining warden's court to disallow expansion of a uranium mining project in Townsville for safety reasons, typifies the situations which could arise in Queensland coastal waters. The Charters Towers mining warden, Mr Eric Lendich, made his decision because of 'grave doubts as to the suitability and safety of proposals by the French company Minatome, for a treatment plant, evaporation ponds and tailing ponds'. In relation to the Premier's response to the warden's decision, I quote from the Hobart Mercury of 28 April 1981. It states:
The Queensland Premier, Mr Joh Bjelke-Petersen-
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! The honourable member for Lilley will resume her seat. I am afraid I have to rule that she is debating matters which come under clause 22. I can see the relevance she is trying to establish by talking of vessels, but she is not really referring to the inspection and boarding of vessels, which as I understand it is the subject of clause 29.
Mrs DARLING-I believe it is all closely related. I have been misinterpreted by some honourable members opposite. I draw attention to the

EnvironmentProtection(SeaDumping)Bill 2 and 3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2957

fact that there is cause for concern when we are dealing with the dumping of nuclear waste. In trying to establish that that cause is justified I have been quoting statements by the Queensland Premier which show that leakage can occur, and has occurred, from nuclear waste quite close to the coastal waters of Queensland. It is quite credible that in the future, if we allow dumping within three miles of the coast, such leakages could take place in coastal waters. As a matter of fact, in the National Times of 17 May to 23 May, there is a lead article headed 'Uranium Spill Threatens Town'. It discusses a leak which was discovered when a concrete seal covering a uranium ore stockpile--

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! 1 will have to ask the honourable member to resume her seat. She is referring directly to clause 22.

Amendments negatived.

Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (1.15 a.m.) -by leave-l move:

Clause 29, page 16, add ai the end of sub-clause (4) 'to

which it is safe and practicable to bring the vessel'.

.

Clause 29, page 17, line 16, omit '$1,000', substitute '$2,000'.

These amendments have arisen from consultations with the States. The Premier of Tasmania drew to the attention of the Government the fact that the clause, as presently drawn, may require an inspector directing a ship to enter a port to enter the nearest port. The purpose of the first amendment is to cover the possibility that travel to the nearest port by a vessel may be unsafe and impracticable. It would enable a direction to be given that the ship go to the nearest safe or practicable port. The second amendment is technical in nature and increases from $1,000 to $2,000 penalty which may be imposed.

Amendments agreed to.

Clause, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 30 to 40-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.

Clause 41 (Regulations).

Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (1.17 a.m.)--I move:

Clause 41, page 21, add at the end thereof the following sub-clause: '(2) Regulations under sub-section (I) may declare that a specified area of sea on the seaward side of the territorial sea of Australia or the territorial sea of an external Territory is included in Australian waiers for the purposes of this Act.'.

The issues that are involved in this amendment have been discussed in relation to earlier amendments.

Mr WEST (Cunningham) (1.18 a.m.)-The Opposition agrees to this amendment, but I wish to put on record that I regard it as a direct consequence of the amendment that was moved by the Opposition to clause 10, which sought to extend the application of the powers established under this legislation to the outermost edge of the continental shelf. We now see what the Government is about. Having accepted the relevance and validity of our argument, it is now saying that it may want to do this at some future point by way of regulation. We would have much preferred that the Government accept our proposed course of action, but will not oppose the amendment. We will merely regard it as a victory for the Opposition.
Amendment agreed to. Clause, as amended, agreed to. Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole, and agreed to.
Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave--adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by MI' Wilson)-by leaveread a third time.
COMMONWEALTH LEGAL AID COMMISSION AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading Debate resumed from 27 May, on motion by MrVinel':
That the Bill be now read a second time.
MI' LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (1.21 a.m.)-The Opposition opposes this Bill. I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining io give this Bill a second reading, the House is of the opinion thai--
(I) the Commonwealth has a continuing national responsibility for the funding of legal aid, the States having amply demonstrated in the past that they have neither the resources nor the inclination to ensure equal access to the law;
(2) the Commonwealth has an indispensable national role in the formulation of legal aid policy so as to ensure that legal services are delivered on a co-ordinated, rational and equitable basis;
(3) the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission has a central national role to play in research, evaluating, advising upon, co-ordinating and monitoring the funding and delivery oflegal aid services;
(4) the present functions of the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission cannot be performed as adequately or effectively by a part time advisory Council and an Attorney-General's Department already subject to severe staffing constraints, and

2958 REPRESENTATIVES 2 and 3 June 1981 Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Bill

(5) the proposals to abolish the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission, to curtail the functions and limit the independence of its successor advisory Council and to limit the number of full time officials working on legal aid policy and funding, are all to be deplored as marking the first step towards the Commonwealth's ultimate abandonment of responsibility for legal aid funding'.
The Opposition has set out in the five paragraphs of the amendment why it suggests that this Bill should be opposed. The purpose of the Bill is to abolish the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission and to create another body called the Commonwealth Legal Aid Council. Honourable members will notice in the preamble to the Bill a prpposal to transfer Commonwealth employees. In other words, Commonwealth employees will be made redundant or transferred. This brings us to the point of what the Bill is all about. This is one of the first of the package of Bills which has resulted from the recommendations of what is known as the Lynch committee. That committee is anxious to cut costs and it proposes to do so in a most stupid and ineffective way. It is proposed to transfer people from-
Mr Coleman-That is a harsh statement.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I know that the hour is late and that honourable members are a bit tired. But all the Government is doing is transferring unfortunate officers out to some other jurisdiction where I think they would still be paid. One wonders how the razor gang can justify this cost cutting without any idea or analysis of what it is about from the point of view of Commonwealth programs or State programs. If these people are to be transferred to some other area someone else has to bear the burden either in another area of Commonwealth responsibility or another area of State responsibility. It is really unsound to suggest that the legislation is doing anything at all. I remind the House that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) made a promise in 1975 that no person would be denied legal aid because of lack of means. This is another example of the Prime Minister's again reneging on a promise.
Mr John Brown-Don't tell me he broke a promise!
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Oh, he has broken many of them. There are many problems in legal aid in Australia, particularly in Victoria and Tasmania. We see the complete abandonment of Commonw~alth involvement. There is a view that the Commonwealth getting out of legal aid would not affect the Australian people. We should bear in mind that very many people are affected by Commonwealth laws. Many people are obliged to go to litigation or to courts because of Commonwealth legislation. We recognise that in a number

of areas, particularly in administrative law. We have had to set up a number of tribunals to assist people, even in the welfare field. Now, in the really difficult area of what one would call adversery legislation, many people will be denied any help at all.
It is also significant that the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission, which was created by the Government, is now being abolished by it. In introducing legislation in 1977 Attorney-General Ellicott said that the Bill was an important part of the framework within which the partnership between the Australian and State governments would be conducted. So much for the partnership! We are now abolishing the Commission. It is clear that no partnership will exist any longer. Again, it would appear that the Government objects to the fact that the Commission was doing effective work and was able to prove it was dynamic. Sir John Nimmo was critical of Commonwealth funding and I suppose that might well have caused the demise of this Commission. In 1978-79 he said:
Since the change in the Federal Government in December 1975 we have seen a 'freeze' in the provision of federal legal aid through the Australian Legal Aid Office while the Government negotiated with the States for the introduction of its new comprehensive scheme. The 'freeze' has been marked, on the one hand, by the imposition of restrictive staff ceilings, and, on the other hand, by failure to adjust or index the monetary commitment limit for referrals to private practitioners to take account of inflation. The commitment limit was fixed at $12m per annum in August 1975. Since then, there has only been one minor increase-to $12.6m-- -in 1977-78.
A distinction needs to be drawn between the annual monetary commitment limit for referrals and the annual provision in the Budget for expenditure on payment of accounts for referrals completed. Expenditure inevitably increases each year because of the time lag between commitment and expenditure and because of cost increases after the referrals are made. However, the resulting annual increases in expenditure are not a measure of the reallevcl of legal aid which is governed by the annual commitment limit.
In other words, what has been happening for years is that the commitment has been limiting the amount of legal aid but has not been able to cope with the arrears that have had to be met because of the actual taking up of cases. Whilst the commitment was limited to, say, $12m per annum, the Government was actually spending some $16.6m in the Budget merely to pick up arrears and not to provide any additional legal aid.
The Commission also complained of the serious rundown in the provision of federal legal aid and recommended the expenditure of $500,000 on voluntary and community legal aid services. Yet only half that amount has been provided in 1981, two years after the Commission recommended that $500,000 ought to be spent. It is important that we look at what was admitted in the Senate

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Bill 2 and 3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2959

by the Attorney-General (Senator Durack)- party in an appeal before the Administrative

that the work of the Commission has been a great Appeals Tribunal against the decision of the Aus-

credit to it. The Commission has been anxious to tralian Broadcasting Tribunal. Some strange de-

expand its role, but the Government as never alcisions have benefited people in this regard. A de-

lowed it to do so. In 1977 the Opposition opposed cision has been made to divert more work from

some aspects of the Legal Aid Commission Act. the Crown Solicitor's Office to the private sector.

We wanted to see a truly independent ComI recall the views in the Press that the members of

mission along the lines recommended by Professor the Lynch committee would act with razors in

Sackville in his report 'Law and Poverty'. We their hands. When we consider this measure, they

wanted to see the Commission having indepenmight as well be handing over bank notes to the

dent powers of report and review in all areas people who will get the benefit of the private

affecting legal aid. Nevertheless, it can be said work. It will have to be paid for. This is outrage-

that the Commission, at least in its first 2+ years, ous. A decision was also made to contract out

did some splendid work. Honourable members bankruptcy work to the private sector. When

will notice from Hansard that in the debate in the talking about people in need of legal aid one

Senate, to which I can advert here, a summary of would have thought that at least bankruptcy work

the major activities of the Commission was incorcould have been financed. Instead, the work will

porated. The Attorney-General recognised the be given to the private s~ctor, and I believe the

value of that document.

costs will be substantially increased rather than

Amongst the areas of activity and research that ~ere being conducted by the Commission were such matters as the evaluation of criteria for accepting and rejecting legal aid applications and ascertaining what should happen to people whose applications were rejected. The Commission was making interstate cost comparisons to determine which jurisdictions, for example, had the cheapest and most expensive cost structures in the area of family law. That was a most important matter, as the majority of federal legal aid moneys are expended in the area of family law. The Joint Committee on Family Law has drawn attention

reduced. In many cases accountants have acted against the interests of creditors. There are plenty of precedents to show that the private sector may not necessarily be interested all the time in the problems of the people we have to represent. It will be a regressive step if reviews which have been conducted by the Legal Aid Commission are now abandoned. It will add to costs. It is not as though the Government were against reviews in general. Never in the history of federation have so many reviews been announced as were announced in the report of the Lynch Committee. Some 35 individual reviews are involved in that report.

to the need to achieve similar and less costly procedures in family law. It would be an absurdity if a rationalisation did not occur because of the stupidity of the Government in dismantling the process where it might adlersely affect private practitioners. The same is also true of the cost comparison between private and salaried lawyers which has been conducted.

The functions of the new Council which will replace the old Commission are even more limited. For example, despite the abandonment by the Government of commercials which led to 90 per cent of the Australian people supporting the Australian Legal Aid Office, the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission did a considerable job pUblicising its activities and it published a national

On all the studies available-they are not bibliography of legal aid materials. I suggest that

entirely adequate-it is suggested that the use of if the Government wishes to rationalise costs it

salaried lawyers is two or three times less expenslook less to abandoning publicity programs such

ive than the use of private practitioners. However, as those which only inform people of their rights

we have a government that is very generous to and think more about abandoning the costly

some private practitioners. Need I remind Government Information Unit, which is no more

honourable members of what is called the Greek than an insidious outlet for Government propa-

security fraud case in which one private pracganda. The new Council will not have an advisory

titioner is in receipt of $1,070 a day? The cost of function in respect of funding and an effectiveness

that case has run into millions of dollars.

as the State legal aid commissions do. The re-

Mr Young-What is his name?

search function of the old Commission is to be abandoned, and that is where a considerable

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I need not quote it. amount of valuable work was done. The new

Substantial sums of money were paid to a Queen's Council is virtually an automaton of the

Counsel to assist the Australian Broadc<tsting TriAttorney-General. Membership of the Council is

bunal. We now find, quite extraordinarily, that to be considerably different from that of the Com-

the same gentleman is appearing for a private mission. No longer are State Attorneys able to

2960 REPRESENTATIVES 2 and 3 June 1981 Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Bill

nominate members. No longer is the Australian limiting government and nothing else. It has limCouncil of Social Service able to nominate a repited vision, limited horizons and limited capacity resentative in its own right. What we now have is to understand the problems of people. For that

a fairly meaningless process for consultation to reason we reject this legislation.

which the Attorney-General need not pay any

attention whatsoever.

.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the amendment seconded?

When questioned about the situation in Mr Scott-I second the amendment.

Victoria, where there is an average shortfall between applications and approvals of around 600cases a month, the Attorney-General stated that no one was being denied legal aid but the granting of it may be delayed. The number of cases undertaken by each member of staff of the Australian Legal Aid Office in Victoria is approximately double that in New South WaIes. When the Victorian legal aid commission takes over it appears impossible that it will not have a serious backlog of cases, despite the protestations of the Federal Attorney-General to the contrary. Certainly, Mr Storey, the Victorian Attorney-General, believes that it will have such a backlog. The Attorney General said that $450,000 would be saved by the abolition of the Commission and the creation of the Council. In view of the fact that only $700,000

Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (1.37 a.m.)-At this late hour I do not particularly wish to detain the Committee. this matter was very fully debated in 'the other place and many of the matters raised by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen), of course, were canvassed in considerable detail in that debate. I wish to stress some of the matters the Attorney-(}eneral (Senator Durack) raised in his address. He made it clear that the Government had no intention of reducing its commitment to the level of legal aid and the commitments it has made in agreements to the States to maintain the effectiveness of legal aid. I think that is the most important statement he could have made and it is an important aspect of this matter.

was spent on the Commision, that seems an The Attorney made the point~I reiterate it-

unusual claim. Some of the staff of the Comthat the cost of the administration of the Com-

mission are to be placed in the Attorney-General's monwealth Legal Aid Council is significant and

Department and others elsewhere in the Public that the reduction of its administration and the in-

Service. Accordingly, it is very difficult to see how corporation of some of the officers from the Com-

there could be a saving of $450,000 in realistic monwealth Legal Aid Commission into the

terr,ns.

.

Attorney-General's Department gives greater

It is also a measure of the paralysis of the legislative process over the past two months that legislation that is so ineptly drafted and, I think, unable to be interpreted is being introduced. A question was asked in the Senate about what proposed neW sections 5 (b) (i) and 5 (b) (ii) mean. The. Attorney-General himself could not even answer the question. It comes to this extra-

scope through reduced expenditure to the Government better ordering its priorities. No doubt some of those resources might well find their way into legal aid as well as reduce government expenditure overall. I think that is the important part that has to be noted in relation to this initiative. Having said those few remarks, I will conclude at this point in time.

ordinary situation of trying to determine, under Question put:

this proposed new section, the advice to be given That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr Lionel and the recommendations to be made concerning: Bowen's amendment) stand part of the question.

(i) the provision by the Commonwealth of financial assistance in respect of the cost of providing legal assistance; and
(ii) the effectiveness of arrangements for the application of financial assistance provided by the Commonwealth in respect of the costs of providing legal assistance;
That shows the difficulties that occur at times be-

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes Noes . . .

. 59 . 45

Majority

14

cause not enough attention has been given to the needs of the people in this area and to the matter of drafting. The Opposition has had assurances in the past that these matters may be only transitory and that there are alternatives. All the assurances we have had have been worthless, whether they apply to pensioners, students or anybody else who is in need. The Lynch committee is about ideas for

Adermann, A. E. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. I.
Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A,
Bungey, M. H.
Burr.M.A.

AYES

HowardjJ.W. Hunt, R. I. D. Hyde,I.M.
Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A.
MacKeUar, M. I. R. MaoKenzie.A. I. (Teller)

Customs Tariff Validation Bill

2 and 3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2961

AYES
Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman,lI. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom, R.I. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. lIodges, J. C. (Teller)

McLean, R. M.
McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, I. M,
Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC.
Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewctt,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duify,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Fn~~l R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Innes, U.E.
Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A, Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Kelly,R.J. Kent, I.. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Wallis, L. G. West, S. J. Willis,R.
Young, M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, p, H.
McMahon, Sir William KiIlen,D.J. Nixon, P,].

Campbell,G.
Keating, P. J. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Third Reading

Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

Bill (on motion by Mr Fife) read a third time,

CUSTOMS TARIFF VALIDATION BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 28 May, on motion by MrMoore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (1.46 a.m,)-Mr Deputy Speaker, the purpose of this Bill-and I am going to stay here until the end of my specch~-is to validate the collection of customs duties until 31 December 1981 in respect of tariffs imposed on imports of silicone products and wheelchairs. Each of these industries is relatively small, the silicone industry having about 110 employees in Australia and the wheelchair industry having about 55 employees, However, for quite different reasons, these are very important industries and the assistance arrangements afforded to them by the Government will have an important impact on particular sections of the community, Because the Government is mismanaging the affairs of this House so that we have to debate this Bill at 1.45 in the morning is no reason why I am not going to talk on this Bill. The silicone industry is a branch of the chemical industry, and involves high technologies which have had rapidly increasing application since the Second World War, I warn Government. members that I have an amendment on this Bill and it is in their best interests that they stay here until the death to vote on it,
The industry is characterised by large scale, integrated production processes, and as is common in these circumstances, major multinational corporations dominate the industry, Australian production began in 1966 and 70 per cent of production occurs at Dow Corning's plant. The value of production has rapidly grown in the face of expanding demand for products based on silicones such as sealants, greases, adhesives and resins, The industry is now principally supplied by local producers, and export sales have become increasingly important. I am delighted that the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson) is wide awake at this early hour of the morning and noting how interesting this speech is, The companies involved have become quite export conscious, and rapid growth in sales to South East Asian countries is expected. The Industries Assistance Commission recommended that a duty of 10 per cent apply for the intermediate and finished silicone products, and minimum duties of 2 per cent apply to raw materials. These rates significantly reduce the nominal levels of assistance afforded to the industry. However, because the cost of raw materials will fall, the effective rates of assistance for many of the products will remain similar to current levels. The Opposition has no objection to these decisions.
The second matter dealt with by this Bill relates to tariff assistance for producers of wheelchairs in Australia. Tariff Proposal No.7 of 1980, which is validated by this Bill, provides for a duty rate to

2962 REPRESENTATIVES 2 and 3 June 1981

Customs Tariff Validation Bill

be applied to imports of wheelchairs of 30 per cent for one year, 25 per cent in the following year, and 20 per cent thereafter. Prior to these changes the rate applicable to mechanically propelled wheelchairs was 34 per cent and 36 per cent for manually operated wheelchairs. These high rates increased the cost of wheelchairs by up to $300. They applied from 1 January 1980, before which time the rate was only 15 per cent on imports from the United Kingdom, a significant source of supply. I repeat the facts. On 1 January 1980 the rate of duty and thus the cost of wheelchairs went up because of an action of the Government in getting rid of the United Kingdom preferences.
Mr Scott-Why do they hate invalids?
Mr HURFORD-Exactly. Why does the Government hate invalids? Why on earth would it allow the cost of wheelchairs to go up, as the honourable member for Hindmarsh has pointed out?
Mr Scott-It is the Year ofDisabled Persons on top of it.
Mr HURFORD-Exactly, in the Year ofDis1 abled Persons. The majority of wheelchairs sold in
Australia are imported. It is quite incredible that a Customs duty of 34.36 per cent should have been applied to those imports, to the disadvantage of the disabled, for the past 16 months. After extra ordinary delays, the Government has decided to reduce the duties, but they will still be a high 30 per cent for one year, and the ultimate rate of 20 per cent will still be higher than the rate applying to many imports of wheelchairs before 1 January 1980. It is not possible for the Government to excuse its delays in making this decision. The lAC, as requested, forwarded the final report to the Government on 23December 1980, about five months ago. This delay, I repeat, is inexcusable. How does the Government excuse the decision to maintain high tariff duties on wheelchairs, par ticularly as this is the Year ofDisabled Persons. In the lAC draft report, a minority of commissioners preferred the payment of a bounty for local pro ducers. This proposal is very sensible.
Mr Scholes-It pays a bounty on tractors. Why not on wheelchairs?
Mr HURFORD-As the honourable member for Corio says, bounties are paid on tractors, and sensibly bounties are paid on many other prod ucts. Why should they not be paid on wheelchairs? The industry provides only a.min ority share of the market and employs only 55 people. A bounty would not be expensive, but it would greatly benefit the disadvantaged people

who must use wheelchairs. However, the Government announced in the 1980 Budget that it would introduce a program of aids for the disabled. The scheme was intended to commence on 1 April this year and $700,000 was allocated to it. But the plain fact is that the scheme has not been implemented, and it is not likely to be implemented for some time to come. That is a measure of this Government's lack of concern for the disadvantaged in our society. It is also a measure of its lack' of commitment to the objec tives of the International Year of Disabled Per sons. Every member of the Australian community also knows that it is a typical example of what happens when this Government makes a promise. Having failed to implement the program of aids to daily living for the disabled, the Minister for Busi ness and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) had the temerity in his second reading speech to refer to the program on apparent justification of the decision to retain high rates of duty.
It is inexcusable for this Government to com mence a new regime of tariff duties on one date while breaking its promises in relation to offset ting assistance. Indeed, we have been given no new commencement date for the aids program of $700,000 promised to the community in this Year of Disabled Persons. In the intervening period, about 500 wheelchairs are sold every month at an inflated cost because of the high rate of duties. It is not merely this delay that should concern us. The Government has not indicated who will be eligible for assistance under the aids program. The program relates not only to wheelchairs but also to a wide range of other aids to daily living.
The Government allocated $700,000 for a three-month period. This implies an annual cost of $2.8m. Yet annual sales of wheelchairs exceed $4m. So there is no way in the wide world, that that particular program would offset the cost of wheelchairs to those poor unfortunate people who are obliged to use that form of transport. It is virtually certain, therefore, that the tariff duties on wheelchairs will have to be paid by many dis abled persons, even if the aid program is introduced. This is quite scandalous.
The Government should be condemned for its pathetic efforts in relation to the disabled. It makes promises during election campaigns and then breaks or delays them immediately after the election. The only further promise that the dis abled in our community should seek from the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) is his prom ise to resign. The Minister for Business and Con sumer Affairs should be ashamed to have the car riage of a Bill such as this which maintains high rates of duty on wheelchairs. Not only should he

Customs Tariff Validation Bill

2 and 3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2963

be ashamed but also he should ensure that something is done very soon to alter the present situation. So that we may focus on this situation more clearly, I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing this Bill, the House-
(1) expresses its concern that the Customs duties validated by the Bill in relation to wheelchairs will maintain the high cost of these necessary aids for the disabled;
(2) calls upon the Government immediately to review its decision in relation to wheelchairs with a view to replacing the tariff arrangements provided in the Bill with a bounty scheme for local producers, and
(3) condemns the Government for its failure to implement its promise for a Programme of Aids for Disabled People including the free provision of wheelchairs' .
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (1.56 a.m.)-I second the amendment moved by my colleague the honourable member for Adelaide (Mf Hurford) as I believe a bounty would be in the best interests of disabled people. On April 29 I brought this matter before the Parliament and asked the Treasurer (Mr Howard) to waive all duty on wheelchairs, both in justice and as a gesture from the Government towards the International Year of Disabled Persons. The Treasurer came into the House to say that he appreciated my concern and would certainly discuss the matter with the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) and with the Cabinet because he agreed that there was some justice in what I had to say.
I do not really call it justice when the Commonwealth Government announced that tariffs will remain on wheelchairs. Disabled people are currently paying a tariff of 34 per cent on imported electric wheelchairs. Thirty-four per cent is equivalent to approximately $1,000 a chair. This is an enourmous burden to place on people who are already disadvantaged through disability. On top of the cost of $3,000 for an electric wheelchair, it costs a disabled person $20 to $30 a week to maintain it. An electric wheelchair in constant use lasts for only a few years. The Government has indicated that the tariff will reduce to 20 per cent over two years, but it would still be 5 per cent higher than the tariff which existed prior to I January 1980.
I think the two basic convictions on which the Government should approach this matter, are firstly, that the needs of the wheelchair user are of basiC importance, as a wheelchair is a necessary utility, not a luxury, to many disabled people and, secondly, that the existence of a viable Australian

wheelchair manufacturing industry is necessary to supply both standard and non-standard units to cater for specific disabilities, because many of the wheelchairs are tailored to the disability a person has and to provide an efficient maintenance and parts supply service. We must maintain our own industry. In doing this a bounty would be much more beneficial to the end user and would provide greater assistance and more likelihood of the preservation of a viable local industry.
Wheelchair users are a special group of consumers. It would not be appropriate for them to have to bear the cost of protecting the local industry themselves. Again, I stress that wheelchairs are a necessity, not a luxury. The information available on the economic circumstances of the disabled seems to indicate that as a group they are financially disadvantaged because of the expenses incurred through their disability. It appears that most have reduced ability to earn a normal income. Some people may well ask why wheelchair users, as distinct from other disabled people, should receive preferential treatment from the Government. This group, because of its particular type of disability, often requires much more assistance in everyday living than other disabled people.
In addition to the general maintenance costs involved in owning a wheelchair-that is, for wheel replacements, brake adjustments and seat repairs-those confined to a wheelchair often require assistance in bathing, dressing, movement to and from the wheelchair and mobility outside their home. If no family member is available to do these things nursing attendants must be employed. All this costs money and the money comes out of the pockets of the disabled. Yet they are expected to pay this heavy duty on imported wheelchairs. Assistance is also required for house and garden maintenance for those not living in institutions. This type of assistance is not a luxury; it is a necessity if the wheelchair-bound are to live in our society and make a contribution to it. If payment of a bountry is good enough to help farmers to buy tractors and superphosphate, it is good enough to help the disabled to buy wheelchairs.
The Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) and the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) indicated that disabled people would be able to obtain wheelchairs through the aids scheme which was announced in August 1980. We keep getting this red herring dragged across. The aids scheme was announced in August of last year. Nine months have passed and not one disabled person has received an aid. Disabled people are asking the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) and the

2964 REPRESENTATIVES 2 and 3 June 1981

Customs TariJfValidation Bill

State Health Ministers what they are doing with the money. In nine months not one aid has been prescribed. Unless action occurs immediately disabled people will lost $700,000 worth of aids. The Government obviously does not understand the problems faced by disabled people in obtaining aids for daily living. The decision made on the tariff issue ignores the fact that there was a thriving industry in Australia when the tariff was only 15 per cent. I am appalled that after nine months disabled people still have not received their aids and appliances. I am very disappointed at what the Government has brought down. I asked for better from the Treasurer and expected it, which perhaps was a bit naive of me. I totally support the amendment moved by my colleague the honourable member for Adelaide-which is supported by every member on this side of the chamber-who really does believe that disabled people have a right to live in this community and should be subsidised to give them that right.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (2.3 a.m.)-I rise at this late hour to speak in support of the proposed amendment because of the importance of this amendment to the handicapped people in Australia, and to point out-to emphasise further-the hypocritical attitude of this Government. On the one hand it is espousing the cause of the disabled in this the International Year of Disabled Persons but, on the other, it is bringing about legislation which will cause severe hardship to users of wheelchairs in Australia. I believe most Australians will be appalled by this callous decision. Currently the tariff on an imported electric wheelchair is 34 per cent, or about $1,000. We should all remember the importance of this equipment to a disabled person. The wheelchair is his or her only source of mobility. In many cases the wheelchair is a life-line which allows a disabled person to participate in a normal lifestyle, to gain employment, to attend social functions and generally to enjoy life's opportunities as much as possible. That is what will be taken from the handicapped people in Australia by the Customs Tariff Validation Bill which is before the House tonight.
Electric wheelchairs, in particular, are vital to those people unfortunate enough to suffer debilitating diseases, especially mUltiple sclerosis and other such diseases. These people rely upon electric wheelchairs as they do not have sufficient muscular strength to operate ordinary wheelchairs. These people are already seriously disadvantaged by their disability. Yet this Government wishes to add an enormous financial burden as well. The cost of an electric wheelchair is about $3,000 and a further $20 to $30 a week is

required for maintenance. A wheelchair in constant use would last only a few years. It is iniquitous that disabled people are being charged high tariffs on their essential items of equipment. It is particularly unjust when we remember that each year this Government hands out hundreds of millions of dollars of taxpayers' money in subsidies to industry, yet it is too mean to assist the small number of people in our community who are disabled.
The Australian Council for Rehabilitation of the Disabled in a submission to the Industries Assistance Commission in 1980 recommended a bounty of 20 per cent on wheelchairs. Members of the Government may be interested in the comments of the Executive Director of ACROD who said that if a bounty is good enough to help farmers to buy tractors and superphosphate, it should be good enough for disabled people to buy wheelchairs. It has become apparent that this Government has little practical concern for the disabled people, despite its rhetoric. Both the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) and the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) in their announcement in August 1980, indicated that disabled people would be able to obtain wheelchairs through the aids scheme. Nine months later no disabled person has received an aid. So much for the rhetoric.
I am particularly aware of the Government's breach of commitment to giving practical assistance to disabled people through my efforts to assist a young inventor in my electorate. This young man has invented a microprocessor controlled foldable electric wheelchair. This very lightweight wheelchair was the result of the inventor's knowledge of the debilitating effects experienced by his brother and other disabled people when using heavy, conventional wheelchairs. This project is well advanced with patent applications pending and considerable commercial interest being shown in the manufacturing side of the project. This enterprise would be particularly suitable for commercial development in the Australian Capital Territory and would be most appropriate in this International Year of Disabled Persons. The inventor requires funding of between $8,000 and $10,000 to continue the project and develop a prototype. He has spent considerable time and effort to get assistance but so far he has been unsuccessful. He has approached the assistance to inventors scheme but this scheme has no funds available. In any case, the future of this scheme is clouded following the razor gang review and this is yet another case of inefficient and ad hoc decision making. The Department of Productivity apparently has

Customs Tari.ffValidation Bill

2 and 3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2965

funds for project development but this inventor is precluded from applying as funds are only available when a prototype is complete.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member is losing relevance with the Bill before the House. I am sure that the whole House is in sympathy with what the honourable member has to say but she is still required to be relevant.
Mrs KELLY-All I am trying to do is point out by this example that it would appear that allocation of government funding for projects with enormous potential to improve life for disabled people are not important enough to be treated seriously. This electric wheelchair, designed by a local inventor which could be manufactured locally with great benefit to the Australian Capital Territory economy, is to be ignored. I believe that this is another example of how the Government's rhetoric bears no relation to its action in this International Year of Disabled Persons. The legislation before us tonight only further illustrates that point.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (2.9 a.m.)-I do not intend to delay the House. I point out that this Bill maintains an additional cost on some areas of wheelchairs of up to $1,000. The amendment which was put forward by the Opposition would have that level of savings for some persons who are disabled and therefore who are least able in our community to provide those sorts of funds towards protection of an industry. Bounties are paid on a wide range of industries. Therefore I think the Government should reconsider its position and obviously that will not be done by a vote in the House at this late hour. I move:
That the debate be now adjourned.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-ls the honourable member for Corio seeking leave to continue his remarks on the resumption of debate?
Mr Scholes-No, I expect the Government to change its position and that we will all be satisfied when the House resumes.
Question resolved in the negative.

some relevance. I know that the Australian Labor Party has a bleeding heart from time to time, but the relevance is to industry. Some honourable members, and particularly the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child), said that the Government had no scheme. The Government's health scheme envisages that people who require them will receive mechanical and electrical wheelchairs. This is part of what is going on, but it has nothing to do with tariffs.
Mr Hawke-It has everything to do with tariffs.
Mr MOORE-It has nothing to do with tariffs whatsoever. Even the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) might need a suitably equipped wheelchair at some stage, and the chair will probably have to be electric. If it is, God knows what the charge will be. He may need a suitably equivalent chair. If he cannot get a suitable chair in Australia, he can apply to get a suitable equivalent from overseas, duty free. The honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) made an academic contribution which was not entirely relevant. As to the number of people who have applied in Queensland for chairs, the local industry has been particularly helpful in its application and in its ability to supply requests. Those people have been able to supply the market quite adequately.
I say to those who have contributed to the debate that they have miscued very markedly in terms of commercial problems in relation to Customs tariff validation and those problems that are associated with social security. If honourable members cannot pick that up at 2.15 in the morning, I really do not have much sympathy for their contributions to the debate.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Amendment negatived. Original question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Motion (by Mr Moore)-by leave-proposed:
That the Bill be now read a third time.

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (2.11 a.m.)-in replyDebate on the matter has been extremely interesting, as usual (Quorum formed). I thank the Opposition for drawing the people's attention to the debate that has occurred here tonight. Most of the debate that surrounded the Customs Tariff Validation Bill 1981 has dealt with matters that relate to social security. This Bill relates to an Australian industry which employs people, and it does have

Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (2.16 a.m.)-I merely want to place on record that now the Opposition has registered its protest on this matter, we hope that the Government will consider it and will make changes sooner rather than later in this International Year of Disabled Persons. It is only a matter of an industry policy Bill; it is also a social security Bill. Just as bounties are used in relation to the farming industry in order to reduce the cost of tractors to farmers rather than impose

2966 REPRESENTATIVES 2 and 3 June 1981

Papers

tariffs on tractors, so that could be done in relation to wheelchairs. I trust that the bounties will be applied to wheelchairs very soon and that a proposal will be brought down even before this Parliament meets for the Budget session.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (2.17 a.m.)-I would like to comment on the statement by the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) that if one cannot buy a suitable electric wheelchair in Australia for one's own use, one can import it duty free. That has not been my experience. I can cite the case of a very well known doctor who uses an Amigo wheelchair and who wrote to the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and to the Commissioner of Taxation seeking permission to bring the chair to Australia duty free. It is not manufactured here. There is nothing suitable or equivalent-nothing anything like it. It is a mobile that can be used as a chair for getting around hospitals and hospital grounds. It is allowed to be taken on international aircraft, and is the only type of wheelchair that can be taken on such aircraft. This doctor paid duty on the chair. I would be interested if the Minister could look at the matter and report back to the House tomorrow on whether his statement was correct.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (2.18 a.m.)-The position is that if the person who has the disability can get from his or her doctor a certificate to say that the wheelchair that is manufactured in Australia is not suitable for his or her particular complaint, that certificate, on presentation to the Bureau of Customs, will, as I understand it, be favourably received by the Bureau.
Mrs Child-Retrospective?
Mr MOORE-No, not retrospective.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a third time.
House adjourned at 2.20 a.m. (Wednesday)
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
. Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to proVide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 2 June 1981, pursuant to statute:

Bounty (Paper) Act-Return for period 6 February 1980 to 5 February 1981.

Lands Acquisition Act-Statement of lands acquired by agreement authorised under sub-section 7 (I).

Public Service Arbitration Act-

Conciliation and Arbitration CommissionerDeterminations accompanied by statements regarding possible inconsistency with the law:

No. I82-Association of Draughting, Supervisoryand Technical Employees.t

No. 183-Commonwealth Foremen's Association of Australia (Australian Public Service).

(tNot accompanied by statement.)

Public Service Arbitrator Determinations accompanied by statements regarding possible inconsistency with thelaw-1981-

No. 159-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).

No. 160--Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Ship-

wrights Union and others.

'

No. 16l-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers) and others.

No. 162-Civil Air Operations Officers' Association of Australia.

No. 163-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public ServiCe.

No. 164-Civil Air Operations Officers' Association of Australia.

Nos 165 and 166-Australian Journalists

Association.

'

No. 167-Transport Workers' Union of Australia.t
1110. 168-Australian Workers' Union.f

No. 169-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.t

No. l70-Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union of Australia.t

No. 171-Aml\lgamated S\lciety or' Carpenters and Joiners of Australia and others.t

No. 172-Federated Engine Drivers' and Firemens' Association ,ofAustralasia.t

No, 173-Transport Workers' Union of Australia.t

No. 174-Australian Workers'Union.t

No. 175-Electrical Trades Union of Australia:t

No. 176-Electrical Trade Union of Australia.t

Nos, 177 and 178-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.t

No. 179-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service.
No. 180-Amalgamated Metal Workers' a~d Ship-
wrights Union and others.

No. I 81-Australasian Society of Engineers and others-t
(t Not accompanied by statement).

Seat of Government (Administration) Act-Variation of plan of lay-out of City of Canberra and its environs, dated 19 May 1981.

Requestfor Detailed Information

2 and 3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2967

REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliament House Accommodation Mr Milton to ask Mr Speaker:
(1) Did the joint meeting of the Presiding Officers' .Parliament House Accommodation Advisory Committees on 26 May 1981, recommend that (a) the offices of the Joint House Department located in rooms LI65 to LI7l, LI75 and LI77 to LI80 be removed from Parliament House, (b) the Department of the Parliamentary Library Stores, Registry and Mail Room be removed from Parliament House, (c) the

Parliamentary Library Legislative Research Service groups of Foreign Affairs and Law and Government be relocated within Parliament House, (d) the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, Inter-Parliamentary Union and New Parliament House secretariats be removed from Parliament House, (e) Room L22 be used as a Committee Room, (f) consideration be given to an extension of offices along the front facade of Parliament House to the extremity of the columns and (g) the House of Representatives Attendants' accommodation in Room L2 be relocated.
(2) If so, was that recommendation unanimous.
(3) What decisions have been taken by the Presiding Officers on these recommendations.

296,8 REPRESENTATIVES 2 and 3 June 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Australian Equity Participation in New Investment Projects
(Question No. 584)
Mr Holding asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 2S February 1981:
(l) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'FIRB gets up a $500m natural resources shopping list' in the Australian Financial Review,19 February 1981, page 30.
(2) If so, (a) what steps does the Foreign Investment Review Board take to work towards a high level of Australian equity participation in new investment projects and (b) do these steps include regular notification to Australian Stock Exchanges of projects requiring increased Australian equity participation; if so, what are the details.
(3) What foreign investment projects have been approved on second or subsequent applications, following direct FIRB involvement, to increase Australian equity participation, for each year from 1975-76 to 1979-80.
(4) With respect to Chapter 2, Foreign investment in industry sectors,.of the FIRB Report 1980, pages 9 to 18, (a) what (i) are the names of the 127 manufacturing companies where payment for assets by foreign investors led to a reduction in Australian ownership in 1978-79, and (ii) was the percentage of Australian ownership before and after that payment in each case (page 9), (b) what (i) are the names of the 145 manufacturing companies where payment for assets by foreign investors led to a reduction in Australian ownership in 1979-80 and (ii) was the percentage of Australian ownership before and after that payment in each case (page 9); (c) what are the names of the (i) 67 businesses in 1978-79 and (ii) 76 businesses in 1979-80 where Australian control was lost through acquisition, giving in each case the name both before and after acquisition (page 9); (d) how many proposals in the manufacturing sector were approved subject to conditions in (i) 1978-79 and (ii) 1979-80, giving in each case (A) the names of the company or companies concerned, (B) the conditions that were applied, (C) whether the conditions have been met and (D) what changes have occurred where conditions have not been met, (page 9); (e) has the FIRB completed its review of the activities of some overseas-owned companies, especially in the food industry, which have made a considerable number of small business acquisitions; if so, (i) has the FIRB made a report to the Government; if so, when and (ii) will he make a statement to the Parliament regarding the companies involved, the reasons for the review and any Government action which has resulted from that ~eview (page 10); (f) (i) what were the conditions established by the Government in July 1978, in order for its approval to the Iwasaki Sangyo Co. for its tourist project at Yeppoon, Queensland, to be granted, (ii) what form has the FIRB's monitoring of the project taken to date, (iii) for how much longer will the FIRB be required to monitor the project, (iv) which of the Government's conditions have not been met, in whole or part, and what action has the Government taken as a result, (v) has the Government reconsidered its 1979 decision not to allow further land acquisitions for the Iwasaki project; if so, has further land acquisition been approved; if that approval has been given, what is the area of extra acquisition and when was it acquired, (vi) what is the percentage.of Australian equity in the Iwasaki project, as at 24 February 1981, and (vii) what is the nature of the Australian participation in other ways in the Iwasaki project (page 12); (g) what are the names of the United States of America firms which have

lodged the 19 successful applications to invest in private hospitals in Australia and what are the locations of the hospitals which were the subject of those applications; (h) when were the applications referred to in part 4 (g) approved and what was the percentage of local equity in each of the companies concerned, as at 24 February 1981, (j) what are the names, before and after acquisition, of the II Australian owned advertising agencies taken over in the last 2 years by foreign firms (page 13) and (k) what methods does the FIRB employ in seeking to establish that Australians have been given an opportunity to buy rural land when there is a proposal before the FIRB for the sale of that land to foreign persons (page 14).
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) (a) The Foreign Investment Review Board discusses with the parties to foreign investment proposals the Australian equity participation requirements that may apply to the proposed investments under the foreign investment policy. Such discussions are an important means of ensuring that the proposed equity structures of projects will satisfy the relevant Australian participation requirements. The discussions are held as early as possible in the planning of projects so that the formulation of the proposal can be undertaken with a knowledge of the Government's policy objectives.
In the examination of individual proposals, the Board considers the proposals against the Government's objective to seek Australian participation to the extent appropriate to the particular circumstances of each proposal, and in the light of the specific guidelines for Australian involvement in new natural resource projects. In all proposals for the acquisition of a substantial interest in an existing Australian business, the board considers very carefully the opportunities that have been provided for Australian investors to sustain or increase the level of Australian participation in the enterprises.
(b) No. Arrangement by which wholly or partly overseasowned companies seek increased Australian participation are a commercial matter to be undertaken by the companies concerned through commercial channels of their own choice. From time to time, Australian companies and institutions approach the FIRB to make known their interest in participating in natural resource development. If the foreign participants in projects requiring additional Australian equity participation so request, they are supplied with the names of those Australian companies and institutions (subject to their concurrence) which have indicated an interest in investing in natural resources.
(3) The FIRB processes referrcd to in 2 (a) frequently reo sult in increases being made in the proposed level of Australian equity during the course of initial consideration of applications. Accordingly, only a small proportion of applications is rejected. Of the 45 proposals rejected between I April 1976 and 31 December 1980,22 were declined, at least in part, because of insufficient provision for Australian equity. Four of these were latcr approved in the light of increased provision for Australian equity participation, including:
the acquisition by Brooke Bond Australia of Bushells;
a proposal by Iwasaki Sangyo Co. (Australia) Pty Ltd to establish a tourist development project at Yeppoon, Queensland; and

Answers to Questions

2 and 3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2969

a proposal involving the acquisition by Robin Holdings Pty Ltd of Singapore of an interest in a property known as 'Merrimac',located on the Queensland Gold Coast.
Details of the other case have not been made public by the Government.
(4) (a), (b) and (c) Because of the commercial sensitivity attaching to much of the information provided to the Board in connection with foreign investment proposals, the Government and the Board treat all such information in strict confidence and do not as a matter of practice disclose details of individual proposals, except in special circumstances where the parties' consent is first obtained. It is not, therefore, possible to provide details of the sort that have been requested.
(d) See answer to 4 (a), (b) and (c). The following information on all manufacturing sector proposals conditionally approved in 1978-79 and 1979-80 is available:
NUMBERS AND TYPES OF CONDITIONS IMPOSED ON MANUFACTURING SECTOR
PROPOSALS

1978-79 1979-80

No. of conditionally approved pro-

posals

21

34

Conditions: Resale Equity Periodic Reporting
Consultation Development and Zoning
Environment Taxation Other

2

0

6

15

8

10

11

8

1

2

1

2

0

11

1

1

Total

30

49

Note: The number of conditions exceeds the number of conditional approvals as more than one condition was attached to some of the proposals.
As appropriate, consultation with the parties to proposals that receive conditional approval is undertaken to ensure that the conditions are complied with.
(e) The FIRB brings such activities to the attention of the Government where these are relevant to the consideration of specific proposals.
(f) (i) I refer the honourable member to my Press release No. 70 of30 July 1978.
(ii) The FIRB Executive has held regular discussions with representatives of the company. The company has also furnished the Board with copies of various studies carried out by consultants and other information concerning the development of the resort project.
(iii) As long as it is necessary.
(iv) The company undertook negotiations in late 1979 to acquire further land for the resort without prior approval. As indicated in my Press release No.8 of 23 January 1980, the Government took action to prohibit additional land acquisitions by the company.
(v) No.
(vi) Nil. The company, however,' has undertaken to invite Australians to participate as soon as it becomes profitable.
(vii) I refer the honourable member to conditions one and two listed in my 30 July 1978 press release. In this regard the company has indicated that the first set of accommodation

units on the resort, which are now due for completion in the middle of this year, will be managed by Australians.
(g) I refer the honourable member to the answer given by my colleague, Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle, to Senate question No. 2024 which appeared on pages 536 and 537 of the Hansard of 4 March 1980. This answer gives information on the companies concerned and proposals by them which have received foreign investment policy approval.
(h) Information as to the dates on which the approvals were given is confidential. As at 24 February 1981, none of the companies concerned had introduced Australian equity into their overall Australian operations.
U) Seeanswert04 (a), (b) and (c).
(k) In the examination of proposals for foreign acquisition of rural land the FIRB seeks to ensure that Australians have had an opportunity to purchase the land if they wished to do so. The Board inquires whether and over what period of time the relevant property has been advertised for sale or listed with agents in the manner normally employed in the industry, and seeks information on any Australian bids Jor the land. In cases where the land has not been offered to Australians or the exposure to the market has been regarded as inadequate, the parties have been ,invited to advertise the property on the understanding that the Government would complete its examination of the proposal in the light of the outcome from the advertisement.

Subsidised Medical Equipment

(Question No. 764)

Mrs Kelly asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:

Is there provision for subsidising medical equipment, such as wheelchairs, for disabled persons either by direct grants or by taxation concessions; if so, what are the details.

Mr Howard-The, answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

As regards direct assistance to disabled persons, in the context of the 1980-81 Federal Budget it was announced that the Government would introduce a new program under which aids to daily living would be provided to disabled people not eligible under existing Government assistance programs. The new program is in recognition of the needs of disabled people, and is a Commonwealth initiative in the International Year of Disabled Persons.

Under the Program of Aids for Disabled People, a range of aids to daily living, including home modifications, wheelchairs, orthoses, oxygen, electrolarynxes, aids for incontinence, walking aids, and personal aids (eating and cooking utensils, toilet articles, etc) will be provided on medical prescription to eligible disabled people, without cost to the recipient. Assistance under this program is to be by way of the provision of aids only, and will not include subsidising the cost of medical equipment purchased by individual disabled people.

I understand that the Department of Health is currently

developing administrative procedures with a view to introduc-

ing the new program later this year.

'

Turning now to taxation concessions for disabled persons, I

note that medical and surgical appliances, including

wheelchairs, prescribed by a legally qualified medical prac-

titioner qualify as rebatable expenditure under the-Income

Tax Assessment Act. A rebate is not, however, allowable un-

less the total of all classes of rebatable expenditure, including

life insurance premiums, superannuation, medical expenses,

rates, education expenses and self-education expenses,

exceeds $1,590. The rebate is allowable on the amount of

expenditure over $1,590 at the standard tax rate of 3~ cents in

the dollar.

.

2970 REPRESENTATIVES 2 and 3 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Item 42 (10) in the First Schedule to the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act exempts from sales tax a range of medical equipment, including wheelchairs, used by disabled persons.
States Borrowing for Power Stations
(Question No. 786)
Mr Howe asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(1) In approving infrastructure borrowing by the States through the Loan Council for power stations, what information is available to the Commonwealth to evaluate the economic viability of the proposed works.
(2) Does his Department undertake any assessment of the pricing policies of the various State instrumentalities.
(3) If not, how does the Commonwealth determine whether the proposed borrowing is consistent with Commonwealth policy on national resource allocation priorities.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
. (1), (2) and (3) The Loan Council has adopted a procedure of referring proposals submitted to it for consideration under the infrastructure borrowing program to a working party of Commonwealth and State Treasury officers for evaluation and report before taking decisions on them. The proposals are evaluated with regard to guidelines which have been agreed by the Loan Council. Reference to those guidelines is to be found in Budget Paper No 7 for 1980-81, page 33. The working party reports are confidential to the Loan Council.
Resource Development
(Question No. 843)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a statement allegedly made by the Deputy Prime Minister and reported in the Australian Financial Review of 9 March 1981, in which the Deputy Prime Minister is reported to have said that in the last 2 years a number of resources companies had, amongst them, raised over $2 billion on the Australian capital market.
(2) If so, is this figure correct.
(3) If the figure is correct, what sum has been raised by (a) foreign-owned or controlled corporations and (b) Australian companies.
(4) What proportion of the funds has been raised (a) in the form of debt capital and (b) as equity capital.
(5) To what extent has the (a) level oflocal ownership of Australia's resource development been increased and (b) access of other borrowers to funds been restricted by this fund raising.
(6) Has the fund raising had any effect on the level of domestic interest rates; if so, what effect.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable m,ember's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. However, the report in the Australian Financial Review of 9 March 1981 quoted the Deputy Prime Minister as having said that the group of companies had, over the past two years, raised over $1 billion on the Australian capital market, not over $2 billion as stated in the honourable member's question.
(2) The figure mentioned by the Deputy Frime Minister refers to some resources companies, not to all resources

companies. Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) data on new capital raisings by all companies listed on Australian Stock Exchanges show that new money raised by listed companies in 1979 and 1980 totalled $l.641 million and $3.006 million respectively, i.e. $4.647 million over the twoyear period.
(3) All but one of the companies involved in the capital raisings referred to by the Deputy Prime Minister are predominantly Australian-owned companies. The exception, CRA Ltd, is a naturalising company for the purposes of the Government's foreign investment policy.
(4) Approximately four-fifths of the capital raisings to which the Deputy Prime Minister referred were in the form of equity capital. The remainder were debt capital raisings. The ABS data referred to in part (2) above show that of the $4.647 million of new capital raised by all listed companies over the two years to December 1980, $2.032 million or 44 per cent was in the form of share issues.
These data are published on an industry basis but do not enable figures to be derived on capital raising by resource companies as such. The data by industry show that 49 per cent of new capital raised by manufacturing industry was by share issues while 94 per cent of the 'other' industry group (which excludes the manufacturing, commerce, finance and property industry groups but includes primary production, mining and quarrying) was by share issues.
(5) (a) It is not possible to quantify the effect of particular capital raisings by selected companies on the overall level of Australian ownership of resource development. Nevertheless, the need to ensure an appropriate level of Australian. equity participation in natural resource projects is recognised by the Australian equity participation guidelines in the Government's foreign investment policy. In the 18 months to December 1980, 9 of the 11 new natural resource development projects that were approved incorporated equity structures that satisfied the guideline level of Australian participation. The other two projects were required, as a condition of approval, to meet the guideline level before production commenced.
(b) In the present Australian context of a very high demand for finance coupled with monetary policies directed to fllstraining that demand within appropriate bounds, it is axiomatic that capital raisings by anyone group'of borrowers can restrict the fund raisings of other groups. It is not possible to measure the extent to which borrowers are being restricted or to identify clearly which groups are being restricted; it is possible, for example, that the companies referred to in this question were themselves restricted in their borrowing plans by the activities of other borrowers including governments and their authorities.
(6) If there is a significant increase in the demand for finance, for example, associated with strengthening investment and economic activities as is occurring in the Australian economy at present, then it is inevitable that there will be some upward pressure on interest rates. The upward pressure on interest rates is one indication of excess demand; it is also one mechanism by which funds are channelled to the more economic projects and resources allocated efficiently. Such pressures, however, are only one of several determinants of interest rates.
Numerical Multifador AssessmJnt System
(Question No. 890)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) How many tradesmen with qualifications acceptable in Australia have migrated to Australia under the Numerical

Answers to Questions

2 and 3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2971

Multifactor Assessment System (NUMAS) scheme since its inception in January 1979.
(2) What is the country of origin of each of these tradesmen.
(3) What is the numerical breakdown of these tradesmen by industry.
Mr Macpbee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) 12,753 skilled tradesmen entered Australia between January 1979 and December 1980. Before April 1979, migrants selected under NUMAS were not enumerated separately from those selected under pre-NUMAS criteria, many of whom continued to arrive well into 1980. Also, other tradesmen have entered under Family Reunion, Refugee and Special Eligibility categories, not subject to full NUMAS assessment. However of the number entering since April 1979, 6,289 were in the General Eligibility category of migrants and subject to full NUMAS assessment.
(2) Statistics for skilled tradesmen assessed under NUMAS, by country of last residence, are not available. The following table shows all skilled tradesmen by country of last residence from January 1979 to December 1980.
SKILLED TRADESMEN SETTLER ARRIVALS (NUMAS AND NON NUMAS SELECTED) IN
AUSTRALIA

January 1979-December 1980

Arab Republic of Egypt

9

Argentina

289

Austria

243

Bangladesh

12

Belgium

11

Brazil

20

Burma

5

Canada

110

Chile .

112

China

36

Christmas Island

12

Columbia

18

Cyprus

21

Denmark

147

Ecuador

5

Fiji

57

Finland

32

France

120

Germany

509

Greece

54

Hong Kong

68

India

26

Indonesia

44

Iran

34

Iraq

6

Ireland

122

Israel .

46

Italy

175

Jamaica

2

Japan

25

Jordan

4

Kenya

6

Korea

40

Kuwait

5

January 1979-December 1980

Lebanon

Malaysia

Malta

Mauritius

Nauru

Netherlands

New Caledonia

New Hebrides

New Zealand

Nigeria

Norway

Pakistan . .

Papua New Guinea

Peru

Philippines

Poland .

Portugal .

Saudi Arabia

Seychelles

Singapore .

Solomon Islands

South Africa

Spain . .

Sri Lanka

Sweden

Switzerland

Syria

Tanzania

Thailand

Tonga

.

Trinidad and Tobago

Turkey

United Kingdom

USA.

USSR. .

Uruguay

Venezuela

Vietnam .

Yugoslavia

Zambia

Zimbabwe

Other

12
211
64
50
3 219
15 7 3,815
1 11 5 39 41 193
12 63
3 9 63
1 536 113
17 44 312
2 2 93 1 3 73
3,640 131 9 89 3 47
243 6
84
43

All countries

. 12,753

(3) A breakdown by industry is not available. The following table shows the number of tradesmen in each skilled occupational category who arrived from April 1979 to
December 1980 in the General Eligibility category and thus were subject to full NUMAS assessment.

Occllpational category
Skilled mining occupations Skilled building and construction trades Skilled metal and electrical trades Other skilled trades
Total

Skilled tradesmen
31 908 3,846 1,504
6,289


