House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 125, 1981 Wednesday, 14 October 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1965

Wednesday, 14 October 1981

byMrWest. Petition received.

Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.

PETITIONS

The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:

Diabetics: Insulin

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the
undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be

made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions

revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.

.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Charles, Mrs Child, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Holding, Mr Kent, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Dr Theophanous and Mr Willis.

Petitions received.

Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the propsed sales tax of 2.5 per cent on books, magazines and newspapers represents a tax on knowledge which should not be contemplated in a civilised country. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that this proposed sales tax be withdrawn from the budget proposals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins, Mr McLean, Mr Rocher and MrVine'
Petitions received.

Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That librarians and library users throughout the nation call for the exemption of books, periodicals and newspapers from the imposition of sales taxes.
The tax exempt status of libraries and schools will not protect them from general cost increases which sales tax and its collection will cause. Indeed, exemption claims on millions of items per year will themselves add to the cost burden of both libraries and suppliers.
This tax is socially injurious and unworkable, and a burden on education, science and culture.
Your petitioners therefore pray: that your honourable House will exempt books, periodicals including newspapers from the proposed sales tax.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That a need exists within the community for the Community Youth Support Scheme.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government not remove any funds for the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child and Mr Killen.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Recognising the high youth unemployment in Australia and the overall effectiveness of the C. Y.S.S. programme in equipping young people with skills necessary for their place in the workforce.
We strongly oppose the close of the Community Youth Support Scheme Programme and call you, the Minister, to reinstate this programme immediately.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to effect the above.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth:
That the serious youth unemploymeni problem is a direct result of the community's failure to create sufficient jobs.
In these circumstances the decision to abolish Community Youth Support Schemes (CYSS) is a socially retrogressive step. The CYSS Projects provide valuable support services and work training for many young unemployed.
We the undersigned are concerned that the closure of CYSS Projects may lead young unemployed to become involved in anti-social behaviour such as crime, vandalism, prostitution, rebellious behaviour and mob action. There is the even more frightening prospect that many more young people will give up hope of obtaining a job, become idle and even contemplate suicide.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government reverse its decision to abolish CYSS Projects and provide sufficient funds to enable the various CYSS Centres to. continue their valuable work with the young unemployed in the future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.

1966 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Petitions

Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
The Federal Government should provide sufficient funds for State Education Systems that will ensure the maintenance of the current high quality of Education and the continuance of educational services to all children in a happy and stress free environment.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley and Mr Campbell.
Petitions received .- i
Health Care Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully requests that the Federal Government ensures that:
a. It honours its 1975 election promise to maintain Medibank-a free, universal health insurance scheme, and institute methods of improving hospital and health services for the Australian people.
b. The Community Health Program remains a Federal Government responsibility, with increased funding and expansion of services.
c. It abandons means-testing and the re-introduction of charges at public hospitals which will severely disadvantage low and middle income groups.
d. Every effort be made by the Federal Government to meet the Health care needs and demands of the Australian community.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled will give earnest consideration to this most vital matter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child and Mr Barry Jones.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) The financial situation of students enrolled at Australian postsecondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) The imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) Those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:

I. Post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students
2. The visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately
3. The Minister of Education immediately clarify the government's attitude to the re-introduction of postsecondary tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins and Mr Kent.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That the Government's Sales Tax legislation imposes an unreasonable burden on the community generally, especially pensioners, families, those in receipt of smaller incomes and small businesses.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will withdraw or repeal its Sales Tax Legislation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Good luck and Mr White.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens showeth that:
We wish to protest on a non-party political basis against the 2t% increas'e in Sales Tax because:
(I) It is inflationary. (2) It wiil be a further imposition on families, pensioners
and small business organizations. (3) It will be an insidious tax on education.
We wish to inform our political representatives that we will be forced at the next election to vote against all those who do not speak and vote against the increase.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Good luck.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the' House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled:
We, the people who have signed this petition ask all parties, Labor, Liberal, Democrats and others, to stop the latest increase in taxes and the forever increases in taxes which hit all people of the country of Australia in all goods and consumer goods and we call for a referendum on taxes and interest rates.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hawke and Mr Kent.
Petitions received.
Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

Petitions

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1967

Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) The creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia.
(ii) Higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent and Mr Morris.
Petitions received.
Food Aid to Polish Government
To the Rt. Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled:
The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that recent events in Poland are of such seriousness as to justify Australia's direct involvement in attempts to relieve tension there.
Your petitioners note that food shortages are a major cause of civil unrest.
Your petitioners further note that Australia has the capacity to make direct donations of food at short notice.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray;
That the Federal Government make the Polish Government an immediate and substantial offer of food aid.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Federal Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the humble petitioners respectfully believe that the recent report of the World Council of Churches team which visited Australia, June 15 to July 3, 1981, emphasises the central importance of land rights to the Aboriginal people.
And noting that all attempts by white Australians to manage Aboriginal affairs for them have failed.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Federal Government will accept its responsibility and use its powers under the Constitution to over-ride racist state legislation, particularly to provide Land Rights with freehold title, and
That in addition the Government fulfil its stated policy of self-determination and self-management for Aboriginal people, by funding all housing, health, education, legal, employment strategy and welfare matters concerning Aboriginal people directly through Aboriginal Community-based Community-controlled organisations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.

Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(a) Present income tax laws are unfair to single income families,
(b) All marriages should be recognized as partnerships by allowing partners to divide their joint income for tax purposes,
(c) The family, which is the natural and fundamental group unit of society, should be an economic. unit in tax laws,
(d) Children are Australia's future and their individual care by a parent at home should not be discouraged by extra tax.
Your petitioner~ therefore humbly pray that Parliament will reform income tax laws to allow the joint income of husband and wife to be equally divided between them for taxation purposes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Cass.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
That we request that the Government take immediate steps to relieve the burden of increasing mortgage costs resulting from increasing home loan interest rates.
We find that the resultant increases in mortgage payments have unduly caused a reduction in the standard of living, reflected in the severe difficulty experienced in meeting household budgetary commitments.
Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should-
Amend the relevant taxation Acts to provide for deduction of home loan interest payments with the necessary adjustments to PA YE deductions to give immediate relief to home buyers.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Drummond.
Petition received.
Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing effectiveness of the Women's Services, i.e., Women's Refuges, Women's Health Centres and Women's Rape Crisis Centres. In particular that:
I. National funding under Special Purposes Grant (Section 96 of Constitution) for a new category called Women's Services to be administered federally under one department.
2. That as an interim measure, current funding of administrative arrngements remain in force.
3. Such Special Purposes Grant funding to be on a guaranteed triennial basis which must take into account inflation and indexa tion rises.

1968 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Petitions

4. Definite Government policy commillment to a substantial injection of funds to consolidate existing services and develop new ones. That such funds be distributed in such a way as to insure equitable national distribution of these resources.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFry.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the \Indersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is increasing interest rates on home mortgage loans without due concern for its impact on the general community and ask that the Government re-consider its attitude to low and middle inc come earners.
Your Petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on home mortgage loans which cause Financial, Social and Psychological pressureS on families.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hawke.
Petition received.
Defence Service Home Loans
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That all members of the Women's Services 1939-45 War qualify as "Australian Soldier" under the Defence Service Homes Act for loans because on voluntarily joining the Australian Forces they took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies making themselves available for combat duty in War Zones, and according to Acts and Regulations of the period the military women had enlisted for service anywhere, some Naval women to sail in any waters, with all servicewomen available for service in Papua New Guinea.
As those members of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force of 1939-45 War who were not sent to War Zones are granted loans, refusal to grant eligibility to all Ex-servicewomen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that you amend the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2a) (b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHawke.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of

living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources; and require the following steps to be taken as a maller of urgency:
I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health system and cuts to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and suffering in our community by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrHowe.
Petition received.

National Roads Construction Program

To the Honou'rable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of cer-

tain citizens respectfully showeth that your pe.titioners believe

that:

.

The decision to subject the National Roads Construction program to the tendering system will:

(a) threaten the jobs of 790 workers employed in 17main

road depots in N.S.W.

.

(b) impair the day labour system and undermine the ca-

pacity of Departments of Main Roads to train staff

and test road const ruction concepts

(c) have a disruptive effect on the employment opportuni-

ties available in small communities

(d) reduce the Rexibility of the Department of Main

Roads to handle emergencies caused by flood or fires

(e) ultimately increase the cost of road construction at

taxpayers' expense.

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government withdraw this disruptive proposal.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray..

by Mr Humphreys.

Petition received.

Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showet h that:
The proposed changes to assistance to the passenger motor vehicle and components industries after 1984 shall lead to the collapse of the vehicle manufacturing industry in Australia. Your petitioners therefore pray that the Industries Assistance Commission report be not given effect.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.

Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia' respectfully showeth:
I. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is

Petitions

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1969

urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored Public Enquiry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Medibank
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote ineq uity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospitai system and community health programs will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce Medibank.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Franklin River
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Minister for Energy, Tasmania, is determined that the Hydro-Electric Commission will flood the Franklin River which is part of the South West Tasmanian Wilderness, this summer.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that this be not permitted now or at any time, but rather that the decision to create the Franklin River National Park made by the Tasmanian Government in July 1980, should never be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrWest.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Kalgoorlie respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Northampton post office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Wentworth respectfullyshoweth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Watsons Bay post office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Coleman.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Farrer respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Walla Walla post office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fife.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Boothby respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of any post office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Steele Hall.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The

1970 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Petitions

humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Stirling respectFully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade Postal and Mail services throughout Australia, will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
downgrading a large number of official post offices; reducing the number of post offices open For business during the lunch period; reducing the number of street posting boxes; delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices; downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff; and using private contractors For mail cartage.
Your petitioners thereFore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the Postal and Mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Viner.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Grey respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Hawker post office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners thereFore pray that the Austrljlian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Wallis.
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Henty PBR Division of Repco respectfully showeth that:
I. the automotive products industry is vital to the livelihood and well being of many thousands of Australian workers and their families.
2. if imported automotive products are allowed to Ilow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the industry of their work opportunities.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled:

The petition of the undersigned people who live or work in the Shire of Werribee showeth that we protest most strongly at the Razor Gang proposals to cut funds to the Community Health Program.
Your petitioners therefore respectfully request that the Federal Government ensures that:
(a) the Community Health Program remains a Federal Government responsibility.
(b) proposals to cut funding to the Community Health Program are withdrawn.
(c) every effort be made by the Federal Government to !Deet the health care needs of the Australian Community-by re-instating a growth program with increased funding and expansion of services.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembh;d will give earnest consideration to this most vital matter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Barry Jones.
Petition received.
Housing Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Ballarat respectfully showeth:
\. That the proposed imposition of 2t per cent sales tax to building materials will have a disastrous effect on the already seriously depressed industry.
2. That the latest interest rate rise of I per cent to home mortgages will now end the hopes of many intending first home buyers. We believe the Federal Government must initiate a scheme of assistance to first home buyers, as proposed by building industry representatives.
In conclusion we reject the Federal Government's lack of genuine interest in the home industry. We also clearly state that the effects of points 1 and 2 above are not acceptable to us.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the Government give immediate attention to an already seriously depressed industry.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mildren.
Petition received.
Vitamins and Minerals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the electors of the Division of Paterson respectfully showeth that the proposal to restrict the potency and open sale of certain vitamins and minerals is not supported by credible scientific evidence and is not justified in the interest of public health and, therefore, government interference over and above existing regulations is not warranted and is an infringment of the right of the individual to exercise his freedom of choice and that in future all interested parties (industry or consumer) be given the opportunity to voice their opinion on matters which so directly affect their well-being and health.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the proposed regulations not be enacted.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr O'Keefe.

Questions Without Notice

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1971

Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned residents of the Electoral Division of the Northern Territory respectfully showeth our concern at Federal Government budget proposals to impose new or increased sales tax on a wide range of essential consumer items. We particularly protest at "sales taxes imposed on:
(I) Building materials which will exacerbate an extremely bad housing situation in the Northern Territory.
(2) Stationery and books which is a tax on knowledge and a means of communication.
(3) Footwear and clothing, which are essential items for all persons.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the 1981 Budget amendments to sales tax legislation be repealed and the Sales Tax Amendment Bills be withdrawn.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Tambling.
Petition received.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
BEEF EXPORTS TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Mr KERIN-My question is directed to the Minister for Primary Industry. I refer to the recent beef exports scandal and the rigorous new testing procedures United States authorities have imposed on Australian beef as a result. What information does the Minister have on moves in the American Congress to impose a strict chemical and drug standard on all imported meat? Is the Minister aware of the so-called Melcher amendment to the United States Farm Bill which was passed in the United States Senate last week? Is it a fact that the United States Assistant Secretary of Agriculture has interpreted the amendment to mean a total prohibition on all meat imports which do not conform with certain strict chemical and drug standards? Is a similar amendment now before the House of Representatives in Congress? Did the Minister discuss this issue during his recent visit to the United States? Can he inform the House whether these moves pose a threat to Australia's $600m meat trade with the United States?
Mr NIXON-I can confirm that in the course of my visit to the United States I did discuss with Mr"John Block, the Secretary of Agriculture, I think with Mr Bill Brock, but certainly with Mr MCMillan, the Meat Importers Association and the Meat Institute, the problems related to the so called Melcher amendment. The honourable member for Werriwa does have the description of

the amendment in its correct perspective. It does threaten to ban completely any product that uses drugs or chemicals that are presently not used in the United States of America and it would be a real threat to Australian exports to the United States were it to be agreed to by the Congress and not vetoed by the President. I discussed the matter also with Congressman Sam Gibbons, who is the chairman of the sub-committee of the Ways and Means Committee, and also Congressman De La Garza, who is the chairman of the House Committee on Agriculture. They recognised the difficulties contained in the so-called Melcher proposal. They recognised not only that there would be considerable difficulty for Australian agricultural products and agricultural products from other countries going into America but also that there could be a strong reaction from the many countries to which the United States of America presently exports. After the considerable number of discussions I had on the matter and after I had raised with those people the seriousness with which Australia would view acceptance of the Melcher amendment, I came to the conclusion, and am hopeful, that one way or another the Melcher proposal will be blocked.
PENSIONERS: MEANS TEST
Mr HURFORD-Is the Prime Minister aware of the enormous worry being experienced by thousands of pensioners because of threatened changes to means test calculations when assessing pension and fringe benefit entitlements? Is he aware that the only effect of yesterday's announcement by the Minister for Social Security, Senator Chaney, is to prolong the uncertainty, the worry, the anxiety of these people for many more months? Does the Prime Minister realise that some adverse results of the Government's delays and its threats to include non-income-bearing capital sums in means test calculations are old people removing their life savings from banks and placing them under mattresses and pensioners being panicked by coaxing advertisements into making irrational investments? When will the Government end this anxiety?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-It was precisely because of the anxiety that had been felt by many elderly people that the Government wanted to make quite sure that any legislation that was introduced on this matter was precisely directed and was not going to cause undue concern or fear amongst a number of elderly people who probably cannot do much to alter their own circumstances once they have got into a certain situation. It was because of the Government's concern for many of the matters that the honourable gentleman raised

1972 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

that we accepted the suggestion that Senator Chaney made to us that there should be a further look at this matter because of problems that had plainly arisen in drafting and because of the need also to be quite precise about any Bill that might be introduced. I and the Government are conscious of the attitudes and the concerns that might be expressed by elderly people within the Australian community. I hope that they will all understand that the delay is occurring because of a consciousness of that concern. I would have read what Senator Chaney has said in rather different terms from those of the honourable gentleman, not as a statement that will give cause for more concern but as a statement that certainly ought to diminish it.
SYDNEY AIRPORT: ADVANCE AIRLINES ACCIDENT
Mr LUSHER-Could the Minister for Transport please inform the House whether he is in a position to provide details of the board of inquiry into the Advance Airlines accident at Sydney in February 1980 which he promised in a statement on 24 September?
Mr HUNT-I am now in a position to announce that I have appointed a three-man board of inquiry to carry out this important undertaking. We have been most fortunate in obtaining the services of a very eminent lawyer, the Honourable
Sir Sydney Frost, Q.c., of Melbourne, to chair the
inquiry. Sir Sydney has had, of course, a very distinguished record both at the Bar and on the bench. The Government has also obtained the services of two assessors to assist Sir Sydney FrostCaptain Peter Gibbes, M.V.O., D.F.C., AF.C., who retired from the position of director of operations of Ansett Airlines of Australia in 1975 and has since served as a non-presidential member of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, and Mr Russell Baxter, who has a very high reputation as an aeronautical engineer.
Yesterday I formally appointed the board members, in pursuance of the powers conferred on the Minister for Transport by Regulation 287 (I) of the Air Navigation Regulations, to inquire into the causes of the accident which occurred in Sydney on 21 February 1980. This is in accordance with the standard procedure for the appointment of boards of accident iriquiry. I emphasise the completely independent nature of the board of inquiry and the fact that its members have been chosen because of their integrity and impartiality as well as their wealth of experience. Sir Sydney Frost will announce shortly when the board will commence its inquiries. I understand that he intends to base his inquiry in Sydney.

AVIATION MUSEUM
Mr CADMAN-My question is directed to the Minister for Home Affairs, who will be aware of proposals to establish an aviation museum and a maritime museum in Australia. Is the Minister also aware of the economic and tourist advantages, by comparison with other sites, of establishing the aviation museum adjacent to the Richmond Royal Australian Air Force base? Has the Minister received comprehensive, compelling and brilliantly written representations from a large cross-section of community, business, aviation and local government interests seeking to have the Richmond site declared? Why is it necessary for there to be continuing delays in selecting such a picturesque and practical area for the museum? Is the Minister not aware that anyone who is an expert and all those without a vested interest unanimously declare the site to be the best in Australia?
Mr WILSON-This matter has been under study by an interdepartmental working group, which has examined the whole question of the possible development, timing and location of a national aviation museum. The inquiry has sparked off a great deal of interest in the community. Many people believe that they know the pick site, and many of them advance as reasons for their chosen preference the sorts of reasons that have been advanced by the honourable member. The report is currently being considered by me, and I hope to be in a position in the near future to report to the Government on the matter. The Government will then give this issue its consideration and, the Government having considered the matter, when any decision is made it will be made public.
WOOMERA VILLAGE: SECURITY
Mr WALLIS-My question is directed to the Minister for Defence. In view of the changed activities at the Defence Support Centre at Woomera, South Australia, and the reduced population, are there any plans to ease the security arrangements now operating at Woomera for entry to the Woomera Village area by allowing it to become an open town?
Mr KILLEN-No, there are no plans that I am aware of. As the honourable gentleman has rightly pointed out, the character of Woomera Village has changed considerably. Studies are under way, involving the possible use of the Aircraft Research and Development Unit in the area, the possible use of the Army, and the possible use of the new tactical fighter in range activities. If the honourable gentleman would be so kind as to

Questions Without Notice

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1973

allow me to make further inquiries, I will convey the information to him.
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON THE LAW OF THE SEA
Mr FALCONER-I refer the Minister for Foreign Affairs to that section of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting cOmmunique which urges a speedy conclusion to the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. Since the main reason for lack of progress is the attitude of the United States Administration, what steps will the Government be taking to impress upon the Reagan Administration the strongly held views of Commonwealth countries? In particular, does the Australian Government feel a responsibility to represent to the United States Administration the views of many smaller island states in our region, which lack diplomatic representation in the United States?
Mr STREET-Everyone in this House shares the concern about the delays in the adoption of a comprehensive law of the sea convention. For the information of the House, I can confirm that the attitude of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, including the importance of the law of the sea to many of the small island states, has been conveyed to the United States Administration. Also for the information of the House I can say that the resolution of this House, which was adopted unanimously some weeks ago, has been formally conveyed to the United States Government.
TELECOM AUSTRALIA
Mr HAYDEN-I refer the Minister for Communications to the fact that the country local call service is a loss-making component of Telecom Australia's activities, to the extent of some $228m in 1979-80. Is the Minister aware that this means that users of other Telecom services are subsiding country telephone subscribers to the extent of over $200 per capita per annum? Is the Government telecommunications inquiry required to have regard to 'the continuing need to provide adequate telecommunications services throughout Australia as efficiently and economically as possible'? Is the inquiry required to examine 'the extent to which the private sector could be more widely involved in the provision of telecommunications services'? Finally, do these two requirements mean either that the profitable sectors will be sold out to private enterprise, leaving Telecom with only the loss-making sectors and with no ability to cross-subsidise, or that the user-pays principle will be forced on to country subscribers, increasing their phone bills by $4 a week?

Mr SINCLAIR-Having heard the honourable gentleman's question, all I can do is say once again: 'Thank God, we do not have a Labor government'. The general degree to which there is profitability-
Mr Hayden-Yes, there would be no scandals. It would be hard work for the Press to get a story to cover.
Mr SINCLAIR-It would be very hard for the honourable gentleman. to keep out of them, though. There is no doubt that in relation to profitability there are different criteria in terms of how the taxpayers' moneys are applied and what funds are earnt on them. The honourable gentleman will be interested to know that on figures that have been given to me it seems that the only two major areas in Australia which generate what might be called a profit in the normal terms are the Sydney and Melbourne areas. According to the advice that I have received from Telecom, the rest of Australia operates, to a greater or lesser degree, on subsidisation from those two megalopolises. That does not mean in any way that as a result of the examination of Telecom we will cut out services in thos~ two centres and hand them over to private enterprise. On the contrary, if the honourable gentleman looks at the developments in communications he will realise that quite a number of services in future will be able to use the telecommunications cable system.
The degree to which new investment in those services will require additional funds for Telecom has been one of the factors that led to the Government establishing the Davidson inquiry. Certainly, there are a number of areas which will involve significant capital funds, the result of which, were the funds to be spent there, would reduce the ability of Telecom to provide services in the expanding areas of Australia and in the remote areas. There is no intention on the part of the Government, either as a result of that telecommunications inquiry or as a result of any other Government decision, to reduce the degree to which Telecom provides throughout Australia services which are widely acknowledged as being well up to date in every sense, technically and financially, when compared with those available in other countries.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY: PRIVATE ENTERPRISE BUILDING PROGRAM
Mr SAINSBURY-I direct my question to the Minister for the Capital Territory. What are the estimates for the private enterprise building works program in the Australian Capital Territory in

1974 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

1981-82? What information can the Minister provide about the current level of private enterprise capital investment in Canberra?
Mr HODGMAN-I welcome very much the opportunity to draw to the attention of the House some very interesting economic indicators which reaffirm. s~atements made earlier this year that there is a re-emergence of private enterprise in the Australian Capital Territory. In 1979-80 some $21m worth of commercial building permits were issued in the Australian Capital Territory. In 1980-81 the figure crawled to $28.6m. In 1981-82, as confirmed by the report of the Master Builders Association of the Australian Capital Territory, the proposed new private enterprise capital works in Canberra will exceed $63m.
Mr Burr-How much?
Mr HODGMAN-Sixty-three million dollars. If ever there has been a vindication of the drive and the initiative of the former Minister for the Capital Territory, the Honourable R. J. Ellicott, and the determination of this Government to attract back to Canberra, the national capital, private enterprise investment, it is this. One of the largest financial corporations in Australia, in its annual report tabled only one week ago, publicly stated:
Two development sites in the Civic Centre of Canberra marking a re-emergence of the Australian Capital Territory market.
That is a pretty clear indication that people in the financial world are recognising that private enterprise has a most important role to play in the Australian Capital Territory, that the time to invest is now, and that it will never be cheaper to buy and it will never be cheaper to build in Canberra than it is right now.
In evidence of that I just want to say that on Monday of this week there was announced a project which the Australian Labor Party had dead and buried and which it said would never see the light of day. A $20m Lend Lease development project to be known as the Jolimont Centre, which will be a major tourist complex for the Australian Capital Territory, housing Trans Australia Airlines and the Australian Capital Territory Government Tourist Bureau, is now coming to fruition.
I would just say in conclusion that this is a slap in the face to those who are negative, it is a slap in the face to those who are pessimistic and it is a slap in the face to those who think that the only future for Canberra lies in government spending. I now call upon those members of the Australian Capital Territory community who go under the guise of ALP socialist republicans to stop being

negative, to stop being pessimistic and to stop grizzling, because the Labor Party. in this place is the most negative organisation in the world apart from the Labor Party in Tasmania.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Milton proceeding to address a question to the Minister for Education~
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman's question is out of order. He is not entitled to ask for an opinion.
AIR FARES: SYDNEY-CANBERRA ROUTE
Mr SHACK-Is the Minister for Transport aware of the effective air fare competition on the Sydney-Canberra route because of the introduction of a third operator? Why has the two-airline policy become a three-airline policy on this route only? When will the rest of Australia's air fare paying public be able to benefit from this sort of competition?
Mr HUNT-East-West Airlines Ltd, of course, made an application to provide a specialist service under the provisions of the 1972 airlines agreement. The specialist service was to-be a no frills service-purchase a ticket aboard, carry luggage aboard. It was to be an off-peak service, with up to four flights a day. Under the provisions of that agreement I deemed it to be a specialist service and felt that it would serve a section of the community that had been dissuaded from using the air services between Sydney and C~lI';berra. Indeed, since the Holcroft formula had been applied earlier in the year there had been an effective 38 per cent increase in the fares for regular, scheduled jet services between Sydney and Canberra. I firmly believe that the East-West service will provide an alternative for those people who feel that they could not afford to pay the fares being charged for the jet services.
Interestingly enough, Ansett Airlines of Australia has now made an application to meet the East-West competition, which it is entitled to do under the spirit of both the existing airlines agreement and the new airlines agreement which will come into effect very shortly. Trans Australia Airlines has decided to make an application for a 20 per cent off-peak discount, which has been applying on the Darwin and Perth routes for some considerable time. Under the new airlines agreement which will come into force very shortly, it will be possible for operators to make an application to provide specialist services. If those services are not provided by either of the two major operators, it is quite within the powers of the Minister to ask the applicant to provide that service

Questions Without Notice

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1975

should he deem that to be in the public interest. in receipt of much larger orders than is usual in re-

So I do welcome the fact that there will be adlation to some of the National Health Scheme

ditional competition on the Canberra-Sydney seritems and that, in fact, they have decided to cut

vice. It is all within the provisions of the existing the supply of over-ordered items, or items which

airlines agreement and it does fall within the purhave been ordered to a greater extent than before,

view of the new airlines agreement.

back to the normal requirements to prevent the

possibility of windfall profits for retailers of those

INTEREST RATES

drugs following the change in prices. As I say, I

Mr UREN-I draw the Treasurer's attention to a statement last week by the Australian Bankers Association that for three successive months the annual growth rate of savings bank deposits has declined. Is he also aware that the annual growth in the share of deposits held by the permanent building societies has fallen from 20 per cent in the 12 months to June 1980 to 10.2 per cent in the 12 months to July 1981? Does the

am not aware of any evidence of manufacturers holding back supplies which could, as the honourable member suggests, endanger any lives. I would expect there to be adequate supplies from the manufacturers, wholesalers and pharmacists. If , the honourable member or anyone else has any evidence which suggests that supplies are being deliberately withheld, obviously I would be very anxious to investigate that.

Government propose to approve a further increase in savings bank interest rates on housing loans so as to enable these institutions to offer higher interest rates? Will this further increase of one per cent, raising interest rates to 13!- per cent, bring the total increase in interest rates since March last year to 4 per cent, thus adding $90 a month to a family's repayment on an average housing loan?

SOUTH AFRICA: ENRICHED URANIUM
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I refer the Prime Minister to reports that the United States Government is about to resume supplies of enriched uranium to the South African Government. In view of the fact that South Africa has consistently refused to sign the non-proliferation treaty and refuses to submit to International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, and particu-

Mr HOWARD-The Government does not larly in view of its policies of aggression in the re-

have before it, nor to my knowledge does the Region, will the Government make known to

serve Bank of Australia, any application from any Washington its grave misgivings about such a

bank for any increase in the deposit rates that it course of action?

can offer, or any increase in lending rates. On the contrary, all of the indications in recent weeks are that the climate for interest rates has improved in Australia. There are a number of very encouraging signs that we have started to turn the corner. There have been very significant sales of Commonwealth Government securities over the past

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I have no information on this particular matter but I will see whether there is anything definite that I can say to the honourable gentleman later in the day. I will see whether any information is available to us, but at the moment I am not advised on the subject.

few weeks. The rate of growth of the money supply has eased. All in all, the Budget strategy designed to take pressure off interest rates appears to be working.

SYDNEY (KINGSFORD-SMITH) AIRPORT
Mr MacKENZIE-Is the Minister for Transport aware of claims that he has gone soft on the proposition of an additional runway at

NATIONAL HEALTH SCHEME DRUGS
Mr JULL-Is the Minister for Health aware that some drug manufacturers' and distributors are withholding supplies of National Health Scheme items to pharmacists until Commonwealth subsidy increases are effected on 1 November? Especially in remote areas, will lives be endangered in some cases if many of these drugs are not made available prior to 1 November? If so, will the Minister move to stop this practice immediately?

Mascot Airport? Can he assure this House that that is not the case? Can he also assure this House that he remains just as hard as ever on the assurance as far as commuter aircraft access to Mascot is concerned?
Mr HUNT-I give the honourable gentleman an assurance that I have not gone soft on the only logical proposition for the future of air services for New South Wales, the city of Sydney and, indeed, Australia. Sydney Airport is the most used airport in Australia. Over 60 per cent of air passengers in Australia use Sydney (Kingsford-Smith)

Mr MacKELLAR-I am not aware of any eviAirport. Now that the State election is over, I pro-

dence to support those statements, which I have pose to talk to the appropriate State Ministers in

heard. I have heard that drug manufacturers are New South Wales in the hope that the climate

1976 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Questions Without Notice

may be more conducive to more sensible and constructive discussions with the New South Wales Government, because quite clearly there is a very serious and immediate problem in respect of services in that area.
I am advised that the full capacity of Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport has practically been reached. It is now running at about 95 per cent of capacity. With increasing traffic, there is not the slightest doubt that, within the next year or so, it will be necessary to restrict operations into Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport. I give the honourable gentleman an assurance that, if there are to be restrictions on services, they will be across the board. Therefore, no section of the industry should believe that it will miss re~trictions. I will not tolerate a situation whereby the commuter operators and the regional airlines are singled out as a result of the New South Wales Government's failure to come to grips with this very serious problem affecting New South Wales. I appeal to the Premier of New South Wales and his Government to have the guts to face up to a very important problem for New South Wales and, indeed, for Australia.
NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICES ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Dr BLEWETT-I direct my question to the Minister for Health. Is it a fact that the Government is disbanding the National Health Services Advisory Committee without any prior reference to the Parliament by the razor gang, in the Budget or by the Minister? Can he say what administrative improvements or advantages to health care efficiency and delivery in Australia will be achieved by dismantling the one national monitoring body which represents professional, administrative, educational, research and user interests in Australia's health care?
Mr MacKELLAR-It is a fact that the advisory body mentioned by the honourable gentleman is to be disbanded. I have already written to the members of the Committee to thank them for the contributions that they have made over a number of years. There has been a review of the advisory bodies servicing the Government; and that, of course, includes all departments. There are a great number of advisory bodies servicing the Department of Health, Those advisory committees again are being reviewed and changes will be made. There is nothing new or unusual about this. There is a regular review, for instance, of National Health and Medical Research Council advisory committees. Some committees are altered; some committees are set aside, and new ones are formed. As I have already mentioned, there is a

great body of advice available to the Commonwealth Government from a wide variety of sources. It was believed that the necessary advice was being provided and it was not considered necessary that that particular committee should stay in operation.
TAXATION: SUBSIDISED HOUSING
Mr DEAN-I refer the Treasurer to foreshadowed amendments to a section of the Income Tax Assessment Act affecting the rental value of subsidised housing for taxation purposes. Has the Treasurer completed his review of the further amendment that is required? When will the Government announce its decision?
Mr HOWARD-I am aware of the interest of the honourable member for Herbert, the honourable member for Dawson and other honourable members in this matter. As the House will know, I announced last year decisions taken by the Government following the settlement of a dispute involving coal mines in central Queensland. There has been some delay in bringing the legislation forward for the very simple reason that we have had great trouble in trying to reach a satisfactory definition of what constitutes a remote area. I think honourable members on both sides of the House would clearly understand that remoteness in this context tends to be in the eye of the beholder, rather than to be subject to any partic.ularly compelling objective test. The Government has reached a conclusion and the details of that will be made known, I hope, next week when the legislation is introduced. I believe that the honourable member for Herbert and his colleagues from other remoter areas of Australia will believe that the Government has come to a sensible, practical and satisfactory definition of remoteness which ought to meet proper and legitimate concerns and objections.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Dr Theophanous proceeding to address a question to the Minister for Education-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question is out of order.
AIR FARES: SYDNEY-CANBERRA ROUTE
Mr HYDE-My question is directed to the Minister for Transport and is supplementary to the question asked by the honourable member for Tangney. Will the Minister assure the House that Ansett Airlines of Australia will not subsidise its no-frills service between Sydney and Canberra with revenue earned on other services, thus, by

Questions Without Notice

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1977

predatory pricing, destroying the East-West Airlines Ltd no-frills service, as the report of the Holcroft Committee of Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares told us it once destroyed the Bizjets organisation?
Mr HUNT-One point that needs to be made very clear is that Ansett has a licence to operate an F27 service. It was not a question of granting it a licence; it has had a licence to operate such a service for some time. Indeed, it already had an authority to do so. In respect of the fare it has offered, I have no doubt that that fare, along with other fares offered by carriers, whether they be domestic carriers or regional carriers and commuter operators, will be the subject of inquiry by the new Independent Air Fares Committee, whose membership was announced last week. That Committee will be establishing its office very shortly. I would expect future air fares matters to be dealt with by that Committee. In the meantime, Ansett has offered an F27 no-frills service similar to that which has been offered by EastWest. As to the question of cross-subsidisation, I have no doubt that that will be the subject of an inquiry once the Independent Air Fares Committee gets under way.
SALES TAX ON NEWSPAPERS
Mr FREE-Is the Treasurer aware that the new sales tax on newspapers will directly cost the Fairfax organisation some $3m a year, the Packer interests in excess of $lm, and News Ltd $4.5m? Is he aware of concern in the newspaper industry that the threat of further increases in this tax might be used as a weapon to compel greater conformity with Government views? In these circumstances is the Government still determined to proceed with this multi-million dollar tax on the free flow of information?
Mr HOWARD-I was not aware of those figures. The honourable gentleman's sources probably are better than mine. I have not had those figures made available to me, but I say to the honourable gentleman that, in company with other sections of the community that have been made subject to the liability for wholesale tax for the first time, it is understandable that newspaper companies around Australia are unhappy. In fact this issue has been the subject of editorial comment not only in newspapers but also in a number of very respectable magazines published by those various organisations around Australia. I say in all seriousness that I regard the argument based upon an attack On the freedom of information as a totally false and misleading argument and that I believe that the evidence that has been pleaded in

support of that argument is very insubstantial evidence. The fact is that a very large number of democratic countries-indeed a majority of democratic countries-impose some kind of indirect taxation on a wide range of publications. The proposition that in some way this is the first country to impose some kind of tax on the transmission of knowledge is a quite erroneous proposition. I would not be properly and fully representing the views of the Government if I did not state that. Of course the tax is unpopular with those who are affected by it.
I can state quite categorically that in no way does this imposition represent in any sense, shape or form an attack by the Government or by any of its members or supporters upon freedom of information or upon the freedom of the Press. The honourable gentleman knows as well as any member on this side of the House that, if governments want to interfere with the freedom of the Press, the use of the revenue in the modest way that is involved in this case certainly cannot be regarded as a step in that direction. I believe that in the context of a broadening of the wholesale tax base it is entirely proper and defensible that newspapers, books and other publications should be brought within the purview of that extension, and I reject as misleading and insubstantial the argument that it is an attack on the freedom of the Press or an attack on the free dissemination of knowledge.
WAGE FIXATION
Mr BURR-My question is directed to the Minister for Industrial Relations. When is it expected that the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission will complete its review of wage fixation methods? What method of setting wage levels is being used while the review is in progress? Is it a fact that claims for increases of up to $30 per week currently are being pursued? Is there a correlation between high wages and high unemployment? If so, what effect will these wage claims have on the job prospects of many young Australians who are about to leave school?
Mr VINER-The Conciliation and Arbitration Commission is not conducting a review of wage fixing machinery or the criteria under which it determines wages. When it decided to abandon wage indexation the Commission said then that it would not hold the next national wage case based on general economic grounds before February of next year. In the transport workers case, which Was one dealing with the transport industry, the Commission invited any of the peak councils, and notably the Australian Council of Trade Unions,

1978 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

General

to make an application to bring that general economic hearing forward from February. But no move has been made by the ACTU to do that, so I think we must anticipate at this stage that there will not be a national wage case before February of next year. In the meantime it is open to unions to pursue claims on an industry basis, and that is what is being done in a number of cases.
I mentioned the transport workers case. There was the vehicle industry case concerning General Motors-Holden's Ltd and there is some industrial trouble backing a claim by the Vehicle Builders Employees Federation against the Ford Motor Company of Australia Ltd. Other industry claims have been foreshadowed or actually are in a state of negotiation at present. I say that to explain that there is no review by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission of its wage fixing machinery. Nevertheless, as the honourable gentleman observed, a number of claims are being made at present in which quite significant sums are being mentioned. If some of those claims were agreed to in full or granted in full by the Commission, that would have a significant impact on the inflationary pressures in the community. If we learnt one thing very clearly during the days of the Whitlam Government between 1973 and 1975 it was that there is a direct correlation between granting extravagant wage claims and the level of unemployment.
Persistently and consistently since we came into government in 1976 we have pursued an anti-inflationary policy, one which has exerted pressures upon wage claims. We have pursued economic policies which would lead to moderation in wage claims whilst allowing wage justice to be achieved. I think the example of what we have achieved over the last five years in reducing inflationary pressures, in seeing the economy expand and in seeing very significant growth in employment and a stabilisation of unemployment levels is proof of the success of our policies.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-I think the Minister should draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr VINER-I conclude, Mr Speaker, by pointing out that the Budget brought down by my colleague the Treasurer this year continues that successful economic policy.
TELECOM AUSTRALIA
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report by McKinsey and Co. Inc. on Telecom AustraliaCapital and Policy Requirements for the 1980s.

Limited copies are available in the Parliamentary Library and the Table Office.
AUSTRALIAN CHICKEN MEAT RESEARCH COMMITTEE
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 16 of the Chicken Meat Research Act 1969, I present the twelfth annual report of the Australian Chicken Meat Research Committee for the year ended 30 June 1981.
PIG MEAT PROMOTION COMMITTEE
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 16 of the Pig Meat Promotion Act 1975, I present the sixth annual report of the Pig Meat Promotion Committee for the year ended 30 June 1981.
AUSTRALIAN PIG INDUSTRY RESEARCH COMMITTEE
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 16 of the Pig Industry Research Act 1971, I present the tenth annual report of the Australian Pig Industry Research Committee for the year ended 30 June 1981.
FAMILY LAW ACT
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-For the information of honourable members, I present the government response to the report of the Parliamentary Joint Select Committee on the Family Law Act.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Mr Dawkins) adjourned.
TERTIARY STUDENTS
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- For the information of honourable members, I present the reports of studies of tertiary student finances: Volume 1-'Financial Assistance to Tertiary Education Students: A Review of Recent Literature and Research'; Volume 2-'1979 Survey of Full Time Tertiary Student Finances'; Volume 3-'Validation Study of the Costs of Full Time Tertiary Students'.
NATIONAL TRAVEL SURVEY 1977-78
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report published by the Bureau of Transport Economics on the 'National Travel Survey 1977-78: General Overview and Assessment'.

General

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1979

AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF MARINE SCIENCE
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-Pursuant to section 44 of the Australian Institute of Marine Science Act 1972, I present the Australian Institute of Marine Science report for the year 1980-81.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PRICING AUTHORITY
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-Pursuant to section 37 (2) of the Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981, I present a report on the operations of the Petroleum Products, Pricing Authority for the year ended 30 June 198L
DEPARTMENT OF THE CAPITAL TERRITQRY
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital, Territory)-For the information of honourable members and with considerable pride, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Department of the Capital Territory.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports)-Mr Speaker, I seek leave to make a statement.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman seek leave to make a statement or does he wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr HOLDING-I wisk to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr HOLDING-Yes.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr HOLDING-Late yesterday afternoon, I was approached by a radio journalist from the Australian Broadcasting Commission to ask me whether I cared to comment about a news item flying from an inquiry being conducted in Melbourne by MrNicholson, QC. into the matters relating to the conduct of elections in the municipality of Richmond. The journalist who sought my comment was unable to describe accurately the allegation which had been made. She said that it was by an unnamed man who had suggested that while Leader'of the Opposition in the Victorian Parliament I had received a bribe.
Mr Tuckey-When did you?
Mr HOLDING-There can be no more--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. I cannot identify who said that. Therefore, I cannot call for it to be

withdrawn, But I ask honourable members to remember that, when an honourable gentleman asks leave to make a personal explanation on a matter, which we all know to be serious, he should be heard in absolute silence,
Mr Hawke-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. I can identify who made the interjection and I ask that you direct the honourable member for O'Connor to withdraw.
Mr SPEAKER-I cannot identify who it was. The House will make its own judgment. I call the honourable member for Melbourne Ports.
Mr HOLDING-There can be no more serious allegation made about people in public office than that they would dishonour themselves, their reputation and bring dishonour upon their party, their family and the political institution of which they are a part, by using their position for personal gain or by taking a bribe. Such allegation, when made, must be treated with all the seriousness that it warrants, not least of all by the media that reports it. I thank the House for my being able to use the first available parliamentary opportunity to place all the available information before this Parliament.
Having been unable to obtain last evening from any journalist an accurate account of what was being said, I contacted Mr Robert Redlich, counsel assisting the inquiry. He confirmed that an allegation had been made and said that he would read it to me from the transcript. Mr Redlich informed me that a person described by the commission as 'Stanley' but whose re~l name is Charles Wyatt, had been called before the commission in order to give evidence on matters completely unrelated to myself and of which I have no knowledge. Mr Redlich stated that, after the luncheon break, Wyatt stated that he had been approached in a local cafeteria during the luncheon period by a former Richmond councillor. In subsequent conversation that had ensued this former councillor had stated, in response to Wyatt's allegations of bribery of Richmond councillors, that I was the one who got the real money. Subsequently, this councillor, when called before the commission of inquiry, denied that he had introduced my name; He stated it had been introduced by Wyatt and, in substance, the councillor denied the allegation.
I suppose it is true that, on almost any day of the week, members of parliament, Ministers of the Crown and the Prime Minister himself, are subject to conversations in hotels, clubs and, indeed, any institution where people gather. On those occasions I suppose we hope that most commments would be favourable. Some would be

1980 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

General

unfavourable and, of course, others would be grossly libellous and slanderous. The conversation in which my name was raised was of the latter kind. But what gives me concern is that that kind of political scuttlebut allegation is allowed to be given before a commisson of inquiry when it is the worst possible kind of defamatory, hearsay evidence. On that aspect of the matter I asked Mr Redlich to convey to the commission of inquiry my strongest protest and concern that, in this case, the commission allowed itself to be used for this type of allegation. While it is true that the commission is not bound by the rules of evidence, some attempt should be made to comply with evidentiary standards and the rules of natural justice and not to allow the inquiry to be used as a vehicle for this kind of unsubstantiated political slur.
There is one further matter with which I am bound to deal. An allegation of this kind, made without substance and without proof, carries no higher authority than the person who makes it. It is an extraordinary situation that I am now called upon to deny a serious allegation carried through the media when, the clear author of this statement is well known in Victoria both in the courts and to the police. The author of the statement, Mr Charles Wyatt, gave evidence to a former inquiry conducted in Victoria relating to abortions and police corruption. The record of Mr Wyatt's testimony and the Board's view of him speak for themselves. I will quote from page 107 of the Kaye report-a public document-on the findings of
Mr Kaye, Q.c., now Mr Justice Kaye, in respect
of Mr Charles Wyatt, the author of the allegation made against me. It states:
The biographical note of Wyatt, set out in Chapter 5, indicates that for the past 21 years he has repeatedly been engaged in criminal ventures, in respect of many of which he has avoided convictions. As an undischarged bankrupt he carried on business for four years under his wife's name, regularly forging her signature on cheques drawn on the account of a business registered in her name. Notwithstanding possession of the means and ability to do so, he has failed to make any payment in discharge of debts proved against his estate in bankruptcy. His conduct during the past eleven years has suggested disloyalty to both his wife and his mistress. He has been ready to betray his friends to police where it has been to his own personal advantage to do so. His confessed conduct in acting as the "male voice" during abortions performed by others on unfortunate girls to induce in them the belief that a doctor was performing the operation, indicates the type of cruel deception to which he has been prepared to resort. He, like registered medical practitioners engaged in illegal abortion practices, has exploited for his own enrichment, the suffering brought about by the mistakes of women and girls. Such was the extent of his exploitation of those unfortunates that he was able to extract from them as much as $1,000 for one day's illegal operations. (2138).
These considerations, simpliciter, justify the conclusion that Wyatt is untrustworthy and unscrupulous in his dealings with others. But, in addition, it was proved that he repeatedly

lied to the Board, that he produced to the Bankruptcy Court a medical certificate about his health knowing the contents were untrue, and that he caused a copy of the same certificate to be produced to the Crown Law Department for the purposes of procuring an adjournment of appeals against his convictions and sentences recorded in the Bairnsdale Court of Petty Sessions.
Om the 9th October, 1969, when examined on oath before the Registrar in Bankruptcy, Wyatt falsely denied knowledge of Jean Warnock Field, and he did so in the belief that it so suited his purposes. Indeed, by his conduct before the Registrar in Bankruptcy, he showed that he is possessed of a diposition to bear false witness whenever he deems it might advance his interests. (2284-5).
For these reasons, the Board was constrained to assess his evidence both critically and with consummate caution. In its opinion, it would not be justified in accepting his testimony on any matter which might impugn the character or probity of another unless it is corroborated by credible evidence.
After that finding on Mr Charles Wyatt he was, of course, charged on 14 counts of abortion, having practised as a backyard abortionist, and sentenced to four and a half years imprisonment. The humblest police magistrate in Victoria would laugh at any attempt to portray this person as a credible witness about anything.
Not only do I treat these allegations with the contempt they deserve and deny them in their totality, but also I am bound to express my deep regret that I am forced to take up the time of the Parliament with explanations of this kind. There is a heavy responsibility on the Victorian Government to ensure that, in the conduct of inquiries of this type, established evidentiary procedures will not be abandoned in the pursuit of the objectives of the inquiry so that the inquiry itself becomes a vehicle for the publication of malicious and false information relying upon the privilege of the inquiry to prevent any citizen who is aggrieved from pursuing his remedies through the due process of law.
I want also to give notice to this Parliament, the inquiry and the constituents of my electorate that I will not only use the forms and the processes of this House to defend my own and my family's reputation but also equally I do not propose to stand aside and allow innocent people and constituents within my own Richmond community, simply because they are members of the Australian Labor Party, to be subjected to the same kind of arbitrary process of vilification and degeneration which has been my lot over the last 24 hours. Mr Speaker, I thank you and the House for its indulgence.
TELECOM AUSTRALIA
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr

Telecom Australia

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1981

Dawkins) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The failure of the Government to release and act upon the McKinsey Report on the capital requirements of Telecom and to ensure that Australia's largest business corporation operates with maximum productivity and efficiency.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number of members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (2.51)- Telecom-the Australian Telecommunications Commission-is not only the largest government business concern in Australia but also the largest business concern of any kind in Australia. It is, therefore, more than a little ironic that the control or . the ministerial responsibility for Telecom should be in the hands of a Minister who has such a woeful record in relation to business management. First, we had the long-running saga of the involvement of the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) in his family's funeral companies, an involvement which led to serious charges being laid against him.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! I do not believe that that is a proper observation to make at this stage.
Mr DAWKINS-It is a matter of record in the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Perhaps the honourable member for Fremantle would like to rephrase his reference.
Mr DAWKINS-Mr Deputy Speaker, I am referring to the credentials of this Minister who is ministerially responsible for the largest commercial undertaking in this country.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I take the view that I hope I am correct, I will seek advice from the Clerks in a minute-if the honourable member wishes to launch that sort of attack on the Minister it ought to be by way of a substantive motion and not raised in debate on a matter of public importance.
Mr DAWKINS-I am referring only to matters which are matters of record in this House and which go to the Minister's credentials.
Mr l)EPUTY SPEAKER-I think there are ways of saying that that would satisfy parliamentary procedure. Otherwise it might be a bit offensive.
Mr DAWKINS-All right. I will try, with due deference to you, not to offend the procedures of this House. However, what was revealed from

that long-running saga concerning the Minister's involvement in his companies was that charges were laid against him which were subsequently, of course, dismissed. However, he still has an obligation, which he accepted, to repay money in relation to those undertakings. He accepted that responsibility and that responsibility still rests with him.
Subsequently, of course, there was the revelation of his involvement in the mismanagement of Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd, a government owned company for which he had ministerial responsibility at the time. Not only did a Senate committee conclude that the Minister had authorised practices which breached Australia's international obligations but also there remain very serious questions still to be answered, questions which go to the integrity of the Minister, to his ability to run or to be responsible for important commercial undertakings. There are questions about the missing money in relation to Asia Dairy Industries-where it is, who got it and whether it will ever be paid back. What I am saying is that with this record of mismanagement, incompetence and maybe even impropriety it is astonishing that this Minister should be entrusted with the responsibility now--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! the honourable member will not use the word 'impropriety'. He is perfectly entitled to question the Minister's performance.
Mr Young-Just say he is crook.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will withdraw that.
Mr Young-I withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will stand and withdraw properly.
Mr Young-I withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I think I have completed my remarks. The honourable member sees the point I am trying to make. He is quite entitled to criticise the performance of the Minister but he should not bring in personal matters without a substantive motion.
Mr DAWKINS-I was referring to the findings of the Senate committee which concluded that the Minister had, in fact, authorised the breach of Australia's international obligations. Now, if that is not an impropriety, I am not sure what is. Certainly, it was an illegality of some kind. So with that sort of record it is astonishing that this Minister should have responsibility for two great public undertakings, Telecom and Australia Post. Of course, it is not astonishing that with that sort of

1982 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Telecom Australia

record he should have made such an awful botch of the management of both of them.
We well remember his stumbling into the recent Telecom dispute a few months ago. Honourable members remember that that dispute between certain technicians of Telecom and Telecom was a matter which had reached a position of substantial agreement between Telecom and the unions involved. But this Minister, like a blind ox, went charging and crashing into that situation and upset that agreement. At the time he threatened to close down Telecom. This Minister, the Minister responsible for the telecommunications of this country, threatened to close down the whole of the Telecom operation in retaliation against demands by unions and those demands had already been accepted by the Telecom management as having substantial justice. In the end, of course, the Minister and the Government were involved in a humiliating backdown in which a settlement was reached on the terms that Telecom had initially proposed. We had a situation where the communications and the country were virtually paralysed because of the Minister's intransigence and incompetence.
Now, of course, we have the Minister's attitude to the McKinsey report and its findings. The McKinsey report was commissioned in March 1979. The report was presented to the Minister in June last year, 15 months ago. The Government has had it for that time. Yet, only today has the Government released that document. Therefore, there has been no debate. about its contents. Now, a spokesman fo.r the Minister said recently that the Government was not suppressing the McKinsey report. He went on to say that the Minister had addressed himself freely to the report during his appearance before the House of Representatives Estimates Committee on 15 September. I was at that Estimates Committee. I went back because I had raised certain question about the McKinsey report with the Minister. I asked him to validate the suggestions that had been made in the Press about what the McKinsey report had found and what it had recommended. I asked him whether he would explain to us what the Government was doing about it, what those recommendations were, what they meant in terms of their implications for Telecom and when the Government would table the report. We had paragraphs and paragraphs of obfuscation by the Minister. He would not tell us what was in the McKinsey report except to acknowledge that the McKinsey report-we all knew this in any event-had been directed towards the capital requirements for Telecom during the 1980s. But, he said that, of course, the McKinsey report dealt with only a

very limited area of the problem confronting Telecom and therefore it would be entirely inappropriate to release the report at that time.
The McKinsey report is a very substantial document. It deals with a number of very important questions confronting Telecom. It seems to us that it is very much in the public interest that that report should have been tabled and should have been made available for public discussion. In this context it might be worth recalling something which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said on 22 September 1976. He said:
. . . if the Australian electorate is to be able to make valid judgments on Government policy, it should have the greatest access to information possible. How can any community progress without continuing, informed and intelligent debate, and how can there be debate without information.
Well, bravo for the Prime Minister. It is a great pity that this Minister does not take notice of what the Prime Minister said on that occasion. Of course the Prime Minister does not follow his own advice in this area. But, with the advice of the McKinsey report the whole of the Australian community and the Parliament particularly will have an opportunity to debate the serious problems confronting Telecom.
What did the McKinsey report say? It said that Telecom should be allowed to increase capital expenditure by an extra $75m or 8 per cent in real terms by 1990. Secondly, it said that the extent to which new services are provided by Telecom will be determined by the amount of spending it is permitted. Thirdly, it said that improved productivity will be more likely with greater freedom for Telecom to increase its investments. Fourthly, it went on to say that the lowest increase in productivity will result from holding down Telecom's expenditure. Of course, this has been happening in recent times. We only have to go to the statement of the Acting Chairman of Telecom. He pointed out in a document entitled 'Australian Telecommunications Commission-Services and Business Outlook for 1981-82' that there was a problem with capital investment.. The capital program was very tight and as a result very serious problems are being confronted by Telecom in terms of providing services and ensuring an absence of congestion in relaton to many services.
The McKinsey report went on to make some favourable and unfavourable international comparisons in relation to Telecom. It said that Telecom had been quite successful in making the transition, inspired and initiated by a Labor government, from a part of the Public Service to a statutory corporation. It said that that was the right thing that should have occurred and that

Telecom Australia

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1983

Telecom is now able to act much more successfully as a result of that change. What it did point to was that the productivity and efficiency of Telecom were seriously compromised because of the deliberate policy of this Government to hold down Telecom's investment. Of course, the Government, without responding to the McKinsey report, has established another committee to look at the whole future of Telecom and the whole question of opportunities for involvement of the private sector. In announcing that inquiry, the Minister said:
An issue to be considered is the extent to which private enterprise involvement in those areas of Telecom's activities now protected from competition could result in a more efficient and economic service to the pUblic.
If the Minister is really serious about improving the economic performance and the efficiency of Telecom, the Government would have responded immediately to the recommendations of the McKinsey report and immediately permitted Telecom to expand its capital investment in order to overcome the most pressing problems which were confronting it and which still confront it. That is not to say that we, the Opposition, endorse all of the recommendations of the McKinsey report. All we are saying is that an opportunity should be provided for debating them and the Government ought to act on those recommendations which would increase and improve the efficiency of the organisation. All we get is a lot of bland and asinine one-liners about how terrific it would be if there were more involvement of the private sector in the Telecom operation. What the Government is doing by compromising the efficiency of Telecom is ensuring that it cannot be as efficient as it could be under some other organisation. That is, the Government says that Telecom would be more efficient if it were in the hands of the private sector and at the same time it is ensuring that that becomes a self-fulfilling prophesy by ensuring that Telecom is unable to act with freedom to maximise its efficiency because of the deliberate policies which have been pursued by this Government.
I think that we must have a look at the result of the Government's policies in relation to Telecom. Capital investment in Telecom has been reduced in real terms by 16 per cent over the last five years. McKinsey makes it clear that a moderate increase was more in keeping with sound management. Also the interest rate paid by Telecom on existing loans has been increased and Telecom's borrowing capacity has been strictly limited as a result of this Government's policies. Consequently delays in connecting new telephone subscribers have grown steadily. At the end of this

financial year 112 Australians will be waiting for telephone installations. That is 15,000 more than last year, despite a projected drop in demand. Some people are waiting up to a year for phone installations. Long delays are occurring in getting calls through with some people, especially those in Queensland and northern New South Wales, often having to wait hours just to get a dial tone. Last financial year, Telecom was able to satisfy only 82 per cent of applicants for new phones. Next year it is estimated that it will be able to satisfy only 79 per cent. Telecom has made it clear that government interference actually caused the Telecom price rises earlier this year.
This is just part of a catalogue of incompetence which has compromised the peformance of Telecom. We have the problem of the last Chairman of Telecom, Bob Somervaille, his term having expired some 15 months ago, still not having been replaced. The General Manager, Mr Curtis, announced his retirement after the Government's handling of the recent dispute and he similarly has not been replaced. We now have the announcement of an inquiry which will further place in limbo the future of Telecom even though the Minister has already predestined the future of that inquiry by announcing in advance that he favours the sale of some of the profitable sections of Telecom to the private sector. But more serious than all this are the consequences for those four million people living outside metropolitan Australia. If the Government has its way in relation to Telecom, if it is able to pursue its user pays principle, those people will be in for very savage reductions in services and very substantial increases in the cost of those services. Those people can take absolutely no solace from the empty undertakings which have been given by the Minister in relation to a small group of remoteliving Australians.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications) (3.7)-The first part of the honourable gentleman's remarks is beneath contempt and not wortli responding to. It is worth saying, however, with respect to the McKinsey report and the whole of the development of Telecom Australia, that I cannot understand why the Opposition seems so intent on bucketing an organisation which has contributed so much to providing worthwhile telecommunications services and which the McKinsey report itself identifies as being of world standard, both technologically and professionally.

1984 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Telecom Australia

The matter of public importance identifies two particular problems. I want to deal with then: because I think they are worthy of our consIderation. The two problems are, firstly, capital requirements and, secondly, the maximum productivity and efficiency of Telecom. There a~e many areas where I think every member of this House looks for an expansion of the services to be
provided by Telecom; a~d I want ~o com~ back. to that. I point out that, m a growmg society hke ours, there are enormous problems in meeting all the demands. Regrettably, they cannot all be met as quickly as we would like. What we are seeking to do is not, as the honourable gentleman suggested, to sell out some of the profitable sections to private enterprise, but to devise ways by 'which the telecommunications system can be extended and the funds required extended by using private enterprise in areas whi~h c~n be an extension of the present telecommUnicatIOns system.
The McKinsey report stated that Telecom has made considerable improvements in the provision of basic services since 1975. It is significant to note that Telecom's performance in this aspect of its services has been judged to be equivalent to that achieved by any other administration in the world with a national economy which has developed to a similar extent. Yet this Opposition wishes to bucket Telecom at almost every opportunity. The consultants did conclude, however, that there was scope for the development of new P?licies with!n Telecom to cope with the expected high growth m demand for new services. Telecom has already moved to the establishment of management practices which will enable it to react more effectively to the demands of major customers for new services.
The report recommends that Telecom should revise its investment evaluation and financing approaches so that the Australian Te~ecommuni cations Commission funds only those mvestments which are economically viable. In other words, there are areas whereby the services to be provided for the Australian community can properly and profitably be extended and in which Telecom, exercising the monopoly which it enjoys, need not necessarily be involved. Examples are the extension of some of the new housing estates and the provision of channelling and the provision of cable services. For the life of me, I cannot see why those cannot be provided by subcontracting facilities by extending the services and facilities available within Telecom itself. An integral part of the McKinsey recommendation provides for ca~ital grants from the Government for those servICes provided by Telecom where the returns do n?t meet the costs of capital. This latter proposal Will

require very careful consideration at a time .when it is essential for the Government to contam the growth of Budget expendit.ure. It. is ~~early a matter of determining appropnate pnontles.
The Australian Labor Party's answer to most things is to spend money. It seems to have no concern for the level of interest rates and the standard of the Australian economy. Our concern is to ensure that within the overall demand for services from the community the Government does not impose undue pressure. The overall approach to the demand for government services, theref?re, needs to be appraised taking into account, not Just Telecom's requirements, but those of every other sector. In the present economic climate it is c?nsidered that Telecom's investment evaluation processes are appropriate. It .may be necessary to reconsider the recommendatIOn when the report of the recently announced inquiry into telecommunications services is available.
McKinsey has also recommended that Telecom should restructure its tariff arrangements and price its services at levels whic~ reflect the costs of the provision of those services. Telecom h.as recognised that by .international .st.andards Its tariff structure reqUIres some revIsion to take account of the fact that rates for shorter distance calls are relatively too low and those for longer distance calls are higher than warranted. The tariff changes announced by the Acting Ch~irman of the Commission early in August of thiS year represent a step towards correcting the imbalance noted by McKinsey. It is important, howev.er, to record that the achievement of a more deslfable mix of tariffs is something which can be realised only gradually if congestion in the network is to be avoided.
The report recommends that Telecom should pursue opportunities for reductions in costs in a number of areas. In relation to labour productivity, since 1975 Telecom has be~n ~ble to achieve reductions of almost one-third m the number of employees per thousand conne~ted se:- vices in the network. The extent to which thiS trend can be continued will depend on a number of factors, including the speed with which modern technologies can be absorbed into the network, the degree to which contract and subco~tra~t labour can be utilised and the degree to which, m those areas where private enterprise can properly provide services, it can be permitted so to do.
In relation to the management of overhead costs, Telecom expects that during 1981-82 it will achieve reductions in management overheads which will make a significant contribution in line with the approach suggested by McKinsey. Much

Telecom Australia

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1985

has been made of the fact that the report recommends an increase in real terms in Telecom's capital expenditure. It is important to recognise, however, that the McKinsey report was prepared in the first half of 1980. It took, as its base, the continuing existing Telecom legislation. We believe that there are areas in which we are providing adequately services to the growing areas of Australia, the regional areas, the decentralised areas and the burgeoning areas where growth is proceeding apace for Telecom to be able to extend its services to the application of the private sector. Honourable members will know that since 1980 the Government has decided on the Davidson inquiry in order 'to ensure that the provision for telecommunications services in Australia can meet the objectives that I suspect most of us share. Certainly it would be inappropriate to preempt the outcome of that inquiry by adopting new capital expenditure policies which might not be appropriate later and which might find the Government involving taxpayers' funds in areas which are not appropriate and in which it is quite proper and possible for the private sector to be involved. It is the Government's intention, therefore, to defer further consideration of this recommendation until the report of the inquiry is available and the course of the further development of telecommunications services in Australia is defined.
The honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) highlighted some allegation about the adequacy of the capital funding and the contrasting between what is said to be the continuing demand and the funds that have been provided. It is worthwhile to look back on the funds that have been allocated since 1975. In its last year of government, the Labor Party approved fixed investment of $747m in Telecom. As honourable members know, this year $1,265m is being allocated. To meet the shortages that that $747m left in the fledgling Telecom organisation, the first Fraser Government approved the injection of $150m more in the 1976-77 financial year, or $897m. In money terms, that meant an increase of the order of 20 per cent. That, in part, reflected the confidence the Government had in the Telecom organisation and is a reflection of the necessity we saw in providing adequate communication facilities throughout Australia-out in the decentralised areas, out in the remote areas-and trying to meet the projected growth in demand. No doubt, when the Fraser Government came to office the contrasts with the depre,ssed inflationary conditions of the Whitlam Government were marked. Of course what has happened is

that over the years there has been a successive increase in money allocated in cash terms to Telecom-$747m in 1975-76, $897m in 1976-77, $937m in 1977-78, $923m in 1978-79, $1,003m in 1979-80, $1,180m in 1980-81 and $1,265m in 1981-82. Therefore, any measure of the increased level of funding, looking back over that period in which the honourable gentleman claims there has been-a decline in capital available, needs to take account of the real factors, and his statement just does not measure up with reality.
By an implicit deflator measure the outlays on capital expenditure by Telecom so far as to June this year in its comparatively short life as a separate organisation have not fallen appreciably behind in real terms. There is some lumpiness and therefore there is variance in capital expenditure by the organisation, particularly for an organisation operating on such an enormous scale as Telecom. Certainly, there is no eviderice put forward by either the honourable gentleman or his colleague in the other place to justify their claim that there has been a 16 per cent decline in capital available to Telecom since this Government came to power. Telecom, in its first 5t years has invested $5,000m in capital works, and 40 per cent of this came from public borrowings and profits. Orders worth $2,200m were placed with Australian industry, and $385m was spent with the building industry. This is the organisation that the honourable gentleman has the effrontery to say is not operating with maximum productivity and efficiency.
Since 1977 Telecom has not borrowed any taxpayers' money from the Government. It haspaid $1,600m in interest in past borrowings since July 1975. Over that period there have been significant cost increases. Small cable has risen by 15 per cent, small switchboards by 28 per cent, diesel alternators by 185 per cent, exchange equipment by 55 per cerit, junction cable equipment by 83 per cent, motor vehicles by'104 per cent, and the cabinet and instruments required for the installation of public telephones' by 165 per cent. Since 1 July 1975 the telephone network has grown by nearly 50 per cent, reflecting the growth under the Fraser-Anthony coalition Government as well as the fact that generally circumstances within Telecom are a lot better than the honourable gentleman would contend. Today over five million services are provided by Telecom. Traffic has grown since 1975 by 50 per cent. The number of country manual services has been halved and many sub-standard lines and old exchanges have been replaced as part of a $500m upgrading program. The number of full time staff per 1,000 lines of equipment, as I mentioned, has been

1986 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Telecom Australia

reduced at the same time by nearly one third. basis of our reference is that there is an explosion

More than 200 major engineering projects ranging of demand for communication services as the

in cost from $500,000 to over $12m were economy of Australia improves. What we seek to

completed or started during this time. Telecom's do is not to hide behind the report. I mentioned at

enviable record of a six year freeze on basic telethe Estimates Committee hearing that this report

phone charges also has coincided with that periodwould be referred to the committee conducted by

in which the honourable gentleman contended Mr Davidson. It also is fully intended to ensure

that nothing has been happening.

that, within the context of that inquiry, it look at

It is true that increases are now required to meet rising costs and to finance future develop-
ment, but let us look at that period of 5t years. The consumer price index has risen by 79 per cent. Telecom charges have been frozen. Many STD charges have beeI1 reduced and low cost
community call charges have been introduced. Basic installation, rental and local call charges have been frozen. The cost of adding a net tele-
phone service to the network in fact has been reduced by 50 per cent at constant prices. The
number of manual services in the country has

the extent to which Telecom, as it now operates,
can be extended through the application of private sector facilities, not to destroy the service provided by Telecom but to extend it. The motion brought forward by the honourable gentleman lacks substance and also lacks accuracy. In terms of the provision of communications services to
Australia, Telecom certainly, in my view, is doing an excellent task but it needs to be expanded in line with the provisions of facilities available in
the private sector if it is validly to meet the demands of Australia tomorrow.

been halved. So there have been substantial increases in the costs of labour, materials and interest charges. In addition to those operational costs funds are needed to finance future develop-

Mr INNES (Melbourne) (3.23)-1 support the matter of public importance this morning, Mr Deputy Speaker.

ment of telecommunications services. In the next Mr Sinclair-It is afternoon, Ted.

two years Telecom will need to invest over

$2,500m to keep up with the demand for new serMr INNES-This afternoon. I have been wait-

vices and to provide a congestion-free network. ing with bated breath. At the outset I wish to cor-

Of the $1 ,200m to be spent on materials well over rect one or two things that the Minister for Com-

$1,OOOm will be spent with Australian industries munications (Mr Sinclair) said. In the first

where costs are continuing to rise. With pressures instance, the Opposition is not criticising Telecom

on the capital market, Telecom will have to look Australia for what it has done. What we are doing

even further to internal funding to meet the capiis laying at the feet of the Government the fact

tal requirement. If current charges had been that Telecom has been restricted by its policies.

retained Telecom would not have had the funds Telecom has been placed in a situation in which it

to connect the one million-plus new telephone cannot effectively carry out its corporate plan and

services required in the next two years and to the plans that it laid out and has carried out very

achieve a reasonable time limit within which new efficiently and well over a number of years. The

telephones can be connected.

philosophy of the Government, as far back as

I know that in a few electorates represented by members of this House-I see the honourable member for McPherson (Mr White) for
example-there is an increasing demand that is extraordinarily difficult for Telecom to meet. But it is an obligation on Telecom to meet this charge, and of course it is one of the prime requirements

when Mr Robinson was the responsible Minister, was that, as from then, it would continue to lay the bases by which there would be inroads into the cream of the communication markets by private enterprise and into the organisation of Telecom Australia in particular and communications in general.

to obtain sufficient funds within the overall level of the funding requirements of the Government at large. New exchange buildings, exchange equipment, individual lines to customer premises and junction cables are necessary. A substantial upgrading of the STD trunk network is also under way.

That sequence of events took place during the 1978-81 period. The task force that was set up as a result of the actions of the Government led to a truncated inquiry and reported on the satellite
communications system that was set up and introduced by Packer as a result of a submission written for him by a person by the name of Bond.

The whole basis of the changed charges is along Until the present day the basis has been laid for

the lines suggested by the McKinsey report. The intrusion into the Telecom market. Unfortu-

Government intended to refer the McKinsey renately, in mid-1981, something occurred which I

port to the Davidson Committee of Inquiry. The would like to say something about later on. It is

Telecom Australia

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1987

regrettable that the Overseas Telecommunications Amendment Act 1981 went through, and, in fact, provided the modus operandi for moving into the monopoly position of telecommunications control by Telecom. We will live to rue the day.
I refer to the fact that the Government's policy has failed to allow Telecom to do what it ought to do in the interest of the consumers of communications in this country. I would like to refer to one or two matters to supportthat view. One matter is Telecom's financial dilemma. Last year Telecom paid the Federal Government $325m as interest on $4,566m advanced by the Government over a long period, mostly when Telecom was under the Postmaster-General's Department. These events provided for the vast expansion of telecommunications across a sparse continent and attracted a social rate of interest of 7.17 per cent. The Government has now adopted an economic interest rate of 10 per cent, which will increase the burden of Telecom and its customers by $130m per annum. The Government no longer sees the provision of telecommunications facilities as a social need; it sees telecommunications as just another area to exploit. How effectively it has done that!
Another aspect is the restrictions imposed on access by Telecom to loan funds. This financial year Telecom will spend $1,265m on capital works to upgrade and expand its network. The Acting Chairman of Telecom, Tom May, admits that that works program will not meet all the demands of the Australian people. That is the situation, despite the rubbish spoken this afternoon by the Minister for Communications, whose glib tongue cannot hide the facts. Mr May says that trunk congestion and lengthy delays in new telephone connections will occur. Telecom estimates the shortfall to be $20m to $30m. Mr May lays the blame squarely at the feet of the Fraser Government for not p'ermitting access by Telecom to adequate external sources of funds. The McKinsey report also endorses that view. It indicates, as we have said, that Telecom is a very efficient organisation, but that it could be more efficient. Its areas of advancement and achievement have been cut by the policies of this Government. Telecom is forced to raise 83 per cent of the funds for its capital works, depreciation, superannuation allocations, et cetera from internal sources. That means that the telephone customers of today are paying dearly for tomorrow's network.
Let us look at what cross-subsidisation, which the Minister spoke so highly of, really means. Telecom provides a social service to people in less densely settled areas of Australia by cross-subsidy

from metropolitan areas, where the telecommunications infrastructure is relatively cheap to provide, to provincial and rural areas. Last year's subsidy was worth something like $232m. In the electorate of the Minister for Communications in 1979-80 that subsidy was worth an average of $341 for every telephone in the Armidale telecommunications district. The earnings of each service averaged $467 and the expenses of each service averaged something like $808. In throwing the profit making areas open to private interests no thought has been given to country people or to expanding the national network. What we have to remember about the telecommunications system in this country is that it can stand only one market and cannot stand an intrusion into that market by any of the friends of the Government, or whoever they might be. Perhaps it might be from Peter Holmes a'Court in Western Australia. He stands like a vulture. One would think that butter would not melt in his mouth. That individual is involved with Satellite Business Systems. I seek leave of the House to have incorporated in Hansard an article which appeared in Computer World and is headed 'Threatening Telecom's Monopoly-IBM Venture Spawns SBS Clone Down Under'. That article--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Order! Is the honourable member seeking leave to incorporate a document in Hansard?
Mr INNES-Yes.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is leave granted? There being no objection, leave is granted.
Mr INNES-I had already done that.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I remind the honourable member for Melbourne that there is a procedure to follow and that procedure will be followed by the Chair.
The document read as follows-
Sydney, Australia-An IBM subsidiary and another 10 of Australia's largest corporations have moved to take control of this nation's long-range communications planning away from the federal government by forming their own version of Satellite Business Systems (SBS).
Called Business Telecommunications Services Pty Ltd (BTS), this joint venture will be headed by Peter Holmes A'Court, former external affairs director of IBM Australia Ltd. BTS will do much to prepare Australia for its first domestic communications satellite, infor~ed sources predicted wh:~ news of the company's founding broke last week, in opposillon to the federally run Telecom monopoly, which wants to keep data flowing through its telephone lines.
Telecom fills the. same function as the postal, telegraph and telep~om: authonlles of European countries. The giant corporatIOn IS often compared to AT & T because both organizations have entered the DP marketplace by drawing on vast revenues from strictly telephone operations.

1988 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Telecom Australia

Both in the US and down under, computer vendors have
called this cross-subsidizing unfair. The US Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has agreed, ordering Bell to keep financing of its voice operations separate from financing
of its DP side.

In Australia, foreign (including US.) and native computer vendors have pushed For similar restrictions on Telecom. But Australia has no FCC. As a government agency, Telecom has monopolized the nation's telecommunications with only nominal accountability to the Federal Ministry of Post and Telecommunicatoins.

So II major Australian firms have seized this look-alike

Bell by the horns, forming its-BTS to-in A'Court's words-

'establish whether government and private enterprise can co-

operate in the -provision of [~dvanced telecommunications]

services'. Joining IBM Australia, which transFerred A'Court

to the BTS tqp job, are Australia's largest or nearly largest

firms in the oil, insurance, electronics, diversified manufactur-

ing, publishing, broadcasting, retail, trucking and mining

industries.

'

Those three organizations may prove to be the largest.customers of their own joint venture, some observers have said,
but SBS main purpose will be competition with AT & T's terrestrial links, notwithstanding Bell's Advanced Communicatoins Service, for the data communications dollars of
US.users large enough to afford the roof-mounted dish antennae necessary for satellite traffic.

"The emergence of BTS shows the increasing significance of
telecommunications to business as the much reported communications revolution gathers momentum," A'Court
remarked. It may also indicate that I/lM, through foreign subsidiaries, plans to wage war From outer space on the telecommunications monopolies or near-monopolies it finds in lucra-
tive markets outside the US.

, . . which the FCC authorized concurrently with its OK of LCR. They are also offering internatioanl telex service
at rates significantly below those charged by the IRCs.

Mr INNES-I will not waste the time of the House by making specific reference to the article,
as it speaks for itself. It oulines clearly the role played by the gentleman concerned and his role in moving from IBM to the SBS organisation. That
will be the modus operandi of giving effect to the
policies to which I have made specific reference. It is not a question of criticising Telecom's operations. The reason that the program for connec-
tions is being left behind is that the Government is
restricting Telecom's activities. The Minister can say what he likes. The honourable member fol-
lowing me in this debate can also say what he
likes, but the General Manager of Telecom has spelt out the matter chapter and verse. What does
the Minister have to say about that?

When the cross-subsidisation takes place, if the
cost of supplying the service to the country areas,
which the Minister talks about continually, goes up to $200 a week, the increased cost of instal-
lations in his electorate will mean that he will not
be the member for that electorate any more; of course, he is concerned about that. The issue is
clear and concise. The market can stand only one
operating body. It is the obligation of any government to provide that service. I think that we were

remiss in not opposing the amendment to the Overseas Telecommunications Commission legislation, which slid through this House, because it gives an open door to destroy that monopoly which should be maintained in the public interest by the telecommunications authority in this country.
I make reference very quickly to the Davidson inquiry which the Minister talked about. The McKinsey report is going to be referred to that inquiry. The terms of reference of the inquiry into telecommunications services in Australia ignore completely imy mention of how Telecom may best serve the national interest or whether there is a role for private entrepreneurs in that field. The terms of reference merely require the committee of three businessmen and one academic to find out how, not whether, private interests can be involved in Australia's largest enterprise and most tangible national asset. The way is completely clear for private enterprise to take the cream from that area. Finally, the burden will be carried by the consumers. In closing, I request the Minister's permission to table a copy of the McKinsey report.
Mr Sinclair-I tabled the whole report earlier today.
Mr INNES-I am pleased that the Minister has done that. I was not aware that he had done so.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon, Ian Robinson)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar) (3.33)-Later in my speech I hope to reconstruct what I think the honourable member for Melbourne (Mr Innes) said, in order to be able to reply to it. In the meantime I will make some remarks, firstly on the speech made by the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins). I thought that the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) made quite a dignified contribution to the debate when he referred to matters not connected with the debate; however, it was a sorry state of affairs to have the honourable member for Fremantle propose a matter of public importance and to begin his speech with a series of grubby attacks on the personality of the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair). I will not comment further on that, but I thought it was absolutely disgraceful. I intend to address myself to the issues and not to the personalities.
Mr Barry Jones-It does not sound like the honourable member for Fremantle I know.

Telecom Australia

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1989

Mr CARLTON-What the honourable member for Fremantle said is a matter of record and can be read in tomorrow'sHansard. I think it was disgraceful. The Australian Labor Party is in a state of considerable agitation at the moment over Telecom because there are certain suggestions that public sector monopolies do not always serve the interests of the people. I notice that in the current series of Boyer lectures John Passmore raised that question. He said that he could not understand why anybody would believe that a public sector monopoly would be likely to deliver the goods any better than a private sector monopoly. I certainly endorse those remarks. If there is a way of expanding the work being done by a public sector monopoly so that it is shared and so that there is a little competition, I fail to comprehend why the Labor Party would not be looking towards that objective as a way of serving the public interest better than it is currently served.
Mr Barry Jones-John Passmore is not an unregulated free market man, either.
Mr CARLTON-John Passmore's remarks were quite sensible. I thank the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) for pointing that out. If one looks at the whole lecture-the whole series of lectures-one sees that a lot of very sensible comments were made. I agree with many of the things he said. On the particular issue of the failure of public sector monopolies to'provide suitable services, I think he was absolutely correct. I also believe that private sector monopolies do not provide satisfactory services. I think the honourable member for Lalor and I are in agreement as far as that matter is concerned. The question, therefore, is a sensible one. It is not a question of whether Telecom is going to be restricted in its capital to provide its basic services; it is really a question of whether the public interests might be served by examining its operations and par'ticularly the areas of growth in communications, which will be one of the major growth areas in the next couple of decades, to see whether it might be possible to avoid some of the problems we have had in the past because of monopoly provisions.
Senator Button, in an address obviously to a union audience the other day, tried to say that the monopoly must be preserved at all costs. In the process, he tried to frighten country people into believing that any breakdown of the monopoly would be to their disadvantage. I think it needs to be said pretty firmly by those of us, in particular myself, who support the opening of the system to

competition, that there is no suggestion in our approach that country people should be disadvantaged. If there were any suggestion that communications to country areas in Australia would be severely disadvantaged because of any changes in competition, I think it would be essential for the Government to come in and correct any failure of the market in that regard. I certainly am very strong on that.
I think the attempt to try to frighten country people over this whole matter is a political ploy on the part of the Australian Labor Party. It is astonishing also that the Labor Party should be seeking to promote the interests of country people. The Labor Party has an appalling history of bashing the bush. If people in the bush. can believe Senator Button, they will believe anything.
What has been overlooked in this whole situation is that the McKinsey report was a report to management. In order to avoid any of the remarks that might be made by such people as the honourable member for Fremantle, I point out to the House that between the years 1966 and 1971 I was employed by that organisation as a management consultant. I have no current connection with it and have not had since 1971 but I thought that I had better mention that in the House so that people like the honourable member for Fremantle would not be able to draw incorrect conclusions from that past association. This was a report to management that, of course, suffered the limitations of a report to management.
The management of a public corporation has to operate within pretty strict guidelines. It has to operate under an Act of Parliament and under certain directions from the Government. Of course, the Government is not constrained to approve of everything that the management of a public sector corporation might ask for. Labor governments, Liberal governments or any sorts of governments are not automatically required to agree with all the requests of all the heads of public corporations, or to agree with all the proposals put forward by consultants to those managements within the constraints under which those managements are currently operating. It is up to the Government to take a view.
Mr Innes-What value will that be to the Davidson inquiry?
Mr CARLTON-If the honourable member for Melbourne will keep his ears open and his mouth shut for a moment he might perhaps contribute retrospectively to the debate, having failed to contribute to it during his actual speaking time. The issue of the role of a public corporation in

1990 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Telecom Australia

Australia is a very important one. If a private consultant, reporting to management, comes up with proposals which the Government believes, taking a wider view of the public interest, should not be implemented exactly as they are recommended, under our democratic system, it is perfectly en, titled to reject any of those proposals.
Basically, what is happening is that there is a totally new opportunity in communications in Australia over the next couple of decades. There is an opportunity in the add-on market which has been investigated thus far by Mr Malcolm King and which will be continued by the Davidson inquiry. There is an opportunity for the private sector to come in and, to my mind, share with Telecom Australia the provision of those additional services.
Let me remind the House of what happened in the United States from 1969 when the Government allowed competition to come in, in competition with the Bell system in the add-on market. The add-on market expanded at such a rate that, although Bell retained only just over half the market after about 10 years, its actual sales went up enormously because the total market expanded in a dramatic fashion. I expect that a similar thing will happen here. If, as a result of the King and Davidson inquiries, the Government a1l6ws private operators to come in, in areas where new services can be provided in competition with TelecolT1, I think there will be an expansion of the overall market and an expansion of jobs.
Let us get down to the heart of what the Labor Party is worried about. This is why the honourable member for Melbourne has been trying to disrupt my speech. He thought I would not have time to get around to this part. Basically, what the Labor Party is worried about is this: It is not concerned about the service to the consumer but it is concerned with maintaining a monopoly of public employment for those currently in the employ of Telecom. If, in the add-on market situation, it were possible for a consumer to get the local private contractor to come in and fix something or to service it, there would be a possibility that the consumer would favour the private quotation against the day-labour service provided by a public sector monopoly. Therein lies a big concern of the Labor Party. It is very concerned indeed that the public sector unions in this area might lose their monopoly of the service; they might lose the monopoly of continuing to operate under a total day-labour system, which is grossly inefficient; and they might lose also the capacity over time to disrupt the whole communications system.

This really is what is behind the move by the Opposition today. It is behind the nasty question asked by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) yesterday questioning Mr Malcolm King's credentials-Mr Malcolm King is a very distinguished retired businessman; it _is behind Senator Button's address to that union where he tried to bring in the big bogeyman of loss of country services and loss of employment tothose people, which was nonsense; and it is behind what I believe will be a continuing campaign of the Labor Party to preserve a privileged public sector monopoly of labour with a monopoly of service by a public corporation which is fundamentally against the longer term public interest. This will also bring about a slower growth rate in the Australian economy. Communications is one of the growth industries of the next 20 years or 30 years. If it remains wholly within a monopoly public sector provision, the rate of growth of the Australian economy will thereby be reduced and the actual wages flowing through to the workers of this country, which the Opposition claims to represent, will be reduced.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILLS
(Nos lA to 9A) 1981
Consideration resumed from 24 September.
In Committee
Consideration of Senate's requests.
Senate's requests.
SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No.IA) 1981
No. I-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a),line22,leaveout "51".
No.2-Page 2,' clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22,leave out "54".
No.3-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a),line 22, leave out "60",
No.4-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5,sub-section (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "82 to 90F (inclusive)", insert "(except where such goods are for use in private dwellings)",
No.5-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5,sub-section (2), paragraph (a), line 23, leave out "96".
No, 6-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "120", insert "(except goods covered by that item which are clothing and footwear)".
No.7-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 6, subsection (b), line 34, after "items referred to in sub-section 5 (2) of this Act", insert "(subject to the exceptions in that sub-section) ".

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1991

SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No. 2A) 1981
No. I-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "51 ".
No.2-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "54".
No.3-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "60".
No.4-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "82 to 90F(inclusive)", insert "(except where such goods are for use in private dwellings) ".
No.5-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5,sub-section (2), paragraph (a), line 23, leave out "96".
No. 6Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "120", insert "(except goods covered by that item which are clothing and footwear) ".
No.7-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 6, subsection (b), line 34, after "items referred to in sub-section 5 (2) of this Act", insert "(subject to the exceptions in that su b-section) ".
SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No. 3A) 1981
No. I-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 21, leave out "51 ".
No.2-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line21, leave out "54".
No.3-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 21, leave out "60".
No.4-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, after "82 to 90F (inclusive)", insert "(except where such goods are for use in private dwellings) ".
No.5-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "96".
No.6-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, after "120", insert "(except goods covered by that item which are clothing and footwear) ".
No.7-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 6, subsection (b), line 33, after "items referred to in sub-section 5 (2) of this Act", insert "(subject to the exceptions in that sub-section) "
SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No. 4A) 1981
No. I-Page 2, clause3, proposed new section 5, sub-section (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "51".
No.2-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "54".
No.3-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "60".
No.4-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "82 to 90F (inclusive)", insert "(except where such goods are for use in private dwellings) ".
No.5-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, leave out "96".
No.6-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "120", insert "(except goods covered by that item which are clothing and footwear) ".
No.7-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 6, subsection (b), line 34, after "items referred to in sub-section 5 (2) of this Act", insert "(subject to the exceptions in that sub-section) ".

SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No. 5A) 1981
No. I-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 19, leave out "51".
No.2-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 10 , leave out "54".
No.3-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 20, leave out "60".
No.4-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 20, after "82 of 90F (inclusive)", insert "(except where such goods are for use in private dwellings) ".
No. 5-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 20, leave out "96".
No.6-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 20, after "120", insert "(except goods covered by that item which are clothing and footwear) ".
No.7-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 6, subsection (b), line 31, after "items referred to in sub-section 5 (2) of this Act", insert "(subject to the exceptions in that sub-section) ".
SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No. 6A) 1981
No. I-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "51".
No.2-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "54".
No.3-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "60".
No.4-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "82 to 90F (inclusive)", insert "(except where such goods are for use in private dwellings)".
No.5-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, leave out "96'.'.
No.6-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "120", insert "(except goods covered by that item which are clothing and footwear) ".
No.7-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 6, subsection (b), line 34, after "items referred to in sub-section 5 (2) of this Act", insert "(subject to the exceptions in that sub-section) ".
SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No. 7A) 1981
No. I-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "51".
No.2-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a),line 22, leave out "54".
No.3-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "60".
No. 4Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "82 to 90F (inclusive)", insert "(except where such goods are for use in private dwellings) ".
No.5-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, leave out "96".
No.6-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "120", insert "(except goods covered by that item which are clothing and footwear) ".
No.7-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 6, subsection (b), line 34, after "items referred to in sub-section 5 (2) of this Act", insert "(subject to the exceptions in that sub-section) ".

1992 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No. 8A) 1981
No. I-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "51 ".
No. 2Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "54".
No.3-Page 2, clause 3~ proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "60".
No.4-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "82 to 90F (inclusive)", insert "(except where such goods are for use in private dwellings)".
No. 5Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, leave out "96".
No. 6Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "120", insert "(except goods covered by that item which are clothing and footwear) ".
No.7-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 6, subsection (b), line 34, after "items referred to in sub-section 5 (2) of this Act", insert "(subject to the exceptions in that sub-section) ".
SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No. 9A) 1981
No. I-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "51 ".
No.2-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "54".
No.3-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 22, leave out "60".
No.4-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "82 to 90F (inclusive)", insert "(except where such goods are for use in private dwellings) ".
No.5-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, leave out "96".
No.6-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 5, subsection (2), paragraph (a), line 23, after "120", insert "(except goods covered by that item which are clothing and footwear) ".
No.7-Page 2, clause 3, proposed new section 6, subsection (b), line 34, after "items referred to in sub-section 5 (2) of this Act", insert "(subject to the exceptions in that sub-section) ".
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.43)-1 move:
That the requested amendments Nos I to 7 to each of the Sales Tax Amendment Bills Nos IAto 9A be not made.
The Government has given very careful consideration to the requests made by the Senate for changes to these Bills. We are dealing with those Bills which impose for the first time a rate of 2t per cent of wholesale sales tax with effect from 1 January 1982 on a range of commodities which at present are exempt from sales tax. The Government's decision was, of course, contained in the Budget Speech. This measure is an integral part of the Budget. The revenue to be yielded from this measure is a significant part of the Budget revenue not only for this year but also for future years.
If the Senate's requests were to be acceded to, the full year's cost of that decision would be about

$235m. The cost in 1981-82 would be in the order of $100m. 1 appreciate that, when one looks at items in isolation, it is always possible to argue a case for tax not to be applied on individual items. 1put it to the House that what we are dealing with is a modest and sensible expansion of the wholesale tax base. We are dealing with a situation in which the total volume of indirect tax to be collected this year will, in fact, rise at a lesser rate than the rate at which indirect tax collections rose last year. That comparison ought to be pondered by those who argue that these measures represent a savage indirect taxation impost upon ordinary Australian families.
The debate in our community about the composition of our taxation collections is a fairly well known one. No doubt the preconceptions that people hold as to what ought to be the appropriate mixture of direct and indirect tax are not likely to be altered by the course of debate on this legislation. We have to look at the sales tax measures now under consideration and the consequences of a major change to them in the light of the overall impact of the Budget. The Budget was designed, principally through a very responsible approach in the area of fiscal policy, to create the optimum conditions for taking pressure off the level of interest rates in Australia. Nobody likes the level of interest rates in Australia atpresent. It is a cause of concern to this Government and it is a cause of concern and difficulty and a burden to many hundreds of thousands of ordinary families throughout our country.
1 cannot think of anything more likely to reverse the very encouraging signs that have emerged in recent weeks on the interest rate front than a major departure from the thrust of the Budget strategy. Any fragmentation of that sttategy, any suggestion that the deficit will be greater than what in fact was budgeted for, runs the risk of disturbing the very favourable trends that have developed on the interest rate front in recent weeks. We have seen increased sales of Commonwealth Government securities. We have seen much anecdotal evidence that interest rates in many areas have found their peak. We have had a host of good indications that the whole tone of interest rates has sta'rted to improve. Of couse, that does not represent any unbounded commitment about the future but I think it represents a very fair assessment of the impact of the Budget and the responsible approach to fiscal policy contained in the Budget on this problem, which has been a cause of such great concern to the Government.
The level of the indirect tax proposed by this legislation is at 2t per cent. 1 stress that none of

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1993

the provisions of this legislation in any way imposes a. tax on food. I stress that the purpose of this legislation, being a very significant Budget measure, is to bring about in a wholly responsible and moderate way a broadening of the sales tax base. One has to recognise that if, as a matter of policy, one believes it desirable to shift the burden towards indirect taxation, the taxing of high volume consumption items is simply unavoidable. In our indirect tax system we already impose very heavy taxes on a limited range of goods. Nobody can deny that we do not already heavily tax liquor and tobacco. Nobody can deny that we do not already very heavily tax fuel. Nobody can deny that thert~ are not significant wholesale sales taxes on a range of luxury items, the rates for which have been increased to 30 per cent in this Budget. If in fact one believes in some change in the tax mix, it is simply not possible to achieve any significant revenue gain unless one is prepared to impose a level of taxation on high volume consumption items. Of course, that brings one into areas such as clothing, footwear and building materials, other areas covered by this legislation.
I repeat that, taken in isolation, the imposition of a tax on any individual item is never popular but these impositions occur against the background that, because of the Government's policy, which has bipartisan support, of automatic indexation of pensions every six months, there is full protection against these increases in cost of living adjustments for those in receipt of almost all social security benefits. In other words, there will be full compensation, without discount or deduction, for people receiving pensions by consumer price index adjustments in respect of the price effect of these indirect taxation changes. That ought to be repeated; it ought to be understood by those who wholly misrepresent and exaggerate the allegedly regressive impact of these indirect tax charges.
I summarise the Go\;,ernment's position by saying three things. Firstly, this measure, because of its revenue significance, is an integral part of the Government's Budget. That Budget strategy is certainly working. The climate, particularly on the interest rate front, has improved significantly since the Budget was brought down. To compromise this legislation in any way will very seriously affect the overall impact of the Budget and the responsible approach to fiscal policy contained in it. Secondly, I defend in its own right and on its own merits a modest move towards a broadening of the indirect tax base in this country. A taxation system that has a better mix between direct and indirect taxation is a better taxation system. There are advantages in having less reliance on personal

income tax and greater reliance on indirect taxation. It is easier to collect; it is harder to evade; it represents less of a disincentive to personal and business effort; and it has a host of other advantages.
Thirdly, I reject as significantly exaggerated many of the claims made about the regressive effect of indirect taxation, not only by the Opposition in this place but also by opponents of this legislation elsewhere throughout Australia. Because of our policy of automatically indexing pensions, those in receipt of indexed social security benefits are fully protected by cost of living adjustments against the price effects of these indirect taxation changes. Against that background, many of the claims made in this area are wholly false and wholly without foundation. If the requests of the other place were to be acceded to the full year cost would be to the tune of $235m. I say only that such an outcome would very seriously reduce the increased scope and potential which these measures have so clearly given to the Government to afford personal income tax relief in the future, given the right economic circumstances.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (3.54)-Before I make the remarks I intend to make, I refer to a couple of the points raised by the Treasurer (Mr Howard). He said that this legislation is a modest and sensible expansion of the tax base. What is involved is an increase of $330m in a full year or $235m in respect of those parts of the Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. lA to 9A) which are the subject of the request. We regard that as a substantial increase in revenue and also one which is being raised on a basis which adds to the inequity of the tax system. The Treasurer was at pains to say that the equity of the tax system was not damaged by the various sales tax measures that he has brought in. In fact, we totally repudiate that statement. The weight of evidence is totally against the Treasurer in regard to that proposition.
The fact is that increased indirect taxes are undoubtedly regressive in their impact and have been shown conclusively to be so by a study undertaken by Mr Neil Warren of the University of New South Wales in which he looked at the incidence of various taxes on taxpayers in differing income brackets in the year 1975-76. This material became available in late 1979. He shows, in the course of that study, that there is undoubtedly a very regressive impact of sales taxes, of customs duties, of excise and of indirect taxes applied by the State and local governments as well on taxpayers as a whole. There can be no argument

1994 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

whatever that a move towards higher levels of incidence of indirect taxation, raising a higher pro-
portion of total taxes through indirect taxes, is
one which adds to the regressiveness of the tax
system and which imposes a higher proportionate
burden on people on lower incomes, at the lower end of the scale, and therefore makes the tax sys-
tem less equitable and fair. There can be no argu-
ment about that. I seek leave to incorporate in

Hansard a table which is taken from the monograph published by Mr Warren called 'Australian Tax Incidence 1975 j76-Sof'le Preliminary Results'.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

INCIDENCE OF AUSTRALIAN TAXES IN 1975-76 Tax as a proportion of income

Household money income brackets ($)

Under 2,0804,1605,7207,2808,84010,40011,96013,52015,60017,680Over

Tax

2,080 4,159 5,179 7,279 8,839 10,399 11,959 13,519 15,599 17,679 20,799 20,800 Total

All Federal Sales (excluding liquor)
All Federal Indirect (Sales, Excise, Customs Duties & other Indirect)
All Indirect (Federal Stale and Local)
Total Taxes

3_91
14.99 34.09 47.71

1.59
7.01 16.34 24.76

2_84
9.71 19.14 32.34

2.68 2.99
9.48 10.22 18.3 18.46 33.4335.88

2.46
8.61 16.3 33.66

2.45
B.12 15.09 33.05

2.36
7.93 14.8 32.27

2.45
7.91 14.8 34.59

2.24
8.0 14.52 33.45

2.21
7.24 13.79 34.46

1.98
6.47 12.0 37.43

2.34
7.88 14.87 34.46

Source: Neil A. Warren "Australian Titx Incidence I975-76-Some Preliminary Results", Australian Economic Review 3/79.

Mr WILLIS-I thank the House. I will not refer to the detail because of the shortage of time. I believe it is important for the House to understand that the comprehensive study undertaken from 1975-76 shows that to be so. Since 1975-76, of course, since Labor went out of office, we have had a much greater increase in indirect taxes than we have had in direct taxes, The proportion of total taxes raised from indirect tax has gone up considerably over the period from 1975-76 to 1980-81, the last financial year. That has added to the inequity of the tax system. An amount of 28.4 per cent of total taxes was raised through indirect taxes in 1975-76 and 30.6 per cent in 1980-81. So we have had a move towards a higher proportion of taxes coming from indirect taxes, particularly because of the crude oil levy, That has added to the regressiveness of the tax system over and above what is shown in this table. Now we are having a further move that way through the measures undertaken in this Budget.
What will happen eventually before the next election is that the Government will bring in some income tax cuts and expect the electorate to be terribly grateful. What we will have will be a pronounced move towards a higher proportion of taxes coming through indirect taxation. We say that that undoubtedly will have the effect, and has already had the effect while this Government has been in office, of adding considerably to the regressiveness of the tax system, particularly as that has been accompanied by a massive explosion in tax avoidance which means that people on high

incomes are not even paying the taxes which they are supposed to pay with regard to income tax. All these factors together, I believe, demonstrate that the proposition made by the Treasurer in his opening remarks, that a move towards broader reliance on indirect taxation is fair and reasonable, is shown to be utterly and completely false.
I had hoped in the time available to me in this debate-perhaps I will get another go later-to say a bit about the Australian Democrats as well as a bit more about what the Government is doing and why we oppose its actions. I will just quickly run over some of the propositions raised with respect to the Democrats, Of course, the reason that we have the Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos, lA to 9A) now before us ,is because the Democrats in the Senate sought to move in the Committee stage that items in regard to clothing, footwear, books, magazines, newspapers, wrapping materials and building materials for private dwellings-all of those items which were proposed to be taxed at 2+ per cent-should be sent back to the House with a request that the tax not be applied to them. This came after the Democrats had refused to support Labor in flatly opposing the legislation at the second reading stage along with the two other sales tax measures; that is, the general increase of 2+ per cent and the increase in various items to overcome supposed anomalies. The Democrats' actions in our view have been marked by remarkable ignorance, confusion, inconsistency and sheer grandstanding. Even allowing for the absence of their leader and the inexperience of the rest it still

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1995

has been an amazing performance. In regard to confusion and inconsistency we have seen, for instance, the continual changes of mind as to what the Democrats will do. They have changed their minds more often than they change their socks with continual refutations of messages which have been previously sent to the Opposition as to their attitude coming one after the other. The Democrats are clearly at sixes and sevens in this regard.
Whilst the Democrats have said that they opposed sales tax on the necessities of life they have supported the increase of tax on many items that are. undeniably necessities of life. Just what are the necessities of life is obviously a matter of a value judgment. If one looks at the items supported by the Democrats one can see that those items clearly fit into most people's conception of what are the necessities of life. In the Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. lA to 9A) where the new taxes are to be applied, including drapery, piecegoods, soft furnishings and yarns, are goods for repairing footwear, such as soles and laces, bedding items such as sheets, pillowcases, towels, facewashers, blankets, cot covers, mattress covers and protectors. One would think that these would come into the area of necessities. If not, and if one takes the view of the Democrats, they must have some very curious sleeping and bathing arrangemen ts.
Also included in the drapery area, which the Democrats believe should be taxed, are cleaning cloths and sponges, cotton, buttons, zips and handkerchiefs. One would have thought that all these were necessities. If not, how then do the Democrats hold up their trousers or fasten their dresses? If the Democrats do not get snotty noses, they must think the rest of us should wipe our noses on our tax free shirt sleeves. All these items are in the Bills now before the House but are not subject to requests for deletion. The Democrats have supported also tax increases on various other items that many would regard as necessities; for instance, in the area where there has been an increase in tax from 27+ per cent to 30 per cent are ballpoint pens, felt tipped pens, foot and body powders and deodorants, razors and electric shavers, brushes and combs and radio and television sets. In the 2+ per cent to 5 per cent category there are furnishings, crockery, glass and cutlery, refrigerators, washing machines, vacuum cleaners, radiators, jugs and toasters, floor coverings, mattresses and pillows, light fittings and candles. Motor vehicles are in the 17+ per cent bracket. All of these would be regarded, to varying degrees, according to one's value judgments, as being necessities of life. Most of them would be regarded by all of us and everyone outside this

House as necessities of life. For the Democrats to say that what they are doing is opposing taxes on the necessities of life and simply supporting increased taxation on luxuries is an absolute travesty of the tru tho

In the Senate they have supported increases on

a whole range of necessities of life-so-called

surely by the standard of anyone who is reason-

able in the community. That fact should be recog-

nised widely. They are grandstanding on this issue

in saying that they are opposing only taxes related

to the necessities of life. They have also failed in

the Senate to support a Labor move-l will not go

into this because of lack of time-which would

have supplemented this action which is now be-

fore us in regard to requests to the House and

reinforced it in regard to an amendment to the

Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Bill.

They have failed to do that. Again that points to

the fact that they are rather grandstanding on this

issue. They have shown their inconsistency also by

saying that, whilst they want the Government to

amend this legislation, they will not eventually

oppose it. That puts enormous pressures on the

Treasurer, does it not? He is told on the one hand:

'We are going to keep sending these back to you

but if you insist on having them passed then we

will capitulate'. Well, some pressure group they

are! Any government worth its salt would treat

them with contempt and that is clearly what this

Government is doing.

.

A further example of the Democrats' inconsistency is that, while they say that they cannot vote against this legislation in the ultimate because it would offend the spirit of their pledge not to block supply which would mean rewriting the Budget, they are moving a private members' Bill which would reduce tax revenue by $900m a year. Senator Haines has moved to eliminate tax on interest from deposits with banks and building societies. That would obviously have a great implication for the Budget. The revenue loss there would equate the revenue loss from rejecting the whole of the sales tax measures. The Democrats, I think, can be shown to be totally and utterly inconsistent. If I get another chance I will come back to say why the Government's measures are totally inappropriate in our view.

Sir WILLIAM McMAHON (Lowe) (4.4)-There are several points that I want to make immediately because I have had to listen over the last few weeks to a large number of people putting their complaints to me. The first point relates to the so-called retrospectivity which applies now only in respect of any new taxes which have been introduced on an increased number of items; that is, those not previously

1996 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

taxed. There is no retrospectivity at all because under the sales tax legislation it is the law and in de facto operation the tax will apply only when the property changes hands as between the manufacturer and the purchaser or the retail seller. I add to that that it will apply too in cases where a person can go directly to the manufacturer. So retrospectivity does not apply. I concede that, on some occasions, for example, where some items . have been increased by 2t per cent to 17t per cent, that there will be some difficulty for people being able to agree with and accommodate themselves to that increase. But, in cases that have been brought to my attention, as, for example, by a truckie, there can be no doubt at all that the amount of tax will be imposed as at the date of transfer of the asset. He, too, will then have that amount added to the amount that he might have thought he was paying. He will make up his price based upon the increased amount plus his markup. It will be a more profitable occupation for him. So, I have no doubt about retrospectivi.ty at all.
The second matter about which I particularly wanted to speak was to confirm to the pensioners in my electorate that they do, of course, get indexation each half year. That indexation will permit them to cover the increases that come about because of the sales tax changes that have occurred in the first sales tax item, that is, the overall 2t per cent on present goods that are now the subject of wholesale sales tax. So I have no worry about that. I must express my feelings about two things that have been said by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) who spoke on behalf of the Australian Labor Party. First of all he was bitterly critical of the Australian Democrats. I am glad of that. They have to recognise that they are detested by the Labor Party. If the Democrats want to be sensible they should join with the Government in order to ensure the immediate passage of this legislation when it is returned to the upper House. Another fault I point to in regard to the honourable member is that when he spoke about indirect taxes he did mention the figure of, I think, 22 per cent in sales tax. But he failed to mention that in relation to sales taxes this is an increase of only 7.2 per cent as a proportion of total receipts.
Coming back to my interest in this matter, I think I have been associated with it longer than anyone else, not only in the Parliament but also in the Department of the Treasury. When I was Treasurer-I do not know how many years ago that was, but it was a long time ago-Sir Richard Randall, a man for whom I had tremendous admiration as Secretary to the Treasury, wanted me

to introduce a value added tax but said: 'Before I go that far I want a sales tax out of you'. I said: 'Not on your bloody life'. That was the exact response I gave to him. He was a wonderful bloke and he did not press it any more. But he said: 'Sir, I tell you it will come some day'. I have been waiting for that day and here it is.
Apart from that I have done a fair bit of work on this matter of indirect taxes. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) will remember a meeting that we, of the Party's treasury committee, had with him to tell him what we thought ought to be done. I then devised a scheme looking, first of all, at a value added tax. I explained why it was impossible to introduce that tax. We then thought about a retail tax and explained how that was impossible to introduce in a Parliament that has a life of only three years. That is another argument that I can see for having a Parliament for five years. If that is not possible I hope Labor will join with us in seeing that it has a life of four years. I did bring up a total scheme relating to a whole sales tax. I prepared outlines of a scheme that was necessary because it has long been the philosophy of the Liberal Party that we must provide incentives for people to do the job. They must be able to know that, it they work and perform and do the job properly, efficiently and profitably for the nation as a whole, they should join in that increased profitability to a greater extent than anyone else. This will surprise a lot of people in this House. Recently I was in Salisbury. The Mugabe Government made a statement, the day after I was there, that it agreed with my philosophy of life. Yet that Government is Marxist from the top of its head to the bottom of its feet or whatever parts of the body it has got to think with.
I come back to the reason why I was pushing for a change. That change, roughly, is based upon the fact that, as you know, Mr Deputy Chairman, there has been a pretty big reduction in the rate of increase in the crude oil levy which this year amounts to only $3,440m. That is an increase of 10 per cent. But sales tax increased to $2,913m or 36.8 per cent of the Government's total receipts, an increase of 7.2 per cent of total receipts. Income tax receipts amount to $20,850m which is an increase of $3,173m or 18.9 per cent. That is 51.2 per cent of all the taxes that are paid. Therefore, I have long believed and have argued persistently for tax relief as has the Treasurer (Mr Howard). At page 18 of the Budget Speech he stated:
This Budget also allows for a number of other recently announced taxation measures. Some of the new revenue proposals--
Which he announced-

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1997

Will help to broaden the tax base and this, combined with measures in other areas, will enhance the potential for further personal income tax relief in future years.
He says it even a little bit better under the heading of 'Sales Tax', but I will not repeat exactly what he said. We had a meeting about indirect taxes and reductions in personal income tax in about February this year. 1 cannot remember the exact date because 1 did not know that this matter would be coming on today. But 1 did prepare this outline of the wholesale sales tax for the Government Treasury Committee. At the same time it is impressed on honourable members that instantaneously as this wholesale sales tax was introduced a statement had to be made relating to personal income taxation. Disincentives to life are being reduced in the private sector of the economy. If that goes on for too long we will not get the production we need to sustain our economic health and our ability to succeed when the rest of the world is failing. As one \Yho has just come back after eight weeks of travelling around the world-it is a little longer than that I know that the opportunities are better here than they are anywhere else in the world. 1 know that we are capable of doing the job better than any other country per head of population. Therefore, 1must emphasise that 1 am pressing as strenuously as 1 possibly can for the Government to do what it said it would do earlier on when we started to think about a broader based indirect tax-.that is, it would join the two together.
Only yesterday 1 asked the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in this House whether he would agree to 1 July as the date on which income tax would be reduced. 1 must say that the Treasurer was right when he said that one cannot make a precise and totally committed statement; because one can never tell what changes in economic circumstances can occur here or overseas. One never knows what the trade unions are likely to do in restraining our exports and therefore our overseas trade or as a consequence the disadvantages that we are likely to suffer in our international trade. One never knows what can happen. For example, we might have a drought as is being experienced in .certain parts of Australia now. Therefore one cannot be precise. But we can be consistent with our philosophy and with our promises as well and at least we can say that it is our intention to reduce taxes. We must make a statement before 1 July to the effect that we will give a substantial reduction in personal income tax as part of a policy to achieve a better mix of direct and indirect taxation, the intent being to give people the right to decide what to do with what they earn. Of course, we must be guided by circumstances at the time

and we cannot give an absolute guarantee of what we will do.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Drummond)-Order! The right honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (4.15)-1 want to take part in this debate and refer to an issue that has not yet been raised and that is: What is this Government's strategy in relation to the message that has been received from the Senate? It is all very well to say that the Government will press ahead with the sales tax legislation. It is very clear that the Senate objects to it. It has sent back a message which clearly indicates, in respect of the nine Bills, the reasons why it will not pass those measures. As my colleague, tpe honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) has said, the Australian Democrats have taken some initiative in rejecting these Bills. However, it was the Opposition which rejected them in to to for the very simple reason that there was no mandate for the Government to impose this type of regressive taxation.
This legislation has nothing to do with annual appropriations or what might be termed government strategy. In our view, it is an additional impost on the people of Australia for which the Government mustget some mandate. It certainly does not have the support of the Senate as it is now constituted. 1 hope that when the Treasurer (Mr Howard) refers to the message from the Senate he will indicate what the Government will do about the matter because it is very clear that the Senate will not change its mind. That is the position from the point of view of the message. Are we going to be put in a position of just waiting around here while we continue to get a number of messages from t!1e Senate which say the same thing-that is, that it does not approve of the measures? While the Democrats do not have much stability or uniformity'of action, they would be laughed out of public life if they decided to change their strategy and give us a different message altogether.
From the Opposition's point of view, our principle is firm and clear. We oppose the legislation. There is no mandate for it. This is a government that proposes to soak the people who can least afford to pay and apparently, in two years, give them back some portion, by way of tax relief, of what it has already extracted from them. We have been put on notice by statements by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) that he forecasts tax relief next year. Certainly it would be the year after because that is an election year. These measures have nothing to do with Supply or with

1998 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

the annual appropriation. This is a government -measure. Clearly the Government never indicated

measure to extract more money from those least to the people at the last election that it was going

able to pay by what is deemed to be a Budget to impose such a tax. So there are some bona fides

strategy. But it is a punitive taxation measure.

in the opposition to it, apart from the merits of the

The Senate, rightly in these circumstances, has expressed a view on the matter. We do not support the Democrats' view, as the honourable
member for Gellibrand has said. The Democrats only looked at some parts of the legislation, said they were all right and then rejected the rest. To

argument put by my colleague the honourable member for Gellibrand about the insidious type of
tax that is imposed on those least able to pay. The reason that the Government should indicate its strategy is that the problem cannot be solved anywhere else than in the political spectrum.

the extent that the Democrats have rejected the other measures that falls in line with the Oppo-
sition view in that we oppose the lot. I am anxious
to hear from the Government as to what its strat-
egy is, if the Senate sends us back another message that it adheres to its original decision. Surely the
Government will not have us here day in and day
out on the basis that we play this political ping
pong to see who will fail first. In our view, it is
very clear now that the Government is being hoisted with its own petard. The position is similar
to what it attempted to do to us in 1975 on mat-
ters much more substantial than this, that is, the
Appropriation Bills themselves. We got all sorts of curious messages sent back to us that we should
offer ourselves for re-election to the people be-
cause of the high rates of interest, inflation and unemployment at the time. If that was the criteria in 1974-75, surely it comes right up to the top
again now because all those records which relate to unemployment, inflation and interest rates
have been clearly exceeded by this Government.

We have now entered again into this doubtful
arena as to which is the major House in the Parlia-
ment. Let us make it very clear. We are the major
House in the Parliament. The Senate cannot hold up legislation willy-nilly on the basis that we have
to give in. The Government knows that this is the
position but it did not accept it when it had some chance to use its forces in the Senate years ago. If
the Senate wants to indicate the position clearly to this House and if it continues to pass this
message-the Democrats are doing that-surely
the Government must let us know now whether it proposes to wait a period of three months and
reintroduce an identical measure and go to the
people. Can honourable members imagine everybody engaged in trade and commerce in this com-
munity not knowing whether the Bills will be
passed and not knowing whether there will be increased taxation? In other words, they do not
understand what is the Government's policy. We
can read all the euphemistic expressions-that there will be a better life ahead and we will get

The Democrats did not find it necessary to talk reduced taxation. But when we come to the issue

about that sort of doubtful message. I do not as to how it will be done, if we do not get this

blame them. They at least have some legal advice measure passed, we do not get any explanation

now which is that we will deal with these matters from the Government.

in specific terms. They sent us the schedule of requests to each of the nine Bills clearly indicating the Bills they want altered. In our view the Government has to face up to what its strategy will be. Will the Government continue to sit where it is now and say, 'We are not going to do anything about it'? Will the Senate continue to say, 'We are not going to change our mind'? If that is the position, what is going to happen from the point of view of the Government's strategy.
Why can we not have a clear statement made here today as to what the Government intends to do? Does it intend to wait for a period, then reintroduce the measure and rely on section 57 of the Constitution which would mean going to the people on the issue? I think that is what it had better do because there is a certain amount of disarray in its own ranks. At least some 20 of its members, we understand, do not support the measure. Clearly the people outside this Parlia-

The Treasurer could clearly indicate today what the Government will do if the Senate refuses to agree with his rejection of its message-in other
words, pass the legislation. It ought to be said. We understand that this session has a limited life of
about 21 days. People would be very interested to
know what is going to happen if, at the end of that
period, the Senate is still sitting back on a number of messages. Perhaps it would have sent us four or
five messages by them which all say the same
thing. We assemble here every day saying, 'That is to be deplored', but we are getting nowhere. What
would the people outside the Parliament think of a government that could not indicate today, when
it is dealing with the message, what is its strategy?
We could well have a position of having to pass legislation next January, if the appropriate period
is three months. If it is again rejected by the
Senate--

ment who will pay the tax do not support the Mr Bradfield-No.

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1999

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-The honourable member is nodding his head for some reason.
Mr Bradfield-We have not got to that stage yet.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-The Government is up to that stage now because the Senate surely will not say that it will withdraw its message. I make it very clear that the Opposition is standing on a question of principle. Maybe the Democrats are going to withdraw the message. If they do, they do not deserve to remain in political life. All we are doing here is wondering whether we will change our minds because the Democrats have a point of view. It is for the Government to indicate its intention clearly.
I want to make this point: The Democrats are well aware of the disarray in their own ranks and are well aware of the fact that the Government has not got a mandate from the Australian people. Possibly they are anxious to force the Government to the polls-we will join them in that enforcement-on the basis that they feel they will teach the Government a lesson. A number of Government back benchers on Nationwide and elsewhere have clearly indicated how they want to teach the Government a lesson. Any government worthy of its name, apart from indicating to the Press its intentions about tax relief, might indicate in the Parliament, when it is dealing with the message, what it intends to do about its strategy.
In Osborne v. the Commonwealth, Griffith said there are matters-they include the matters we are discussing-where there is no law that can be enforced in a court. These are proposed laws and the obligation for their enforcement is directed to the House of Parliament. The conduct of its affairs is for it alone and they are ~ot subject to any review by a court of law. Let us have a clear exposition from the Treasurer, who has a few more minutes left in which to speak, as to where he stands on the issue. Is the Government going to continue to stand firm on the issue as it is today and reject the message if a similar message is sent back here after this one is returned to the Senate? If so, what happens after that? The Opposition makes it very clear that we oppose the legislation in to to and we will not be varying from that position. I would have thought it is in the interests certainly of the public that the Treasurer could have indicated the position when talking about the message today.
Mr GROOM (Braddon) (4.25)-The Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) seems to be implying that there may be some miniconstitutional crisis arising out of this particular

package of Bills that is now before the Committee. I think he will find that the problem will evaporate in due course. It seems to me to be a strange use of section 53 of the Constitution for the Senate to request certain amendments to this legislation by the House of Representatives when certain elements in the Senate have said that they will eventually pass the legislation. They are on record as saying that they will eventually support this legislation. Yet by way of their request they
are asking members of the House not to support the legislation which they themselves have said they will support. There is something inconsistent about their approach.
A point I want to make was made by the right honourable member for Lowe (Sir William McMahon) earlier; that is, it concerns me that we are now dealing with a package of sales tax Bills which seeks to raise $330m in revenue without any offsetting cuts in direct tax. No one likes taxes, of course. The public does not like them and members of parliament generally do not like to support tax measures. But unfortunately they are inevitable. They are necessary to provide the funds for government services. I hope that we will see in due course some significant cuts in personal
income tax. On my reading of the comments that have been made by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), clearly they have in mind at some appropriate time to bring in cuts in personal income tax, if it is at all possible when one has looked at the general budgetary situation. I have endeavoured-I regret unsuccessfully-to pin the Government down to bring in some cuts in personal income tax in the next Budget, because I believe that would be the appropriate time. The community is not prepared to wait forever for cuts in personal income tax. I certainly hope that, before too long, we will see something positive done by the Government and see some cuts in this area.
I support the general movement that might re-
sult from these measures away from direct income tax to indirect taxes. Direct, personal income tax has deficiencies. It stifles incentive. It stops people going out and working a bit harder, setting up a business and so on. That is not good for theeconomy and the country. Of course, at the same time
it is so easy to evade personal income tax. It is unfortunate that, in this day and age, there are many people in the community with fairly large incomes-I am told there are some with incomes of $100,000 or more-who are not fulfilling their responsibilities to the community and are not paying a fair share of taxation. It is important that everyone pays a fair share. They should not pay more than they have to pay, but at least they

2000 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

should be willing to shoulder their share of the burden. I believe that this movement towards indirect taxes will assist, because it is much more difficult for these people to evade or to avoid their responsibilities to pay taxation.
I hope that, when the Government considers cutting income tax, it looks at the family situation. I hope it will look particularly at the single income family and will provide some taxation concessions for the single income family, especially the family with children to support. I believe that that is important and essential, because we must ensure that these families receive proper support. There -may be later speakers who will talk about the burden being faced by the ordinary families in this country. I would not like to see those families incur penalties as a result of this legislation. Many of them are having a battle at the moment; there is no doubt about that. They have some additional costs. Many of them are paying higher interest rates, which is an important issue. Of course, one cannot look at these things in isolation. If the deficit can be kept down, there is no doubt that pressure is taken off interest rates. No doubt one of the reasons for this sales tax legislation is to increase the revenue of the Government and, as a result of that, to take some pressure off interest rates by reducing the deficit. That certainly is to be commended. But let us look at the family situation eventually and, as I said earlier, let us provide those in that category as soon as possible with some tax cuts and concessions to provide them with more support than they may have at present. The point has already been made that pensioners will be protected to some extent.
Mr Bradfield-That is an important point.
Mr GROOM-It is an important point, and the right honourable member for Lowe made it also. The point is that these increases will have an impact on the consumer price index and flowing on from that the CPI increases will mean an increase in their pensions. That will assist them. The same results come from decisions that we have made in the area of health. Those decisions will have an impact on the CPI and again the pensioners will receive the benefit from the CPI increases that occur. The honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) has already made that point at a meeting earlier today and I think it is a very worthwhile point that we should all note. That group will be protected; that must be realised. I am concerned about that other group, the low income earners who may be earning $3,000 or $4,000 and who at the moment would not be paying personal, direct income tax but may be paying indirect taxes. Of course, they are not paying direct income tax at present and this

movement away from direct taxes to indirect taxes may again increase the burden that is put upon the shoulders of this kind of person.
Mr Bradfield-Put the point that it is not on foodstuffs.
Mr GROOM-That is right. It is not on foodstuffs, which is a fundamentally essential item for a family.
Mr Lionel Bowen-Have a yarn outside.
Mr GROOM-That is fair enough. We must have some discussion on a point like this. It is an important measure and the honourable member has made a very important point. That area is also protected.
Mr Kerin-Can I make a point too?
Mr GROOM-The honourable member can make a point if he wants to, but the important point I make is that I support this movement. If we are going to see a movement away from direct taxes to indirect taxes, I would certainly like to see at the earliest possible opportunity a significant cut in direct taxes, certainly to assist the ordinary, battling family which is having a problem at the moment. On that basis and as a result of the indications that have been given that in due course there will be cuts in direct taxes, I am prepared to support these measures. I would not be prepared to support them had there not been these general assurances that we will see cuts in direct taxes in due course.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (4.34) - The Bills before us propose substantial increases in sales tax of the order of $900m in a full year. They are part of a package of economic measures of the Government which, it professedly says, are designed to fight inflation. So we have it in a nutshell. The Government tactic is to fight inflation with higher prices. It is like filling a fire extinguisher with petrol and has as much rationality about it. In his opening comments in relation to these Bills today the Treasurer (Mr Howard) said that there were encouraging signs on the interest rate front as a result of Government policy. He was dishing up to us, in saying that, an old-fashioned serving of hard-boiled economic tripe. He may well believe what he has been told to say by the Treasury but the people who have told him to say that know better and do not believe it.
Any easing on the interest rate front will be welcome. Let us be clear why there will be some easing, or why at least there should be. It will be because there is a collapse in the keystone of economic policy. The large capital inflow upon which so much of Government policy for this year

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2001

hinged is falling apart. The implication of that is very simple. In economic terms it means for monetary management that the addition to the domestic money supply coming in from outside will be reduced. The Government not only can lower interest rates but also-if it coninues; if the re-
verse is substantial and persistent-will be threshing about trying to change the direction of economic policy or else casting this country into one of the most brutal credit squeezes we have seen in the post-war period. The change in interest rates, as welcome and as desirable as it will be, will be through an error on the part of Government forecasting as to the trend in the economy.
Having made the point that the whole change of emphasis in economic policy implies that the Government must think in terms of relaxing domestic economic controls, let me make this important point: It exposes the nonsense of the Government in terms of economic management in persisting with the sales tax increase which is before us, raising in a full year nearly $900m. What the Government will need to do in its threshing about to try to restore some sort of equilibrium in its economic management within the context of what it set itself as its objectives is increase the availability of spending power domestically. One of the most effective and equitable ways of doing that would be to abolish this commitment to these new sales taxes and to the increased sales taxes. In the course of this fiscal year that would mean a reduction of a little over $500m in the surplus of $1,500m. I would argue that, if the capital flows coninue to reverse on the basis on which they have
so far, that will not be enough. The Government will have to aim at eliminating the surplus completely, perhaps even moving in the direction of a mild deficit, such is the nature of the changes which are taking place dramatically, rapidly and with significant impact on the economic management measures which will be required in this country.
I move on to the constitutional implications of the consideration of the measures before us. We are considering these measures again because they have been returned from the Senate. They have been returned from the Senate because the Senate has tacked a message on the sales tax Bills. In essence, as a result of an initiative of the Australian Democrats, it proposes that essential commodities should be exempted from the imposition of sales tax. We are opposed to all of the sales tax adjustments which have been proposed by the Government and we will not flinch in our opposition. We support this measure, although we would like to go further, because at least it goes some of the way towards meeting the commitment we have given

to the Australian public. On experience, there is a lot of doubt as to what the Democrats mean when they give a commitment, but if we take it as an accurate assessment of the Democrats intent and if we accept that Senator Mason, their spokesman on economic matters, is the man best fitted to make those sorts of commitments, we are being confronted by a constitutional challenge. In the Senate on 16 September, Senator Mason said:
We will not condone its failure~~
Being the Government-
to remove the sales taxes on necessities and we will continue our campaign against them for as long as is necessary, certainly up until the next election whenever that might be.
The Democrats have declared, if they mean it, that they will fight, and they will fight, and they will fight again on this issue. What they are declaring, if they stick by that commitment, is that there is a constitutional challenge between the Senate and the Government. The facts are, as the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) pointed out, that the Senate has the right, constitutionally, to make its request on a particular money Bill once and once only. That is the opinion of Garran, Sir Harrison Moore, Sir Isaac Isaacs and Sir John Latham. They are unequivocal in their declaration. To go beyond that, it is their separate view but consistent in all cases, that the Senate is no longer proceeding with a message to the House of Representatives but is virtually demanding an amendment to the legislation and, therefore, is taking steps which are prohibited by section 53 of the Constitution. In those circumstances, the Senate's action has to be interpreted as a rejection of a money Bill. Having sent the message to this House once and its being rejected and sent back to the Senate, if the Senate proceeds with it again the matter then moves into the purview of section 57 of the Constitution-failure to pass. If the House of Representatives again will not accept that action, it has taken the first step towards a double dissolution and then it is competent for the Government at some time, three months later or thereafter, to take the next step, and that is to introduce fresh legislation. That means, synoptically, that we will have established in this House well before Christmas-within the next week or two-whether the Democrats are fair dinkum, whether Senator Mason knew what he said and meant what he said when he said that they would fight 'as long as is necessary, certainly up until the next election whenever that might be'. He will not have to wait that long; he will know early in the New Year. If not, he and his colleagues would have welshed once again on the firm intent that has been declared in the Senate.

2002 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

The opinion of Professor Richardson, Garran Professor of Law at the Australian National University, makes it quite clear that, having embarked on this course of conduct and having persisted with it, there can be only one outcome; that is, having set in train the processes for a double dissolution, either the Government is prepared to accept that challenge, or the Government has to climb down. As to section 53 of the Constitution, he states:
In denying the right and conferring the right of request instead, the section intends to draw a difference of substance. Where a request is made the right of decision as to the form of the bill rests solely with the House of Representatives and, it is submitted, that to press a request is to insist upon it andthis section 53 does not allow. In the opinion of the writer, therefore, to press a request may set in train a course of events leading to the establishment of a deadlock under section 57.
One way or the other, we will find out whether the Democrats have spine or the Government has determination, whether the Democrats will stand by their obligations to the Australian community and persist in resisting this legislation or whether eventually the Government will cave in.1 urgethe Democrats to stand by their commitment. We will not retreat; we will not flinch. Apart from anything else it makes good economic sense for the Government to review the economic policies it laid down and the general strategy it declared in the last Budget. It ought to do that immediately in repudiating its commitment to indirect tax increases of such extraordinary levels with such inflationary impact, which will be so unfair and unjust in their impact on the community. If the balance of payments position continues to weaken in the way in which it has in recent times and if the vast capital flows upon which it hinges so much of its optimistic expectations as to economic performance in the future continue to weaken, the Government will have to bring in a mini-Budget in the first half of the next calendar year to try to offset the very unsettling forces which will be at work in the economy, forces which will impose on this economy and this country a savage contraction with very serious effects on the general performance of business and a serious set-back for the living standards of people in this community.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Order! The Leader of the Opposition's time has expired.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (4.44)-1 want to make a couple of points very briefly. Before 1do, I would like to say how extraordinary it was to hear the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) say that these indirect tax rises should be withdrawn. He said that these indirect tax rises are of 'such extraordinary impact' and of 'such extraordinary levels'. How extraordinary it is that they are

exactly half the rise of indirect taxes in his last Budget. In real terms, indirect taxes will rise 3.7 per cent in the current year as a result of this Budget. That is less than half the 8 per cent rise in real terms that the Leader of the Opposition increased indirect taxes by in the Hayden Labor Budget of 1975. This man comes into this place, having had an indirect tax rise double the rate of the current one, and pretends that this tax is impossible and disgraceful and that it should be withdrawn. What a humbug this man is to come in and make a point like that. Having established that, let us examine another little bit of humbug. Let us examine the points--
Mr Hayden-Where did you hide all the money you took off the pensioners?
Mr BAUMK-When the Leader of the Opposition manages to control himself so that I can be heard, it would be nice if we could examine another little bit of humbug from the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). He faithfully follows in the footsteps of the Leader of the Opposition. I admit it is unusual for the Deputy Leader of the Opposition to follow in the footsteps of the Leader of the Opposition-after all he could not do so in regard to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting-but in this case he is following in the footsteps of the Leader of the Opposition because he is also talking arrant humbug. He pretended in this House that there was a major division within the Government over the principle of sales tax. That is self-evident nonsense. We have just heard the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) give a very reasoned statement about the reasons for concern that he has, for example about indirect tax rises, if there is to be no eventual reduction, about which he would be content, in direct taxes. There is no doubt that that is a reasoned statement from the honourable member for Braddon. But that was not the point that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition was endeavouring to maintain in the Committee. He endeavoured to maintain that a meeting held last night represented a division over the principle of sales tax, and that is totally and hopelessly false. It is totally untrue. If members of the Australian Labor Party have such a great interest in what happens in Liberal Party meetings, let me tell them that that discussion very simply was over one set of consequences of the alteration to one group of sales tax measures, and that is those which, without intent, can have a retrospective impact. It has nothing to do with the principle of sales tax. There is overwhelming-monumentalsupport within the Government for the principle

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2003

of sales tax. For the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, knowing what the reality was;to come into this House and pretend that that meeting represented division on the principle of sales tax, does not do him justice. He is a man of much higher standards and reputation than that. It is interesting to see in the Australian of today's date this nonsense being perpetuated in the Press. That newspaper states:
. . . Mr Howard, was arguing the Government's case for imposing sales tax before a meeting of angry backbenchers in Parliament House late last night.
That, for the benefit of Mr Schneider, is a lie. It is part of a campaign by that writer and that newspaper against sales taxes for their own specific reasons. At the moment I am not prepared to raise what those reasons are. They know them and, no doubt, so does Mr Schneider. The fact was that that meeting was not to discuss the principle of sales tax. I assure the House that those at that meeting last night gave the Treasurer (Mr Howard) overwhelming support for the principle of introducing sales tax and recognised the fact that the tax mix in Australia needs amending in the direction of a greater proportion of indirect taxes. In fact the rhetoric in the Press and in the Opposition is simply not sustained by reality. The reality is that indirect taxes will go up by a lot less than direct taxes this year and that indirect taxes will go up by the lowest rate in four years. In fact the indirect tax rise this year is approximately one-quarter of the rise in 1978-79. Let us get some reality in this debate and stop this nonsense from the Leader of the Opposition and the Deputy Leader. Let us have some honesty in this debate and stick by the figures that show clearly what the position is.
Mr Charles Jones-Mr Deputy Chairman, I raise a point of order. The honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) is misleading the Parliament. He said that the article in the Press was a lie and that there was no meeting and then he said that there was a meeting and the Treasurer won hands down.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Drummond) -Order! There is no point of order.
Mr BAUME-I think it is important that for the sake of the honourable member for Newcastle, so that he may at last understand-I do not hold too many hopes about this-I stress to him, because he WaS either absent or asleep when I raised the matter--
Mr Charles Jones-Present, sir.
Mr BAUME-Not all present, if I may say so. I made the point very simply that there was a meeting last night. It did not deal with the issue of

whether sales tax was right or wrong. I said that the description of that meeting and what it was about was a lie. For the honourable member's benefit and MrSchneider's benefit I repeat that. It was part of a campaign of dishonesty that has been going on in respect of sales tax which cannot be supported by the facts. All I seek to do is draw the attention of the Committee and the nation to the reality that what the Government is doing is in the best interests of this nation.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (4.51)-1 do not know why the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) joined in this debate. He had nothing at all constructive to say. He is just wasting the time of honourable members on this side of the Committee. In s4Pporting honourable members on this side of the Committee in their total opposition to the sales tax adjustments contained in these Bills I briefly draw attention to one regressive effect of the provisions; that is, the 17t per cent tax on pet foods. It is not true as the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has claimed that the automatic indexation of pensions will cover the imposition of sales taxes. The 17t per cent tax on pet foods will cost pensioners an additional $1 per week.
Mr Sainsbury-Mr Deputy Chairman, I raise a point of order. We are addressing ourselves to sales tax measures not related to the 17t per cent increase. I wonder whether the speaker might address himself to the present question.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- The point of order is taken. Perhaps the honourable member will return to the substance of the Bills in due course.
Mr Robert Brown-On the point of order, I think the question being considered at present is in connection with the sales tax levied on necessities. If this Government has its way, pet food will be a necessity for families and for pensioners.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! There is no point of order. If the honourable member for Hunter takes that sort of point of order again I will not recognise him.
Mr MILTON-The point I was trying to make is that for many aged pensioners a pet is their only companion, and they are in no position to avoid a tax on what for them is an essential item of their household expenditure. That is the point I am trying to make. I maintain that the Government has no mandate to levy these indirect taxes. It certainly did not give any indication of this in any of its previous policy statements. Therefore I believe these Bills should be withdrawn.

2004 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (4.54)-1 Representatives, but also by all responsible sec-

am pleased that the honourable member for tions of the community, by all responsible com-

Macarthur (Mr Baume) has not left the chamber mentators, by all responsible journalists, in all edi-

because I would like to remind honourable torials which describe the sales tax provisions as

members on both sides of the Committee that one iniquitous, as provisions which should be with-

of the points made by the honourable member for drawn by the Government. The Government

Macarthur was that the imposition of sales tax did would do well to take heed of the degree of wide-

not have very much impact on low income earners spread and growing concern that exists in the

because, as he put it, the wives of workers buy $20 Australian community about the direction the

dresses and the wives of the affluent buy $200 Government is taking.

gowns. This is supposed to indicate that as a result

of the spending patterns of various levels of income earners the burden of sales tax falls more heavily on high income earners. This is quite contrary to the facts and quite contrary to any type of informed opinion. It is recognised that indirect taxes-sales taxes in particular-are the most in-
equitable, the most unjust, and the most discriminatory against low income earners of any type of taxation which can be devised. The taxes on necessities will not just be imposed on high income earners. They will be imposed with increasing severity on low income earners as well.

There are a number of reasons why the Government is turning its attention to indirect taxes. Of course, the first is that the philosophical commitment of the Government is directed towards ensuring that the most deprived sections of the community-I include in that the middle and lower income earners-should bear ever increasing proportions of the total tax burden. I and other honourable members have previously cited figures indicating the extent to which that is proceeding and the extent to which, under this Government, it will continue to proceed. The bur-

den will continue to grow. Of course, the Govern-

The Government's intention in connection with sales tax is to bring in an additional $900m in a full year or, during this financial year, an additional $500m. Of course, as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) indicated, if the Aus-
tralian Democrats honour the decision they have adopted, if they honour the commitment they have made to the Australian people, if they persist in taking the direction they are taking at this
stage, the Government will not obtain that $500m or anything like it this financial year. The Government should not obtain it because to a very large
extent that $500m will be dragged from the pockets and the pay envelopes of those groups of people within the community who are least able to make that sort of contribution. There is no question about the inequity of these arrangements. There is no question about the injustice of the arrangements. There is no question about the fact that the incidence of these sales tax provisions will fall most heavily on those people who are earning low incomes.

ment has already suggested that one of the other reasons for adopting this measure is to increase the amount of total tax revenue so that, in the future, it will have the opportunity to participate in what it now politely calls 'discretionary tax cuts'. It has been indicated, not only by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) but also by the Treasurer (Mr Howard), that 'discretionary tax cuts' means tax cuts which occur immediately prior to elections. An undertaking was given in
1975-subsequent undertakings have been made since-by the Prime Minister, by the current Treasurer and previous Treasurers, that tax indexation, for example, would keep government honest with the taxpayers' money. But the Government has abandoned that policy in favour of discretionary tax cuts. In order to provide the opportunity to exercise that discretion, it will be necessary for the Government to broaden the total tax base and to increase total tax revenue. Of course, the Government is taking advantage of that opportunity at this stage. That is one of the reasons why the Prime Minister and the Cabinet

are digging their heels in to resist the widespread

We might consider the reasons why the opposition to these proposals.

Government has found it necessary now to turn

its attention to indirect taxes. There are a number Another reason why it is necessary for the

of reasons and they are precisely the reasons why Government to increase total tax revenue is that

this chamber, as was done by the Senate, should. within three years when the new Fortescue oil

take advantage of the opportunity to reject these field comes on stream in Bass Strait, the oil from

provisions now. The Government should accept that field will be identified as new oil, it having

the points being made not only by members of this been discovered since 1975, and the crude oil levy

Parliament, in both the Senate and the House of will not be applied to it. The Treasurer knows

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2005

that, as a result, when the Fortescue field is proextent to which they are being taken to the

viding about 10 per cent of our total oil requirecleaners by this Government.

ments it will also be reducing by about 10 per cent the total revenue derived from the crude oil levy. That represents in today's prices, according to this year's estimates of revenue from the crude oil levy, something like $340m. The difference has to be made up. It has already been pointed out to the Treasurer and to the Government that the difference could be made up very substantially if
they were to take more effective action against widespread tax avoidance in Australia. But the Government has chosen not to do that. Over $3,000m is available to this Government and to future governments-to this Treasurer and to the Treasury. Tax avoidance is costing the revenue in excess of $3,000m and that could be scooped up this year.

The suggestion has been made on previous occasions as well that the imposition of indirect taxes in some mysterious way increases the capacity for people to decide how they will spend their incomes. It matters not whether the Government takes the tax at the time that the income is earned or whether it takes the tax at the time that the income is spent. In both of those cases the capacity for people to decide how they will spend their incomes is reduced. No amount of talking by members of the Government will detract from or diminish the truth of that statement. On previous occasions the honourable member for Macarthur has referred to this Government's responsibility to close the gap that he referred to as having existed
between 1972 and 1975. The opportunity for this

Mr Howard-Ha, hal

Government to close the gap was considerably greater than it was for previous governments. But

Mr ROBERT BROWN-It could be scooped did it close the gap? It closed it with a vengeance

up in Australia this year, in exactly the same way this year when it took out of the Australian tax-

as has been done in Great Britain if the Treasurer payers' pockets $1,500m more than it is going to

and the Government were prepared to accept the give back to them, if in fact the Budget objectives

arrangements that have been entered into by the are achieved; I have already indicated that there

British Government to kill the tax avoidance inare very good and sound reasons to believe that

dustry overnight. That action has been taken in the Budget strategy is going astray, will continue

Britain and it will be taken after 1983. Let the Opto go astray and will be modified. The Govern-

position give the Government that firm assurance ment will have to reverse its policies or it will not

and let the Opposition give that firm assurance to achieve those objectives which it set out to

the Australian people. They will not be expected achieve.

to continue to make up the difference caused by I am hopeful that the Australian Democrats, as

all the tax dodgers in the community, in the cora result of their conscious and conscientious deter-

porate sector and in the private sector. Tax avoidmination in the Senate, will continue to resist this

ance will be nipped in the bud overnight. We will iniquitous impost on the Australian people. Let

have the opportunity to do that because the this Government justify its position, not just in

Government and the Treasurer are not meeting this chamber and in the Senate, but in the com-

their responsibilities.

munity. Let it see whether it can justify its pos-

Mr Braithwaite-Rubbish!

ition to the Australian community. The Government will have a job ahead of it. Australian people

Mr ROBERT BROWN-The honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite) should go back to his electorate and spend a bit more time inquiring about what the Australian people-the people in his electorate-are concerned about. He

know, with increasing clarity, just what is involved in these measures. The day of judgment in 1983 or prior to that will fall on the heads of those people who have been responsible for such iniquitous decisions.

will find out that what I am saying is perfectly corDr EDWARDS (Berowra) (5.4)-1 wish to re-

rect. It will be confirmed. I have indicated that if spond briefly to two points that have been made

the Democrats continue to maintain the position from the other side of the chamber by the honour-

which they have adopted there is no doubt that able member for La Trobe (Mr Milton) and by

this Government will find itself in very serious the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert

strife because the members of Australian comBrown). The honourable member for La Trobe

munity, as the whole issue proceeds-as the tacand other members of the Australian Labor Party

tics are devised by the Democrats and as tactics somehow have the idea that we lack a mandate to

are devised by the Government in its attempt to expand tax collections in one 'particular area

respond to the Democrats' tactics and to dig its while they are changing in another area. For in-

heels in-are becoming more and more aware of ' stance, a very small increase is projected in the

the issues involved. They know increasingly the petrol tax with, as the honourable member for

2006 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

Macarthur (Mr Baume) has said, the overall redodger. Let me make that clear-it discriminates

sult that the rise in total indirect taxation this year against the tax dodger and that is the point we are

will be one of the smallest for years. What is this trying to get over.

talk about a mandate? Since when has a government not possessed the right in the interests of all Australians to balance the mixture of taxes that have to be raised in a way that it sees as appropriate? That is the first point that I wish to make. In a moment I will come back to it and state why it is important. It links with the point about which
the honourable member for Hunter had a lot to say at one stage concerning tax dodgers. He accused the Government of not being active enough in respect of tax dodgers. Let us bring these two points together because they are closely linked. One of the important reasons for beginning a broadening of the tax base, particularly in the sales tax area, is that a considerable difference exists in the area of evasion and avoidance between a tax on spending and a tax on income. The honourable member was drawing a distinction between the two.

Another point that was made concerned the incidence of indirect taxation. I hope that the Government extends gradually the range of the sales tax further, along with equal and simultaneous reductions in personal income tax-thus not as a means of increasing the total of tax, but of definitely changing the mix. The further it is extended and the broader the base, the less the rates would have to be. The present situation in relation to indirect tax is that it certainly has an extremely heavy incidence on low income groups. I refer not to these changes, but to the totality of indirect tax at the moment. But that is basically related to the fact that low income groups spend a very significant proportion of their income on items that at present carry very high rates. I am thinking of things like alcohol, cigarettes and so on, which carry a form of indirect tax.
Earlier today I heard the shadow Treasurer, the

There is a significant measure of tax avoidance honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis),

and tax evasion. The Government has recognised quoting a study. An earlier study is based directly

that and it has done more about it than any other on survey data of actual family incomes and

government. There is also-in effect it is one form expenditure, which is very difficult to obtain, and

of tax evasion-a very large component in the this shows very clearly the extent of the extremely

economy to which we sometimes refer as the 'cash heavy incidence on the low income groups basi-

economy'; that is, the work that is done at weekcally because of the relatively high proportion of

ends which is paid for in cash but which never the low incomes which goes on these items. I hope

comes within the purview of the tax collector, the that this action is the beginning of a gradual move

sales of primary produce and other things at the to a great broadening of that tax base which will

farm gate which never go through the books and enable a lowering of those rates in which event the

never come within the purview of the tax collecincidence would be improved in terms of its im-

tor. We are doing a lot to try to cope with formal pact on low income groups and not the other way

avoidance schemes. But it is extremely difficult to around.

bring within the purview of the system these This move to increase sales tax can be, and I

activities in the so-called cash economy.

hope is, the first step in a very significant broaden-

If one cannot nail down the income, then tax ing of this base. The existing sales tax is the best the income at this point of spending-everybody vehicle to do this. We heard a lot of discussion

has to spend, including the tax evader, the capital earlier in the year as to whether it should be a

gainer, the person operating in the cash economy; value added tax or various other forms of tax. I all these people have to spend-there is thus a big think that issue has basically been decided. The

difference between the income tax and trying to existing sales tax is indeed the best vehicle. There expand the spending tax base somewhat. That is exists an established, well-understood machinery

all that we have done. We have made a relatively to levy that tax, and other forms of tax, such as

minor change in the mix to expand the tax base in the v'alue added tax, are more irksome and comthe area of taxes on spending. There is a big plex administratively and they are not, as has gen-

difference between that and the income tax. At erally been claimed, for instance, of VAT, more the point of spending you catch everybody. As I effective in combating avoidance and evasion said, it catches the cash economy person, the spiv, than the established sales tax system. I hope we

the capital gainer-everybody. The more that see here the beginning of a broadening of that base taxation is switched in that direction the more in the interests of all Australians. The suggestion effective is the system as a whole, and the more that our Government has no mandate to extend

equitable the system will be. The Opposition said this tax base, with the effects that I have described

that an extension of the sales tax does not disand with appropriate corresponding reductions in criminate. It does. It discriminates against the tax personal income tax, is quite absurd.

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2007

Mrs CHILD (Henty) (5.13)-Along with my colleagues, I am also totally opposed to the imposition of these sales tax burdens. The matter about
which I would like to speak today is the hardship created for many Australians, not only by the sales tax increases but also the significant economic impact that they will have. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the proposal to impose a 2t per cent sales tax on building materials. Coming
as it does on top of the recent interest rate rises, this proposal has the potential to deal a very savage blow to the building industry and an equally savage blow to many of those young Australians who either are trying to get a home, or who are trying to hang onto the home that they have.
It has come as quite a shock to a lot of people that a Liberal Government could abandon that party's traditional commitment to home ownership and the soundness of the building industry. It seeins that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and his diminishing circle of supporters are now so besotted by the El Dorado of resource development that anything else is superfluous. The automotive industry can go to the wall; the building industry can go to the wall. Industries built up by years of toil, providing a permanent livelihood for so many Australians, are now evidently quite expendable. They are all to be replaced by the transient industries, such as uranium mining, which earn a lot of money for a short time for a few people and then vanish. The economic health of our nation should not rest exclusively on what can, quite literally, be described as shifting sands.
The building industry has long been regarded as our chief economic barometer. Given the obvious flow-through of .the impact of changes in its fortunes on the rest of the economy, one would have thought that any government would have made a long and detailed study of a proposition of the nature of the sales tax imposition in the building industry. However, that does not appear to have been the case in this instance. Instead, the proposal comes from the masters of ad hockery who produced the razor gang report. Of course, the distinguishing feature of the razor gang report was its apparently random nature, reminding one more of a hatchet than a precise instrument like a razor.
Working on the assumption that Government members have not considered the economic implications of this legislation, I will spell them out. The increase in housing costs which must flow from the sales tax imposition will further depress the demand for housing. Many thousands of people will simply drop out of the housing market. They are dropping out now, having lost heart

at their prospects. Ba-nkruptcies, already widespread, will increase. As the industry contracts, so will employment. In addition, the general inflationary impact of tax increases will create added pressure for wage demands, with the consequent possibility of industry disruption. Several honourable members opposite pointed out today that there will be at least a I t per cent inflationary flow on from the sales tax. I suggest that it will be even greater than that. It is no wonder that builders throughout Australia are alarmed at the state of the industry. It is no wonder that building workers are worried about their jobs.
Another concern being expressed by builders is the administrative burden they will have to bear. I hope the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has taken note of this. It is being expressed by many of the smaller firms. The administrative burden will be very great on many of the smaller firms which deal in small quantities. Many of them, including the button manufacturers, whom I know are not covered by these Bills but who sell in small quanti-
ties and service their clients two or three times a week, will have to put on extra staff to cope with the extra administrative burden of adding the sales tax. The button manufacturers and many of the people who sell the bits and pieces which go on clothing sell sample goods in small quantities to factories. They will have to do the extra work resulting from the sales tax. When their goods arrive at the factories they are often shipped back as unsatisfactory. In these cases, they will have to issue credit notes and, once again, credit the tax. I do not think the Government has considered the administrative burden these people will have to bear. This represents no problem for large firms but small operators could find themselves bogged down in the kind of red tape that the Liberal Party used to pretend it was opposed to.
All in all, Australia's builders have enough on their plates without this thoughtless imposition, dreamed up by people who are seemingly far removed from the practical problems of business. However, there is another aspect of the issue which needs to be considered. The Master Builders Association, in the course of its statement on the tax, described the tax proposal as the thin end of the wedge, with the Government's ultimate aim being a value added tax. We are all aware that this kite was flown by the Government earlier this year. After a lot of ammunition was expended on it the Treasurer assured us that nothing could be further from the Government's collective mind than the introduction of VAT. Given this Government's record, it is hardly surprising that almost nobody believed him. We are entitled to ask whether VAT will be

2008 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

introduced. 1 would like to hear the Treasurer say again that it will not be introduced. The sales tax impositions will be a tremendous burden on the poorer section of the community. 1 refute the remarks of the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume), as recorded at page 1883 of Hansard, when he said:
It is a fact that indirect taxes, such as sales tax, hit the rich equally.
That is nonsense and he knows it. If 1 buy a frock, whether it costs $200 or $20 1 will pay the same percentage in tax. If 1 have a house built 1 will pay the same percentage in sales tax as a poor person will pay. The honourable member for Macarthur also cited some quite extraordinary figures to prove that the pensioners will be $1.05 a week better off because of the automatic indexation of pensions. He said:
Pensioners in fact will get roughly double protection . . . though as usual there will be some delay before it takes place.
He knows and 1 know that that delay will be six months. If pensioners should receive $1.05 a week for 12 months and they receive it only for six months, they will not be better off and he knows it.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (5.20)-1 was not going to enter into this discussion but some of the speeches of members of the Opposition seem to have been higher on emotion and rhetoric that they were on substance. Opposition members also seem to be very short on memory. Basically, what we are talking about is a change in taxation from one area to another. Opposition members conveniently forget that probably the greatest indirect tax in Australia, which they created themselves, is inflation. During the period from 1972 to 1975 the greatest collector of that indirect tax was the then Labor Government. The Opposition is now totally opposed to sales tax. It has to substantiate the fact that for three years it was prepared to accept it along with everyone else and grow wealthy on it. The Opposition's rhetoric is not matched by the facts or the substance of the case. Opposition members have also mentioned other things, such as tax indexation. This was something which they would not have during their three years in government. Following its introduction by this government it has resulted in real decreases in tax to the people earning lower incomes. Those people have received as much benefit as anyone else. 1 want to dwell on the fact that whilst there has been a change in the tax mix-is undoubtedly the direction the Government is taking with these measures-sales tax is certainly a superior form of indirect taxation than

either value added tax or retail turnover tax. Opposition members have talked about these taxes. 1 would like to hear their views on them, if there has to be an indirect tax, 1 believe that the vehicle by which it should be delivered should be a whole- . sale tax and certainly not one of the others that have been mentioned. It should certainly not take the form of inflation. The Opposition is arguing about tax avoidance whereas we are arguing about tax evasion. The last speaker for the Opposition, the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child), mentioned the housing industry. She put her finger right on the problem. A government may see difficulty in coming to grips with the cash economy. It is probably within the housing industry that the cash economy is greatest. 1 suggest that, if sub-contractors and everybody else in the housing industry had been honest right along the line and paid their dues in direct tax, it is quite likely that the increase in the indirect wholesale tax may not have been necessary. It concerns me a little when representations are made by thehousing industry but I realise that if people in the industry had been fair and above board right along the line the need for a wholesale tax would have been obviated. We have to look also at the increases in the cost of building. These will not be affected as much by the influence of the wholesale tax as they have been by the industrial repercussions over the last 10 years or so, for which the Labor Opposition must take some responsibility.
I take this opportunity to say that I would have liked to have seen more done in the direct tax line, in the cash economy, to see whether recovery was possible. I think there was a possibility of such a recovery in the housing industry. It seems a pity that that aspect was not investigated fully. I must agree with the honourable member for Henty that there will be an imposition on small business from the expansion of the indirect taxes. I would like the Government to give some sympathetic consideration to keeping the collection and administrative costs to a minimum. I have already experienced in a number of areas a difference in the method of collection of this tax which causes problems to small business people, particularly those dealing with both the wholesale and the retail trade, for whom the presentation of certificates is not the only way out of the administrative costs.
In my speech on the Budget. I said that 1 was
concerned about the additional imposition of the wholesale tax on rural Australia because of the freight component. I say again that if we are to deliver an indirect tax, it is certainly superior to deliver it in this way than to introduce VAT or RTT. In the latter cases tax is paid not only on freight

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2009

but also on higher profit expectations and carrying and storing costs. 1 would like the Government and the Department to look very carefully at this aspect of the additional charge on those living in rural Australia to see whether some notional formula can be worked out to give a rebate to those people who will be paying more. That is of real concern.
The other area at which 1 would like the Government to look again is the tourist industry. 1 do not think it is fair to class the tourist industry as one which is just recreational because of the end user. The people in the tourist industry are fighting as hard for their profit out there in the open market as any manufacturing or any other industry. 1 would like to see overcome some of the anomalies and inconsistencies that are now in the industry as compared to other industries, particularly the travel industry. This is particularly so in relation to boats, not only for the ship builders but also for the tourist industry. It appears to me that people who can take their recreation in the back of a bus can pay lesser sales tax than those who ride the ocean wave. That is just one of the areas we should look at.
Whilst 1 have reservations about the sales tax legislation as against direct tax 1 regard it as an option that the Government has taken in the presentation of the Budget. There are many ~hings within the Budget context that 1 and anybody in here could disagree with. The whole of the legislation is a package. 1 will support it but 1 ask the Government to look at those other aspects. 1 would certainly like the Opposition to look again at itself so that its members might clarify their position on this whole argument. 1 do not believe in the rhetoric that they are putting up at the moment. 1 do not believe that they are in total opposition to it. This is a front. It is something that gives the lie to their past. 1 just wish that they would smarten up their tactics so that they could present a concise and clear case.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (5.27)-1 will deal with some of the arguments that have been raised on the Government side in the course of this debate. One of them is that Australia's percentage of tax raised from indirect taxes is low and undesirably low and should be increased; that is said to be justification for the sales tax measures, part of which is. now before us. To argue that Australia has a relatively low level of indirect taxes is to argue in contradiction of the facts. By comparison with other countries the proportion of taxation which is raised in Australia by indirect taxation is high. It is well above the average for other members of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. This is proved by

statistics put into Hansard by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) on 12 March this year.
On page 760 of Hansard Table 2 sets out selected taxes as proportions of total tax revenue for all the OECD countries. From this table one can clearly see that the following countries all raised a lesser proportion of total taxes in 1978 from indirect taxation than Australia. Those countries are Belgium, Canada, Germany, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States of America-the United States with almost half the proportion that we raise from indirect taxes. It is also shown in that table that the proportion of taxes raised by consumption taxes in Australia is above the OECD average. Those figures, I think, clearly give the lie to this argument which has come forward from quite a few speakers on the other side, including the Treasurer, that we have this basic need in Australia to raise the level of taxation which is coming from indirect taxes because it is relatively low compared with other countries. This is just not the case. It is a total contradiction of the facts as presented by the Treasurer in relation to 1978.
Since 1978, of course, we have had in this country a much more significant increase in indirect taxation than most other countries have had because of the impact of the crude oil levy. Other countries have not had the crude oil levy operating-they have had the increases in oil prices but the tax has been imposed by the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries, not by their own governments. In this country the tax has been imposed by the Fraser Government. So the rise in the crude oil levy since 1978 has considerably increased the proportion of tax which is being raised by indirect taxation. The figures shown in the table presented by the Treasurer earlier this year iIi relation to 1978 must be seen as an understatement of the relative position of Australia vis a vis other countries in regard to this proportion of taxes raised by indirect and direct methods. This basic argument which is being put forward by the Government is just totally in contradiction of the facts.
Secondly, it has been argued by several members on the Government side that increased indirect taxes are a desirable means of overcoming the tax avoidance or tax evasion problem, to take the point of the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite), the last speaker from the Government side. This is a thoroughly hopeless argument in our view. It represents absolute capitulation to tax avoiders and tax evaders. What they are saying is: 'Look, it's too difficult trying to knock off tax avoidance and tax evasion but if we

2010 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

raise a high proportion of our taxes by indirect means rather than by direct means we will at least be making the tax avoiders pay something'. But in the process they will be asking all the pay-as-youearn taxpayers who are now paying a high proportion of their income through income tax to pay a higher proportion of their income through indirect taxation as well. The people who are down the line, who already are paying a more than proportionate share of the burden of taxation ove~all, will be asked to pay an even greater proportIOn. Indirect taxation is, as I have already shown when I spoke previously in this debate, a thoroughly regressive form of taxation. If one is going to overcome the tax avoidance or evasion problem in some way by resorting to indirect taxation, what one is doing is capitulating to tax avoiders and evaders and asking the people who are already bearing a higher proportion of the tax burden than they ought to be bearing-those people on lower and middle incomes-to pay an even greater proportion of that burden because the indirect tax will be regressive and the impact on them more severe than on higher income earners. We regard this argument of the Government as being an absurd one and one which should have no credence at all.
The third argument that has been put forward is that indirect tax increases provide a basis on which income tax levies can occur. Various members on the Government side have made bleeding heart statements about how they hope that the Government will get round soon to reducing income tax. But what a big deal this will be for the Australian people if the Government eventually brings in some income tax cuts I must say as seems likely, before the next election. What Government members are saying is that the Government, when it gets the Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos lA to 9A) through eventually and because of those Bills that have already gone through, will have the room to provide income tax cuts. In other words, the Government will be able to put more money in one pocket by way of an income tax cut because it is taking more out of the other pocket through indirect taX'ation. That cannot be of any satisfaction to taxpayers as a whole. Indeed, because of the regressive nature of indirect taxation it means that it will be no satisfaction whatever to lower and middle income earners as from such a deal they are likely to finish up worse off than they are at the present time. The impact of the income tax cuts will almost inevitably be such as to give higher proportionate benefits to high income tax earners. That is the usual way they operate, particularly when they

come from conservative governments and certainly this was the way the government parties operated in 1977 when the tax cuts were made. Indirect tax increases, of course, will bear more heavily on the lower and middle income earners. The result of such an exercise is likely to be of no satisfaction whatever to the vast majority of the Australian taxpayers.
What the Government, of course, is hoping is that because income tax is more visible than indirect taxation there will be vast gratitude coming from the Australian electorate on seeing the income tax cuts but forgetting about or not being able to recognise the indirect tax cuts. In other words, the Government is hoping to deceive and dupe the Australian electorate into feeling grateful towards it. It is ironic that this Government, which came into office making great noises about how it was going to end the secret tax of inflation, has not only maintained the secret tax of inflation and abandoned tax indexation absolutely but also will in future apparently rely on the secret tax of indirect taxation to try to get some revenue without the electorate knowing about it.
Another argument that has been put forward by the Treasurer today is tha~ any loss of reve~ue by capitulation to the Senate III respect of the BIlls now before us would raise the possibility of higher interest rates and destroy the Budget strategy. As the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has already pointed out in the course of this debate, the Budget strategy is looking pretty sick at the present time. One of the fundamentals of that Budget strategy was that 45 per cent-almost half of the growth of the money supply-would come from the surplus on private foreign exchange transactions. So far there is no such surplus with a quarter o"f the year gone. If this continues for any length of time in the future it will certainly be the case that the Government will have to look at a total revision of its budgetary strategy. In any case what we are talking about here, as the Treasurer said in opening the debate, is $100m of revenue which would be lost if he capitulated to the Senate on this issue. This is in respect of a domestic surplus of $1,500m. If the domestic surplus were reduced from $1,500m to $1,400m, is the Treasurer really saying that this would bring about enormous pressure for increased interest rates? I think it is an absolute absurdity to put it that way, but that is, in effect, what he is saying to us here today.
I remind the Committee that we oppose this kill(~ of legislation also, apart from the reasons that I have already mentioned, because of the inflationary impact of this kind of legislation. It is

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2011

an absolute absurdity to fight inflation by increasing prices which is what this Government is doing with this kind of legislation. We object to the increase in the overall tax burden. It is an increase
which, again this year, means that the proportion of gross domestic product which goes in taxes is higher than last year and is the highest level ever
in our history. We object to the inequity of these measures because of the factors which I raised earlier. I showed quite conclusively, from the Neil Warren study, that such taxation is thoroughly regressive. The argument that a pension adjustment for price increase will occur is no satisfaction. It is
by no means clear that pensioners will finish up in front. As the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child) said, there is every reason to be skeptical about this because of the delay in payment to pensioners. Finally, of course, low wage earners, superannuants and fixed income earners of other kinds will receive no such automatic adjustment but will have to pay these taxes. So there are many reasons for this Committee agreeing to the request which has been made to it by the Senate and supporting that request.

Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)

(5.37)-1 thank those who participated in the de-

bate. There are a few comments that I want to

~~ke on ~he arguments advanced by the Oppo-

sItion agaInst these measures. Let me say again

that this group of Bills, the Sales Tax Amendment

Bills (Nos lA to 9A), is an integral part of the

Budget. The Bills are, in the Government's indispensable to the passage of the Budget. I

tviisewa~

odd resort to a legalism to try to establish, in some

wa~, that these Bills are not Budget Bills. In any

ordInary understanding of the expression 'Budget

Bills' or 'Budget legislation' revenue measures

which collectively will raise something like $800m

to .$900m i~ a full year can hardly be argued as

beIng anythIng other than Budget Bills and there-

fore are fundamental to the implementation of

the Budget.

.

'I take this opportunity to refute the remarks of both the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) about the Government's Budget strategy. I would not have thought that I would have to point out to both those gentlemen again that the Budget strategy is not to achieve a given level of private capital inflow. The Budget strategy is to achieve a series of economic objectives principally controlling inflation through a series of different approaches including a responsible fiscal policy, a responsible monetary policy, a sensible approach
to wages and the sensible management of our external policies. In no way does it represent a fragmentation of the Budget strategy if, in fact,

the volume of private capital inflow this financial year turns out to be less than was projected at the time the Budget was brought down, provided the right alternative measures are taken by the Government in the face of that reduced private capital inflow. In any event, it is altogether too soon for the Leader of the Opposition or the honourable member for Gellibrand to be saying that private capital inflow will disappear and we are going to have a massive exodus of funds. The fact is that private capital inflow so far this financial year, is running at a higher rate than it was during the September quarter of 1980. What in fact, has happened is that we have had a much larger current account deficit because of the difference between exports and imports. Really, all of the rhetoric from the Leader of the Opposition and the honourable member for Gellibrand about private capital inflow and the Budget strategy is sadly astray and sadly irrelevant to this discussion. The fiscal policy of this Government is in very good shape. Indeed, if one looks at the utterances in recent weeks of bodies such as the International Monetary Fund, which has placed a greater emphasis on governments adopting firmer fiscal policies, the strategy of this Government stands up extremely well in comparison with the strategies of most other industrialised countries.
In getting more to the specifics, we have had a lot of talk about what is a desirable tax mix. I was really surprised to hear my colleague, the honourable member for Gellibrand, say that in reality our argument about changing the tax mix was not one that could be sustained. The fact is that my statement of 12 March, which he relied upon rather heavily, made the point that whilst the overall tax burden in Australia is relatively low, figures show that Australia places a relatively heavier reliance on personal income tax as a source of revenue than other Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries. I repeat what I said on 12 March that in 1978, which is the year that the honourable member for Gellibrand used, Australia raised 43. 7 per cent of its total tax revenue through personal income tax compared with an OECD average of 38.5 per cent. In other words whereas our overall tax burden is 5 per cent or 6 per cent below the OECD average-I repeat that the overall tax take in Australia is 5 per cent or 6 per cent below the OECD average-our personal tax take, as a proportion of overall tax, is 5 per cent above the average of the OECD countries. That demonstrates a very heavy reliance on personal income tax. It i~

2012 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

tru.e that we rely very heavily on tax on a very limited range of goods which has the effect of producing the results in those other tables that were included in that statement. We rank twenty-first out of the 24 member countries of the OECD in our reliance on general consumption taxes which, indeed, is the great imbalance and the great weakness, in my view, in the taxation mix so far as the Australian economy is concerned.
The argument that the Government has advanced all along has been that we have an overemphasis on personal income tax in our country and in our system. Nothing that I said on 12 March alters that fact. So, there are advantagesthe honourable member for Berowra (Dr Edwards) referred to them very well-in changing the tax mix. I will take 30 seconds to say that anybody who can seriously come into this House and argue that this Government has not tried to seriously, honestly and conscientiously address the issue of tax avoidance and tax evasion has been doing a Rip Van Winkle ever since April 1978 when this Government commenced the most uncompromising attack on tax cheating that this country has ever seen from any government of any political persuasion. For the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown) to come in here and expect the House and the Australian community to believe that sort of approach is absolute nonsense.
Again, as my friend, the honourable member for Berowra pointed out, the honourable member for Hunter failed to distinguish between avoidance and evasion. We can attack, by legislaton, the sophisticated schemes. But if we want to get at the cash economy, if we want to get at the cabbage, which is the colloquialism used in the clothing trade, if we want to get at some of these other cash practices in the underground economy, we have to rely more heavily on indirect taxes. The hardest taxes to avoid are general consumption taxes. There can be no argument about that. It is a very valuable supplement to the approach that the Government is taking to the more sophisticated tax avoidance schemes.
I want to say one or two things about the contribution made by the honourable member for Henty who, if I may say so, made a very thoughtful contribution about the effect of these measures on the building industry. I concede, at first blush, that it is an odd thing for a government, at a time when we are worried about activity, perhaps, in the housing areas and we are worried about the level of interest rates and the cost of housing, to put a tax on building materials along with a number of other things. I reply to that in three ways. Firstly, I think the point has to be made that

if we have decided, as a matter of principle, to broaden the taxation base, then we have to accept that in order for that decision to work it has to be applied in areas where there is high volume consumption. In other words, we cannot on the one hand say that we are going to broaden the indirect tax base but on the other hand say that we are not going to apply it in this area for a particular reason. If there is a case for not applying it on building materials, obviously people can argue there is a case for not applying it in other areas. If one believes that there is virtue in broadening the taxation base, then one must accept that there is a case for applying taxation in general consumption areas.
The second observation that I think has to be made is that if there is one form of investment in Australia-this affects the building industry very directly-that is advantaged and privileged because of our existing taxation system, it is investment in real estate. The Australian taxation system, because of the absence of capital gains taxes, does encourage investment very heavily in real estate. That has a very direct bias in favour of investment in that area. It is a bias that I support because it underpins the very high level of home ownership in this country. Let there be no doubt about that. The contribution that the absence of capital gains taxes has made to the home ownership level in this country which is superior to any in the industrialised world is quite enormous. Let the critics of there being no capital gains tax bear that in mind. The contribution that that has made has been enormous. When we take into account the absence of a capital gains tax, I do not think it can be said that the impost of a 2t per cent tax on building materials has a very significant overall effect on the housing industry and building industry.
Thirdly, I go back to the comment that I made at the commencement of my remarks when I moved the motion. Any significant alteration to the overall shape of the Budget, any change that would have the effect of putting in doubt the achievement of a domestic surplus of $1,500m and a near elimination of the Budget deficit, could very significantly alter the improving interest rate climate. I did not say, as the honourable member for Gellibrand unfairly represented, that if we take X million dollars out of the Budget surplus, it automatically follows that there will be a particular increase in interest rates. What I did say was that where we have circumstances in which the Government is selling bonds, where interest rates may well be peaking, where there is a great deal more confidence on the interest rate front, it is folly indeed to put in question at all any part of

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2013

the economic strategy which has brought that situation about.
Above everything else, the Budget was designed to take pressure off interest rates. I believe, and the Government believes, that the thing Australian families are most worried about at the present time and what is most costly to them is the level of interest rates. If an economic strategy can be effective to take pressure off interest rates, then it is a valuable economic strategy not only in straight economic terms but also in social and political terms. I say to the honourable member for Henty-this is also relevant to the very understandable concerns that she has about the building industry-that the contribution that the Budget and the role played by sales tax in the Budget in taking pressure off interest rates are vital to the long term position, indeed the short term position, of the building industry in Australia. Anybody associated with the housing and building industries in Australia would be prepared to "Concede that the thing he is most worried about is, of course, the level of interest rates. At the end of the day that is the most important thing for us to keep in mind and at the end of the day the cause that the Budget has served above everything else is to bring about a change in the climate of interest rates. If we had the opportunity to retrace our steps on that matter I would not, nor would the Government, alter in any way the priority that we attach to bringing about a huge reduction in the size of the deficit and therefore take pressure off the money markets of this country, reduce the Government's borrowing requirement and, as a consequence, make a contribution towards controlling and I hope reducing interest rates. That strategy was clear; that strategy was right; and that strategy is starting to work. We ought not to risk it. This Parliament ought not to risk it and the most effective way that we can endorse it is to support the motion to decline the requests of the Senate and to invite that chamber to support the legislation which is such an integral part of the Government's Budget.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)-I call the honourable member for Kalgoorlie.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (5.50)-Thank you, Mr Chairman--
Motion (by Mr Sainsbury) proposed:
That the question be now put.
Mr Lionel Bowen-Mr Deputy Chairman, I raise a point of order. The honourable member for Kalgoorlie was on his feet. You called him. I know that he wants to move an amendment. I think it is appropriate to give him a chance to do so.

Mr Howard-I respectfully make the point to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition that the Government did extend the courtesy to the honourable member for Gellibrand of allowing him to speak twice in the debate at the Committee stage.
Mr Lionel Bowen-We are entitled to do that. There is no courtesy there.
Mr Howard-Any honourable member is entitled to speak twice in a Committee debate according to the Standing Orders. But the fact of the matter is that if an understanding about the order of speakers has been reached,- I think it ought to be kept.
Mr Lionel Bowen-On the point of order, I wish to make this point. The honourable member got the call. Therefore, I think it is appropriate that he be given the chance to move a motion. To gag him and to prevent him moving a motion I do not think is in the interests of the Parliament.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)-I am afraid there is nothing the Chair can do about that. The question is: 'That the question be now put', and I have to put that question from the Chair.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. The original question is, 'That the requested amendments Nos 1 to 7 to each of the Sales Tax Amendment Bills Nos lA to 9A be not made'.

Question put.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes

62

Noes

43

Majority

19

AYES
Adermann. A. E. Baume, M. E. Birney. R. l. Bradfield, l. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Cariton, l. l. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R.

Jarman, A. W.
lull,D.F. Katter,R.C.
Killen,D.l. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. l. R. MacKenzie, A. l. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William Macphee, I. M. Moorc,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.l.
O'Keefe, F..L. Peacock, A. S. PorterI J. R. Robinson, [an Rocher, A. C.

2014 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill

AYES
Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt,R.J. D. Hyde,J. M.

Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller)
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Street, A. A.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I.
White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass, M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Good luck, B. J. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Innes, U. E.
Jacobi, R. Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kerin,J.C.
Klugman, R. E.
McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les (Teller)
Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young, M. J.

Bourchier,J. W.
Anthony,J. D.
McVeigh, D. T. Millar,P.C. Ruddock, P. M.

PAIRS

Johnson, Les Scott, J. L.
Jenkins, H. A. Brown, John
Cross,M.D.

Question so resolved in the affirmative, Resolution reported; report adopted,

Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.

FOREIGN FISHING BOATS LEVY BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 24 September, on motion by Mr McVeigh:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill, the Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Bill, the Fisheries Amendment Bill and the Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Bill as they are related measures, Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate,
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate

covering these four measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (8,1)-The Opposition does not oppose these Bills. All four Bills relate to the imposition and collection of levies on foreign fishing vessels authorised to fish in the 200nautical-mile Australian fishing zone. The Bills relate to foreign fishing vessels involved in joint venture arrangements or otherwise. The main countries concerned are Japan and Taiwan. The Australian fishing zone has now been an entity for nearly two years, and development and regulation of the fishery or" fisheries have been proceeding at a pace determined by the economics of the exploitation of the resource and in the light of growing knowledge of the extent and biological limits to it. I think it is fair to say that the ninth meeting of the Australian Fisheries Council, which was held on Lindeman Island in Queensland in November 1979, devoted most of its discussion to the Aus~ tralian fishing zone. Of course, there is plenty of room for disagreement about the nature and extent of the fisheries and the best way that they should be handled.
The Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill imposes a levy on licences issued to foreign fishing boats entering into joint ventures and otherwise and the Fisheries Amendment Bill provides for its collection, The Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Bill gives fee collection from foreign vessels legislative backing, while the Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Bill provides the legislative machinery for the collection. The Bills are legally complex and interrelated, so that there can be no legal doubt as to the validity of the Commonwealth's imposition of levies and collection of fees, Although the Bills are legally complex, the intention of the Government is quite clear and is not opposed in any way! shape or form by the Opposition.
The Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh), in his second reading speeches, has covered all aspects of the Bills in detail. As they are complicated it is sensible to explain what is intended and what has happened once again. The main Bills are the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill and the Fisheries Amendment Bill. Firstly, the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill imposes a levy on the grant of licences authorising foreign boats to fish in the 200-nautical-mile Australian fishing zone or to take sedentary organisms from the Australian continental shelf. Since the establishment of the fishing zone on 1 November 1979, the Government has collected amounts in addition to licence fees in accordance with the agreements between the Commonwealth and the foreign interests concerned. This Bill does not affect that

Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2015

practice. The Government's policy~it is one that is agreed to by the Opposition-'---is to encourage joint fishing operations between Australian and foreign interests as the preferred method of allowing foreign fishermen to have access to the portion
of fish stocks in the Australian fishing zone that Australian fishermen do not harvest. The principal purpose of this Bill is to enable implementation of an aspect of the new guidelines for joint Australian-foreign fishing arrangements developed by the Australian Fishing Zone Committee,
comprising representatives of the fishing industry and State, Northern Territory and Commonwealth governments.
Following endorsement by the Australian
Fisheries Council in September 1980, the Government announced acceptance of the new guidelines. They provide that, in addition to administrative fees prescribed by regulation under the Fisheries Act, joint venture partners during the period when foreign vessels and crews are utilised might be required to pay access fees which may be reviewed during the project. This provision in the guidelines is designed to cover the initial situation where there is little Australian involvement in the joint venture. As the Australian content is increased, the levy could be phased out. Alternatively, where considerable benefits are offered, the levy would be payable if the benefit& do not materialise.
This Bill provides for the assessment of a levy payable in respect of the grant of licences for foreign boats operating under the control of joint fishing arrangements and for the liability of licence holders, who may be Australian residents or companies, for payment of the levy. Other Bills in the package of four provide for the collection of the levy and how it may be reduced or waived if other suitable benefits are provided to Australia.
The Bill not only applies to licences granted as the result of a joint fishing arrangement but also subjects all licensees of foreign fishing boats to an
obligation to pay a tax to be called a levy except iIi two cases. The first case is where the licence is granted under an agreement with a foreign government which specifies that an amount is payable over and above the licence fees. The second case in which a levy is not payable under this
Bill is where the boats are temporarily imported and the regulations prescribe them to be exempt. The Government's intention is that the regulations will exempt only those temporarily imported boats that are under the exclusive control of Australians for use in developmental fishing. The amount of levy that is payable under the Bill is set out in the regulations. Clause 7 of the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill provides that the

regulations may set out the amount of levy payable for any boat or class of boats by reference to a wide range of matters relating to the boat or its operations.
The Fisheries Amendment Bill relates to the Government's policy of licensing foreign fishing boats to fish in the Australian fishing zone only after entering into formal agreements with foreign fishing interests seeking the licences. These agreements fall into three general categories, each of which this Bill deals with separately. Again, I think I should itemise them for the information of honourable members. The first category is agreements for the conduct of joint fishing operations. Where a joint fishing company offers benefits to Australia, in consideration of which the Commonwealth has agreed to release the company from additional impost by way of levy, the Bill empowers the Minister to give effect to that agreement. The Government expects that the use of this power will encourage joint fishing companies to create employment for Australians, to invest in facilities on-shore in Australia or to provide other tangible benefits.
The second category of agreements is where Australia agrees with the Government of a foreign country to license fishing vessels flying its flag to fish in the AFZ. The Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill exempts boats licensed pursuant to such arrangements from liability to pay the levy. The Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Bill provides legislative authority to give effect to the agreement insofar as it may be held to deal with the imposition of taxation in relation to the agreed amount. The Fisheries Amendment Bill provides for giving effect to the agreement in cases that do not have taxation implications. In other words, the package of four Bills covers all eventualities.
The final category of agreements comprises those which do not fall into either of the previous categories, such as the agreement with the Kaohsiung Commercial Fishing Boat Guild of Taiwan. Foreign boats licensed under agreements in this category will continue to be liable to pay the full amount. The rest of the Bill sets out various amendments to various sections of the existing Fisheries Act which, I think, has been in force since 1952, and again it tidies up the arrangements that are to prevail in the future. The Opposition has no opposition to any of these tidying up amendments.
I would like to take some time to make some very general points about the fishing industry. It is one in which one finds it hard to get agreement upon many issues or even any issue in some instances. Fishermen are notoriously independent

2016 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill

and yet the industry is subject to the most intimidating plethora of overlapping regulations of any primary industry. Let us start with the very basics. Is it regarded by the Government in all aspects as a primary industry? I think we can say that the answer is no. Is it regarded by the Government as the Cinderella of the primary industries? I think we can say that the answer is a qualified yes.
What are the basic statistics of the industry? Here one is immediately confronted with the fact that insufficient resources are devoted by the Government or the Department of Primary Industry to the fishing industry. I find this rather amazing. After all, it is one of several industries. It is not one. It is spread throughout the Commonwealth and it is a major export earner. It is hard to get statistics beyond 1979. Economic studies carried out by the Department of Primary Industry's (Fisheries) Division are inevitably dated, and it is clear that there is very little independent data collection on key economic aspects of the industry. This, of course, is no reflection on officers of the Department but I think that that Division of the Department has not had sufficient resources given to it for a long period. I am not saying that some improvements have not been made but when we look at the industry, as I did, and we find that we cannot get statistics beyond 1979 I think there is some cause for concern. Froin what I can find out, there are between 12,000 and 13,000 licensed vessels in Australia. In June 1979 there were 12,900 which would represent an investment of between $350m and $450m. In 1979 Australian fishermen caught 127,700 tonnes of fish valued at nearly $300m. The value of the catch has been consistently rising, and again in 1979 it was estimated that 21,000 people were engaged in the industry and exports were well over $200m.
If one extrapolates the 1979 figures and assumes the trend of the past 10 years, it can be estimated that the value of production will be $350m and that exports will be valued at somewhere near $250m in the current year. If that is correct, we have some very interesting information. Taking the latest Bureau of Agricultural Economics quarterly review of the rural economy and looking at the figures for rural exports, it can be seen that the value of fish exports for 1980-81, or the estimates for 1981-82, were or will be exceeded only by wheat, barley, sugar, wool, beef and veal and all dairy exports. The value of the fishing exports exceeds that of larger and more recognised industries such as rice, dried vine fruits or any of the fruit industries, raw cotton, mutton, live sheep, butter, cheese and whole milk powder as separate items. What I am trying to say is that

fishing is a very substantial industry but it does not get as much political or departmental recognition because basically it has not agreed on the policies that should be applied to it and it is spread right around the coast of Australia. Therefore it does not represent a powerful voting block. But this Parliament must give it more recognition, and the recognition that it should receive as such a substantial industry. Industries of less overall importance in the economy and regionally receive far more recognition and the governmental back-up at the Commonwealth and State levels is also a lot more for the other industries.
There has been pressure from the fishing industryon all State governments to set up State departments of fisheries with their own Ministers and in their entirety. It is pleasing to see that 'the Minister for Agriculture in New South Wales is now the Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries, but the fishing industry said that it would like a separate Minister. I think it feels somewhat isolated due to the reasons I have already set out
Let us look at the question of recognition of the industry as a primary industry. It is not recognised for exemptions from sales tax with respect to four wheel drive vehicles yet these vehicles are absolutely essential for many fishermen. The rural adjustment scheme does not include the fishing industry. There are fishermen who are potentially viable who would welcome a chance to be assessed for the debt reconstruction program, but they are denied. The Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia is not especially geared to process the needs of fishermen, although it does take them on board. When talking of finance we should remember that even the Primary Industry Bank of Australia Ltd is seemingly not able to devote a proportionate level of resources to the fishing industry. The last annual report of the Primary Industry Bank of Australia shows that fishing and forestry together received only $4m of a total advance of some $237m. Surely the fishing industry would represent more than 3 per cent of the total funds being made available by that finance facility.
The razor gang-the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions~inflicted extra costs of about $lm on the industry by requiring it to pay 50 per cent of the cost of fish inspection. People in the industry reacted to this decision by saying that it is acceptable as long as it applies to the inspection costs of all primary industries but they also wanted some say in the adequacy of and the necessity for some of the export inspection, labelling and quality requirements. In the upshot, the Government took the opportunity to load on an array of administrative on-costs and the cost of

Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2017

employee benefits. This is resented by the industry and many processors of fish products in Australia are convinced that one of their biggest problems is the appropriateness of some departmental requirements and, in some cases, ignorance of the fishing industry entailed in the requirements. Because the Commonwealth Department does not have sufficient resources devoted to fisheries, the expertise available to it is not comprehensive enough to take into account some of the industry's and overseas buyers' particular requirements. Again this is no criticism of the departmental officers. It is simply the fact that we are not providing enough resources for the Department.
In the key areas of finance, research, infrastructure and policing, insufficient resources are devoted to the needs of the industry. Everywhere one goes in Australia the industry is pleading for recognition or for special assistance. I guess the number of demands the industry makes is legion. The wharf at Townsville is seen as being particularly bad. Fishermen' unload their fish on to the dirt wharf. The people at Ballina want the State government to spend money on the removal of the bar. I guess there are not many places where port facilities are not crying out for attention. There is a slow response from departments to a range of measures. I refer for example to the question I placed on notice on 17 September to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, (Mr Moore) referring to the fact that people in the fishing industry in the north of Australia are very concerned about actions of the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority. It was stated that consideration was being given to changing the fuel freight subsidy scheme by removing existing freight differentials for safe anchorage locations in northern Australia and restricting these differentials to six mainland points only. I placed that question on notice nearly a month ago. There has been no response. Similarly, I recently sent letters to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs and the Premier of New South Wales about a problem with the construction of fishing boats in Ballina. A boat builder has gone bankrupt and people are trying to have their boats built. They are trying to finance the construction themselves. Again there has been no immediate response. This seems to be typical. When individual fishermen, or even groups of fishermen, run into problems the response from departments and from governments at allievels~all parties~is particularly slow.
As I have already said, the industry is subject to overlapping regulations. Some fishermen are happy with restrictions on the fisheries that they are fishing but of course outsiders are not. The

sustainable yield from some fisheries is still inde-

terminate, and in these circumstances State

authorities have little choice but to impose con-

trols and require licensing. I guess if we are to be

consistent, fishermen cannot have it both ways,

but I believe there is evidence of too much govern-

ment intervention. We find the Commonwealth

and State governments in conflict but particularly

we find this great plethora of regulations that

some of the State government impose on fisher-

men. I guess that is where there is evidence of too

much regulation. I recall one person giving evi-

dence to the Industries Assistance Commission in-

quiry into the fishing industry which reported in

1978. He said he was required to have approxi-

mately 50 licences. That is not a responsibility of

the Commonwealth Government but it gives

some idea of the dimensions of the regulation in

the industry. That regulation, as can be expected,

is resented.

.

I now refer to an issue which is current; that is, with respect to the Investigator Strait prawn fishery. There seems to be a very long time before any decision is reached. There is a lot of contradictory evidence about it and a lot of crude politics seems to be involved in it. As far as the South Australian Department of Agriculture and Fisheries and the prawn fishermen in South Australia are concerned, in 1980 the Fisheries Division of the Commonwealth Department of Primary Industry advised that Investigator Strait would be closed to prawn trawling for some two years. Since then there has been a lot of disgraceful political interference. I will not go into that in too much detail, but that interference has clouded the issue since then. However, the very important thing is that no decision has been made.

The version of the South Australian Minister reponsible for fisheries is that the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), who is sitting at the table now, would not agree to close Investigator Strait to trawling unless the South Australian Department of Agriculture and Fisheries consented to absorb the vessels operating in Investigator Strait under Commonwealth exploratory fishing permits into South Australian prawn fisheries. The Commonwealth Fisheries Division granted 12-month exploratory permits for Investigator Strait in 1977, against strong protest from the South Australian Government. The results have been as predicted: The collapse of the adjoining St Vincent Gulf fishery. Despite that, the permits remain. I do not know what the exact facts of the situation are, but there seems to be a lot of conflicting evidence. The very important thing, and the principle I am trying to identify, is that

2018 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill

again there seems to be no quick resolution of a conflict which is facing the fishing industry.
I guess we could go into the conflict which arose in respect of the Government's decision to end the freeze in the tuna fishing industry and to allow other entrants to the industry. The Australian Fishing Industry Council was opposed to that decision; the Australian Fisheries Council was in favour of it. At that time. I think it was in April this year-there was a lot bf controversy about the Minister's decision. It seemed to me that the basis on which he made that decision was most inadequate. Perhaps that reflects the fact-I pointed to this aspect earlier in the piece-that the Government, in the Department of Primary Industry and the Fisheries Division, does not seem to have the sort of factual back-up, the sort of analysis, that it gets from the Bureau of Agricultural Economics and from the Department with respect to other industries.
It is difficult to generalise. One cannot consistently argue that there is a lack of attention and over-regulation at the same time. But I think there is sufficient evidence to show that fisheries industry problems do not get solved quickly and some of the complications just do not seem to get sorted out in a sensible fashion. The Industries Assistance Commission report canvassed many of the chestnuts in terms of the beliefs of the fishermen and the commonly held beliefs of people outside the industry. It pointed out how difficult that industry is to deal with in terms of the problems it has and how there are so many separate fisheries, so many separate interests and so many separate problems. But I still believe that if we apply the resources at the departmental level, at the research level, we will come to a more rapid resolution of some of those conflicts. I accept the difficulties and I am not always critical of the Minister, but I think a lot more can and should be done. There needs to be a lot more consultation and agreement. It seems that decisions are taken on an ad hoc basis and an insufficient attempt is made to get commonality between the States in licensing requirements and procedures where, as I have said, most of the over-regulation occurs.
Time does not allow a full discussion of the problems faced by processors on-shore, but it seems to me that part of the problem is the fact that we tend to over-fish many of our fisheries and that, even so, supply is not consistent. Basically the Australian fishery itself, overall, except for migratory species, is not as good as the fisheries of other continents or other international fisheries. Of course, there has been a lot of management problems with many of the on-shore facilities. Our exports are concentrated in the lobster, crayfish,

prawn and abalone areas, whereas we import up to 55 per cent of other fish products. People constantly ask: 'Why is that so?'. I think that by and large the industry is pointing roughly in the economic direction in which it should point, but again I am not convinced that more cannot be done.
At present we are collecting over $3m a year from people fishing our resource; in other words, we are collecting that much by way of rent for the use of our renewable resource. That money goes to general revenue. Given the needs of the industry, which I have demonstrated, and the fact that it is not regarded fully by the Government as a primary industry, given the fact that it has many needs in research, extension, infrastructure and policing, I think there is a very good case that some of this money should go back into the industry. Whilst the Opposition does not support the principle of hypothecation, we believe there is a very strong case for more money and resources to be devoted to the fishing industry in all areas in which the Government is best placed to assist, without interfering in the industry's basic economic stability. These needs to be more attention at the political level and more clarification of regulatory and licensing procedures.
Some of the recent issues we have had before us-for example, the orange ruff case-show that consultation and guidance can be beneficial. By and large, the industry itself has sorted out some of its problems in that area with guidance from the Government. But in the other area-perhaps the Minister will be able to comment on this-one of the more recent matters that has come to the attention of the public is the fisheries version of the beef scandal. The Australian Federal Police are involved now in investigating an alleged abalone racket. That would seem to indicate that again we need more commonality between the States in the provisions and regulation. Otherwise we will have more examples of misconduct with the fisheries such as we have seen recently in the beef industry. Perhaps the Minister will be able to comment on that matter because it has not yet been discussed in this House.
By and large, the Opposition does not oppose these Bills. We' believe they are sensible. They are part of the legislation which is connected with the on-going process of the development of the Australian Fishing Zone, with the way in which the Australian Government is entering into joint fishing venture agreements with other countries and the way in which we are allowing other countries to come in and take our fishery. But the Opposition takes the very basic point that it is about time that the fishing industry was regarded fully, in all ways, as being a primary industry. It is also

Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2019

about time that more resources were devoted within the Department of Primary Industry to providing more back-up for the Minister in some of the policy matters that come before him. I do not think it is sufficient to have an Australian Fisheries Council meeting once a year and to have the rest left up in the air as an on-going administrative process; I think more attention needs to be paid to all areas of that rather substantial industry. As I have said, it is probably the sixth or seventh largest exporter. It just does not get the recognition it should on that basis alone.
Mr IAN ROBINSON (Cowper) (8.23)-1 support the measures before the House. I was pleased to hear the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), who spoke for the Opposition, say that the Opposition does not oppose the proposals. I listened with interest to some of the observations. I believe that the record of the Government has not been fully recognised. You, Mr Deputy Speaker, as chairman of the Government rural committee, would be well aware of that. I know that you have played quite a considerable part in assisting the Australian fishing industry. I note with some interest that you are wearing a particular tie this evening; I believe it is that of the Australian Fishing Industry Council. No doubt that reflects a close association with the activities of that body.
The task of the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) in this matter over some considerable time now has not been an easy one. There has been a great deal of hard bargaining in the lead-up, to the arrangements for joint ventures, for the appropriate licensing procedures and then, of course, for appropriate arrangements for the collection of a tax on various kinds of fishing activities by foreigners. But it is essential that there be an effective arrangement in that regard so that, in the first place, we have a reliable administration in terms of the surveillance of the 200-mile limit. Of course, the import of that is that we have a very great resource off the Australian coast, which is of considerable national importance. It is important because we have our own fishing industry to be recognised, to be taken into account, in what is done in the development of fishing within those waters.
It was realised right at the outset, when the 200-mile zone became our responsibility, that it would not be possible for the Australian industry alone to undertake the task of utilising the waters for fishing purposes. This could best be done by a joint venture arrangement in many instances. One has only to look at the industry in the broad. In fact, a visit to the Tokyo fish market by any member of this House, by any participant in the

fishing industry, or by any Australian would, I believe, give a very immediate answer to the problems that are faced in building up the kind of fishing expertise that is necessary if we are to utilise our resources, but at the same time are to ensure that there are safeguards, in the conduct of
fishing operations off the Australian coast.
I have had some interest in this matter because my electorate spans a considerable length of the eas.tern coast as do the electorates of a number of other honourable members in this House. We have a very great regard for the initiatives that have been in evidence on the part of the Australian fishing industry. I have found in my electorate in the fishing co-operatives that have now functioned in some instances for more than 2S years the means for what eventually will be a very efficient and sound fishing industry for Australia. With the benefit of the expertise that those in the industry have been able to develop, with the encouragement that has come from research initiated both by the Commonwealth and the State governments and with the utilisation of funds such as the research and survey grant announced by the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) only a few days ago we are able, for the first time in some instances, to see the harvesting of species which hitherto would not really have been recognised as a commerical proposition.
I remind the Opposition and the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) in particular that there have been other matters that have played a significant part in the development of the fishing industry. I refer to the export incentives scheme which has made possible the development of a very lucrative export trade from a range of fishing ports around Australia. I know, in the instance of the Clarence River Fishermen's Cooperative Ltd on the Clarence River in northern New South Wales, a very large export trade has been developed. That has been the consequence of the direct support that has been given by the present Federal Government.
It would be wrong to suggest that there has been any stinting by the present Government in its practical approach to these matters. Certainly, more can. be done. Undoubtedly, more will be done. But we must move in a. practical way in these matters. We would like to see things happen
faster. I refer in particular to the provision of funds for equipment for the fishing industry, particularly for suitable fishing vessels, through the availability of finance from the Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia. Whilst it was suggested that, comparative to other sections of primary industry, the amount utilised is small, it is, nevertheless, significant if we take the total

2020 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill

capital value of equipment in the fishing industry and relate it to the total capital value of equipment used by other sections of primary industry. I think a very sound approach exists in that regard.
Licensing, which is really the province more of State authorities than of the Commonwealth, has created a certain amount of discord. I am sure that that discord is recognised by those who have a reality in outlook. There must be viability and a recognition of expertise. To some extent, that is encompassed by the requirements of licensing currently. It ensures that the approach made by the industry is in the best interests of the industry and in the best interests of the future prospects for the development of fishing and it takes into account the resource situation.
There is, of course, a beginning with everything. We see a beginning under this legislation for the collection of a levy. No doubt, as we gain experience in the administration of this scheme, many aspects will be recognised that perhaps we have not foreseen until now. Perhaps it goes a little beyond the scope of the Bill to refer to one or two small matters. But I particularly want to mention the importance of a good relationship between the Australian fishing industry and that secti(;m of the industry which will operate under the joint venture schemes and, of course, the utilisation of vessels which are brought into Australian waters as a consequence of the joint venture schemes.
One of the great worries that Australian fishermen have when they see a vessel is that they are not to sure whether it is within the correct limits and that it is operating as licensed so to do. They scan the vessel perhaps from a distance and are left in some doubt. One of those actions that is urged by the administration of the patrol services is that, if any vessel is seen that may not be operating in accordance with licensing requirements, it should be reported. The difficulty is in being able to identify such a vessel. One of the point& that I am sure has been overlooked is that there is a simple answer to enable one to identify a vessel. There should be a requirement for a very easily distinguished large number to be painted on the side or in an appropriate place on any foreign fishing vesselthat is licensed to operate within the 200-mile zone. I put this to the Minister as one matter that might be looked at. Perhaps negotiations would be required to achieve what is proposed. I am sure that not only in Australian waters but also in many parts of the world if there was a unified requirement tor the displaying of a license number on a vessel which could be easily seen and distinguished at a certain distance it would overcome a great deal of the difficulty that

exists at the present time and a great deal of the predjudice that arises because of this problem.
I commend the Government for the progress that is being made in this matter and for its concern for all sections of the fishing industry. I am sure that this legislation will be the forerunner of a very sound administrative approach to a very important segment of fishing in Australia.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (8.38) - The Opposition does not oppose the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill and cognate Bills. As has been stated, the Government has presented a package of four Bills authorising the imposition and collection of a tax on various kinds of fishing activities by foreigners. In that regard,it is a somewhat welcome relief not to be debating a measure imposing a further tax on Australians. There has been far too much of that under the Fraser Government, particularly as the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has been promising lower taxation and his Government constantly introducing legislation to achieve the opposite effect.
The first Bill, the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill, imposes a levy on the grant of licences authorising foreign boats to fish in the 200 nautical mile Australian fishing zone or to take sedentary organisms from the Australian continental shelf. The second Bill in this cognate debate provides the Commonwealth with legislative powers to give effect to fisheries agreements entered into with a foreign government. This will enable a charge to be levied additional to amounts collected on administrative fees payable for the issue of licences.
The third Bill provides for the collection of moneys payable on the granting of licences under the Fisheries Act 1952. Where a joint fishing company offers benefits to Australia, the Government, through the Minister, under this legislation, may release that company from additional imposts by way of a levy. The Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh), in his second reading speech, said that the Government hopes that the use of this discretion will encourage joint fishing companies to create employment for Australians. He also expects them to invest in facilities on shore in this country. In the present employment situation these two statements are commendable. The Opposition will monitor the results to see how much extra employment develops from these measures.
The fourth Bill provides for the collection of a levy in relation to licences that may at some future time be granted for foreign ships to take sedentary organisms. We take the Minister's word

Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2021

that at the moment no such proposals are under consideration. In the second reading speeches there is no mention of the money expected to be collected. Section 5l of the Constitution of the Commonwealth assigns to the Commonwealth Government power to legislate for fisheries in Australian waters beyond territorial limits. The residual power in relation to water within teritorial limits rests with the States. Each State and Territory has legislation regulating fisheries in waters within its jurisdiction. Persons taking fish for sale and their boats are required to be licensed and provision is made for management of the fisheries. Most Australian fisheries are subject to detailed regulations. A complex array of Commonwealth and State regulations covers such things as boats and gear, eligibility for fishing and processing licences, the types and sizes of fish that may be taken, and seasonal area closures. These regulations have a major influence on the econ01llic return from Australia's fish resources.
The States in the fishing industry have a de facto extension of their powers. They are largely responsible for issuing Commonwealth licences and administering Commonwealth regulations. The States, because they control the use of most ports by Australian residents and the handling of most fish on shore, can also influence fishing in Commonwealth controlled waters. However, the Commonwealth Government holds the greater power, as expressed clearly in the Bills before the House. The Commonwealth collects the majority of taxes and levie:;. We on this side of the Parliament believe that there is a strong case for the funds collected under these and other Bills to be returned to the fishing industry in one form or another. However, that is not to say that we believe that as a principle all revenues collected by the Government by way of levies on a particular sector should be returned to that enterprise. A typical example of that philosophy is the moneys being collected by way of oil levies at present. In that regard a strong argument could be made for the Government to return more of the taxes it collects on fuel to those who provide the revenue.
The provision of infrastructure is one area of State responsibility where this Government could provide more logical and sensible economic assistance. The States are being squeezed economically by a Federal Government which still dreams of the possibility of returning this country to the days when States were legally collecting their own income tax. This is part of the federalism policy that I believe will never be achieved. The sooner the Government forgets about it the better this country will be able to be governed. Extension services for the fishing industry are an area where

the Government could upgrade and make use of some of the extra revenue this legislation proposes to generate. Australian extension services grants, which provide funds for extension services in rural industries, should be made available to the fishing industry. This assistance is not available at present. Anyone involved in the rural industries knows that extension services play an important role in the dissemination of research and extension results. It is important that the fishing industry receives information pertinent to the industry.
The fishing industry is a complex one with abbut 40 species of marine and fresh water fish supporting a substantial commercial industry. In fact, the industry rates rates sixth in order of importance as an export industry. Its exports amount to in excess of $250m annually. This industry, like many others, is suffering from the twin evils resulting from the present Government's policies. These are the high costs of the administration and running of a business, particularly the cost of fuel, and the difficulties being experienced on export markets brought about by the sharp rise in the value of Australia's currency as against those of competing nations. Even though we export large quantities, we also import a large amount of edible fish products. With the effects of currency adjustments, many of these imports are creating extra pressures on the industry.
I now turn to a matter of local interest in the fishing industry in my electorate of McMillan. I will point out how some of the funds provided by this legislation could be used to assist in that area. The electorate of McMillan is in the south of Victoria. It takes in the coastal areas of Phillip Island, San Remo and New Haven. There is a large and growing fishing industry based in that location. Many of the fishermen who work from that area fish right down the coast to the electorate of Gippsland, which is the electorate of the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). The fishing industry at San Remo has grown so large and the local jetty is so crowded that there have been moves for a new marina to be constructed in that part of my electorate. Last winter many vessels were seriously damaged during storms because of the lack of space and the jetty facilities not being adequate. Members of the fishing fleet who work from that area will continue to have serious difficulty unless improvements are initiated.
Last April the San Remo Marina Committee was formed. The Committee is now recognised by the State Government and the local shires. It comprises 11 members covering all sectors of the community, including the commercial fishing industry. The Committee believes that the local fishing industry needs the marina, as does the

2022 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill

local tourist industry. Existing pier accommodation is totally unsatisfactory and damage to vessels has occurred on a number of occasions, the last being during a storm in July of this year. The Committee has done a lot of work which shows that many young people are now employed in the industry in that area. It also believes that service industries could be built around a new marina. The Shire of Bass and the Committee have had extensive communications with the State Government and the Department of Public Works. Requests by the Bass Shire to the Public Works Department have resulted in a hydrographic survey being conducted. The Public Works Department has expressed interest in the establishment of the marina at San Remo. However, in the present political climate, a climate which has been created as a result of Federal Government policy, the financing of the marina is the major problem. I would like the Minister for Primary Industry, who is at the table, to take particular interest in this matter as it affects not only my electorate but also his, which adjoins mine. A meeting has been arranged between the State Minister of Public Works and the San Remo Marina Committee for next week in an endeavour to put the case for this project for the fishing industry.
I urge the Minister to consider seriously providing some assistance in funding, through the State Government, for this marina using some of the $3m the Federal Government collects on fishing levies and taxes in a 12-month period. The fishing industry in that part of the world employs many young people. At present, the oldest person working out of that area is 36 to 37 years of age. It is a thriving industry but it has the economic problems of many other industries throughout the country. We all know what they are. They include high interest rates, insurance rates and fuel prices and, as I said earlier in my speech, the problem of competing on markets where the upward valuation of the Australian dollar is causing enormous problems in the export industry.

Mr SAINSBURY (Eden-Monaro) (8.49)- The Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill, the Fisheries Agreement (Payments) Bill, the Fisheries Amendment Bill and the Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Bill relate to levies and foreign fishing in Australian waters. In that sense they go to the very heart of some of the problems Australian fishermen have faced in recent years. I have travelled fairly widely amongst the Australian fishing industry and spoken ofttimes in Canberra to members of the Australian Fishing Industry Council. I feel as though I have lived through the years of change of the Federal Government going through the results of law of the sea conferences and establishing the Australian fishing zone. It has certainly been a time of upheaval in the fishing industry and fishermen, with their very independent pose and disposition, have, at every turn, tended to mistrust anything that has happened. That, I suppose, is a reflection of what the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) called the notorious independence of fishermen. Perhaps notorious is not the best word because I certainly regard independence as a characteristic that ought to be praised. Nevertheless, I see what he means.
It has been difficult in many ways for the Government to press on gradually with the evolution in the Australian industry which, I think, has been very important. We are now at a stage where we have not just the foreign fishermen coming to Australia, who traditionally camethough, of course, some still do and the AustraliaJapan long-line tuna fishing agreement reflects that-but we now have also joint ventures. We are moving further along the track to a stage where we will have, perhaps, fishing boats from overseas dominated by Australians. This is a fairly complex field, an evolving field, as I have said, but I must also say that great credit ought to be put on the shoulders of the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) because of his flexibility in seeing that that evolution ought to take place.

Another area of the fishing industry that could be assisted is marketing. There has been a lot of research into the industry relating to the productivity side of harvesting the catch. However, there is a great need for more research into marketing. Education on marketing research needs to be upgraded. We in the L~bor Party support these Bills. We see the fishing industry as having many of the problems of other rural industries. We urge the Government to consider seriously its economic policies to see that this Australian industry can fully develop and take up its rightful place in the Australian market and the export market.

There have been some comments with which I have disagreed slightly, especially those from the honourable member for Werriwa, although I was most impressed with the diligence with which he has obviously been around the country and acquainted himself with fishing industry problems. Some four years ago a number of members of the Government decided that the fishing industry really was a Cinderella industry in the primary area. Even though we had extremely competent people working in the Department of Primary Industry at the time it was obvious that no members of parliament of either side had ever come to

Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2023

terms as a group with the Australian fishing industry. At that stage we decided that we ought to do something about it.
It is not always a matter of insufficient resources. It is not always a matter of not enough money. In fact, there are lots of paradoxes in the fishing industry. Some people were running around the country not very long ago saying: 'We ought to have fewer but bigger boats.' Some people were saying: 'We ought to get more money out to the fishing industry by way of loans, perhaps through the Primary Industry Bank or the Development Bank because really we have all these fish that have been in the sea for years and years. We have. never got around to catching them. We now have this magic 200-nautical-mile fishing zone. We ought to do something about it. We ought to get bigger boats.' Of course, that sort of resource supply does not always work just as any intervention of government is often open to
later scrutiny and often we find that, of course, it was not a good idea.
In the case of the argument towards fewer but bigger boats we are now finding that we have too much capacity in some of our fishing areas. I mention one aspect that arose from the Australian Fisheries Council meeting only a couple of weeks ago-a realisation by the Federal Government
and now, apparently, by the States in the southeast of Australia, that we have too many boats. We have too much capacity and there ought to be a restrictive trawl fishery, much as that might go against the grain of some people who do not like restrictions. It seems to me that when one has a resource which is finite, where there is a sustainable yield which, if exceeded, will mean the wiping out of the resource, certainly in the medium term, there is a very good case for saying, 'We should allow at least some people to make a living', instead of saying, 'Let's have open slather so that nobody makes a living.' In that sense I very much commend the moves we are making towards a restrictive trawl fishery in the south-east of Australia. That will help the constituents of the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) as it will help mine in my electorate of Eden-Monaro which has a lot of fishermen along the south coast of New Sou th Wales.
There are many things that one could speak about in this debate. I will mention one or two. I refer to the tuna freeze that the honourable member for Werriwa raised a minute ago. I took it from his comments that he criticised the Government for not doing enough research into the policy of lifting that tuna freeze. He quoted, I think, the Australian Fishing Industry Council which certainly in some quarters was against the lifting

of the freeze. I just say for my part that I was very much in favour of the lifting of the freeze. There was some fairly solid logic from the fishermen in my electorate when they said that the fishermen of South Australia who had many of the licences saw the freeze as an opportunity to take over gradually the whole of the fishery. That, perhaps, does not sound fair to some people. But certainly to my fishermen who, as the honourable member said, like others are notoriously independent that seemed to be pretty good logic. The Federal Government's decision was very well accepted, certainly in the port of Eden which is the biggest tuna fishery port, I believe, apart from Port Lincoln.
We are really talking about tonight some aspects of foreign fishing. I have some worries about the tuna long-line agreement with Japan. No doubt these amendments will have some effect on that agreement and also that agreement will have some effect on the levies that might be proposed from time to time. It seems to me-I am not a biologist nor are many of the fishermen, I might say-that if the Japanese long-liners are catching, in the main, mature tuna which our own fishermen at a particular stage are not in a position to catch, and if we recognise that those mature tuna will never get any smaller, the catching of them by the Japanese will probably not have a great effect-apart from the breeding aspects, and we do not know very much about that-on the fish available for our own tuna fishermen. That is a point of view not being made by a biologist but on logical grounds it seems to be to be reasonable.
On the other hand, it seems to me to be reasonable that if we are to expect the Japanese to do what really they have worked against for many years, usually indirectly-that is, if we expect the Japanese to allow our fishermen to get their tuna into the Japanese market as shishimi tuna-I think we have also to expect that the Japanese will want some quid pro quo. I am therefore saying that we need to be very careful in our negotiations with the Japanese on the long-line agreement. A first priority is to see that our fishermen can get access to all the fish that they can catch. They are generally, as I said, not mature tuna. On the other hand, we want to see that the Japanese, certainly at this stage in the medium term, get access to enough water so that in their own backyard they will see that our fishermen get access to their markets. It is tremendously important for our developing tuna fishing industry not to be putting so much fish into cans. We are talking about Rolls Royce fish when we are talking about

2024 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill

southern blue fin tuna. It is tremendously important to have access to the high priced Japanese market. I hope that in all the negotiations this is pushed very hard.
There are many other things that I could say but I have spoken for 10 minutes and perhaps I will not say any more. I hope that the Government will continue what I see as a virile policy towards the fishing industry. I am very pleased with the dedication, as I have said, of officers of the Department of Primary Industry in the Industry No.5 (Fisheries) Division. I believe that they have done a great deal towards having fishermen understand that there are people in Canberra who appreciate their problems. I have had acquaintance on several occasions with specific problems where there has been the right sort of sympathy and very fast action. On the other hand, I hope that the fishermen of Australia will not tend towards what some other industries have donethat includes some primary industries-and that is sitting in the lap of government and expecting government to provide all the answers. When that happens the fishermen will find that they will be ultimately worse off and not better off.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (9.0)-ln rising to speak on the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill, the Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Bill, the Fisheries Amendment Bill and the Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Bill I am aware that my electorate contains all of the west coast of Australia, a third of the south coast and some of the north coast. It is an electorate which has the highest per capita income from fishing in Australia. It is an industry that is very vital to the people in those areas. It is an industry which I feel has tremendous potential for decentralisation. What is worrying me is that although we do not oppose this Bill, it does seem that in many ways the Government has simply not capitalised on the potential value that exists. For instance, when one looks at the figures, one finds that we import much more fish than we catch ourselves. The figures for 1978-79 show that $268m worth of fish were caught, of which we exported $214m and we imported $129m. In other words, we imported $129m worth but we only caught in Australia $54m worth. It seems to me that there is something basically wrong with the fishing economy when that sort of thing is happening.
If one considers that most ubiquitous of all species, the fish finger, one finds that only five years ago we started the manufacture of fish fingers in Australia. I ask honourable members to believe that we used mainly imported fish to manufacture them. When one realises things like this I think it is clear that the Government has

done too little and, perhaps, too late with respect to the fishing industry. It has been very much a neglected industry. If it had been treated with the ~ame generosity as the farming industry I am sure It would be a lot better off than it is today.
The Taiwanese fishing boats in the year prior to the enactment of the 200-mile fishing zone took from Australia 80,000 tonnes of fish. In Australia all wet fishermen caught 47,400 tonnes of fish. Quite clearly even before the 200-mile zone was implemented. the Taiwanese were doing much better. I believe that the trouble is mainly with marketing and is something that should really be addressed. We have to change the Australian people's fish eating habits. We have to encourage them to eat a lot more fish. In Australia. I think the p~r capita consumption is something like 10 kilograms per head. In Japan the per capita consumption is 35 kilograms per head and many European countries approach this figure.
The snapper fish industry is one about which I am very concerned. The snapper is one of the supreme fishes of the world. It has a taste and texture which makes it very desirable. In Japan it is called the red imperial fish which is an indication of the regard with which it is held in Japan. Carnarvon, in my electorate, is an area which desperately needs new industries. A group oflocal fisherm.en set ,themselves up as the Shark Bay Fishermen s Co-operative. The Shark Bay area is a world renowned area for snapper. It is a known breeding ground. It seems to have very large numbers of these fish which have not been depleted over recent years. This company fell onto very hard times-in fact, it has now been wound up-by a combination, I suggest, of State Governme~t duplicity and Federal Government apathy. To Illustrate this position, I point out that I wrote ~o the Minister for .Pril!lary Industry (Mr Nixon) In August. He replIed In September. I asked him to put an immediate ban on the issue of any more Commonwealth licences for trap fishing; The reason for this was quite simple. What had very much damaged the image of the Shark Bay Fishermens Co-operative was the number of trap cau~ht fish that were being marketed. Trap fishIng tends to lead to a very high degree of bruising. I had spoken to the State department about this. It said that that was not its problem and that it had ceased to issue any trap licences at all but t~at the Commonwealth Government was issuing lIcences for beyond the three-mile limit. So I wrote to the Minister. I might add that this was a bipartisan approach because I know that Senator Thomas is also concerned about this. We asked the Minister simply to stop issuing licences for

Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Bill

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2025

trap fishing in the area. The Minister Wrote to me. He said:
. . . you may be aware the Western Australian Department of Fisheries and Wildlife recently instituted a study on the problems in this fishery and I have agreed with the Honourable G. E. Masters, MLC, the Minister for Fisheries and Wildlife not to take any action until this study is completed.
In the circumstances I would not like to suggest measures at this stage without the concurrence of the Western Australian Minister for Fisheries and Wildlife.
He said that he had sent him a copy of my letter and a copy of his reply. I thought it was rather odd that the Department in Western Australia told me that yes, this was the problem, but there was nothing that it could do, that the matter was in the hands of the Commonwealth, and then I get this reply from the Minister. It is obvious that either the Minister in Western Australia does not know what he is doing or our Minister does not know what he is doing or possibly both. I think it does illustrate a very valid point-the lack of liaison and the lack of communication which exists in the industry and the tremendous impost that this puts on the orderly development of the market.
In the few minutes that I have left I urge the Government to consider making available to the industry some of the money that it will reap from the licensing arrangement that it will make under this Bill and similar Bills and make this money available to the industries to reinvest it in Australia. It seems to me that only by this investment of capital made available to local independent fishermen can we ever hope to rival the expertise that seems to be available to foreigners who are only too willing to come to our shores and export our fish. I add that for some time now this has been a policy of the Australian Labor Party. It is a policy which, I am sure, will meet with the enthusiasm of all thinking Australians who must realise the tremendous potential for development that we have in this industry. It is certainly something to which I would urge the Government, in a bipartisan spirit, to give some serious consideration.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.

FISHERIES AGREEMENTS (PAYMENTS) BILL 1981
Second Reading Consideration resumed from 24 September, on motion by Mr McVeigh:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
FISHERIES AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 24 September, on motion by Mr McVeigh:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
CONTINENTAL SHELF (LIVING NATURAL RESOURCES) AMENDMENT
BILL 1981 Second Reading Consideration resumed from 24 September, on motion by Mr McVeigh:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82 Consideration of Reports of Estimates Committees
Consideration resumed from 13 October.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-The House will now proceed to consider the reports of Estimates committees.

2026 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I suggest (a) that the reports be considered in the following order-D, E, A, B, C, F, and (b) that when considering each of the reports the House consider together the proposed expendi-- tures and any resolutions or expressions of opinion which are covered in the respective reports. These procedures have been discussed with the Opposition, which has raised no objection to what is proposed.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER--Is it the wish of the House to adopt the procedure suggested by the Minister? I will allow that course to be followed.
Consideration of Report of Estimates CommitteeD
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The question before the House is:
(I) That the following proposed expenditures be agreed to:
Department of the Treasury
Proposed expenditure, $375,042,000
Department of Primary Industry
Proposed expenditure, $108,673,000
Department of Finance
Proposed expenditure, $52,094,000
Advance to the Minister for Finance
Proposed expenditure, $125,000,000
Department of Transport
Proposed expenditure, $447,589,000
(2) That the resolution agreed to by Committee D in relation to the Department of Transport be noted, namely:
That this Committee, recognising the disruption being caused to air services and the tourist industry in Australia and the substantial costs being incurred by air service operators because of the shortage of air traffic controllers commends the Government in its immediate efforts to overcome the shortage of air traffic controllers and calls upon the Government not to relent in those efforts.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (9.14)-1 wish to address some of my comments to the estimates of the Department of Primary Industry. As honourable members will realise the Department, with respect to the beef scandal and the report on Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd, has been under some criticism and attack in recent times. I think it is a great pity that the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations-the Rae Committee-had a few paragraphs in it that diverted the attention of the media and the public in general towards whether or not the head of the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) could be lopped off. What the Rae Committee report really said was a lot more serious than that. It reflected very seriously on some very fundamental failings

which related to the way our primary products statutory marketing organisations are run. Part of the reason for that is the impact, unwittingly, of the way the rural establishment acts to defend itself. I think this is very understandable. The way very key people in primary industry producer organisations and other statutory corporations re-
late with and meet, in their every day work, members of the Department of Primary Industry and Ministers from the Government leads them into a situation where things can happen that would not ordinarily happen if they were being a lot more vigilant. Again we cannot necessarily be critical of individuals.
If honourable members read very carefully through the transcript of the Rae Committee report with respect to Asia Dairy Industries and the Australian Dairy Corporation's subsidiaries, they will see the way the departmental officers were caught in having to recall what went on at comittee meetings. They were caught in not knowing who they should defend or what they should de~ fend. They were caught in a situation where they
did not know what was going on or they could not remember that far back. The same sort of process, the idea that I am trying to develop of a rural establishment where we have a big happy family of an instrumentality that is very self-defensive and not internally self-critical, again applies with respect to the razor gang decisions and the way the Department and the Government have handled the so-called decision to sell the Australian Wool
Testing Authority.
Most of my questions to the Minister at the Estimates Committee meeting related to the 13 razor gang decisions that applied to the Department of Primary Industry. At one stage it seemed to me very clear that many of those decisions-it is now six months since they were made-were not being implemented by the Department and
the Minister or they were not able to be implemented. That seemed rather nonsensical. The most nonsensical of it all, of course, was the sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. I will go through the decisions of the razor gang. First of all, the production costs of the Australian Fisheries magazine were to be recovered by charging a fee. This is being done but it has been rather trivial because previously the Department recovered a large proportion of production costs through advertising charges. For example, in 1980-81, $111,581 was recovered. The 1981-82 estimate is that $150,000 will be recovered from advertising and $50,000 from sUbscriptions out of a cost of$214,000. At least that has been dpne.
The second Government decision was that the
Australian Plague Locust Commission be sold.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2027

That has been done. In the policy advice, research and support functions in the Department it was claimed that there is scope for staff reductions to be examined. I do not know what that means but I spent some time tonight in the debate saying that I think it would be very important for some of the functions of the Department to be expanded, particularly in the Fisheries Division. The fourth decision in respect of the Food and Agriculture Organisation-FAO-was that Australia's representation be scaled down. That has not been done, to my knowledge, and it is in the interests of the Department that the representation should be as it has been. I think perhaps that is so. The fifth measure is that the Government has decided to abolish the Commonwealth Council for Rural Research and Extension. That decision is crazy, but it has been done. The sixth decision was with respect to the rural extension services. From 1981-82 the rural extension services grant will be incorporated into general financial assistance grants to the States. I do not know what was meant in terms of cutting down if we accept the Government's usual excuse for putting things into general revenue grants. In other words, the Government is spending the same amount of money.
I will speak at more length about the Australian Wool Testing Authority, the seventh measure. The eighth measure related to the sale of wool stores. Some wool stores were sold after an initial dispute between the growers and the Australian Wool Corporation about ownership. The ninth measure was on wool promotion. I do not know how that was cut, but the Commonwealth contribution was to remain at the same money level for three years, and it has. The tenth measure related to the Australian Wheat Board interest rate subsidy. This is the decisiol). I still have the most difficulty in understanding. It is very debatable whether or not this is still being done. I do not think it has been complied with entirely. Perhaps it cannot be complied with entirely. But it does show that the initial examination of the Department in this area was rather misguided. The Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), who is at the table and the Treasurer (Mr Howard) have yielded ambiguous replies to questions I have placed on the Notice Paper. At the Estimates Committee meeting the Minister essentially said that the recommendation could not be complied with. The Department of Primary Industry estimates worked on the basis of an increase in the differential of interest rates from 2 per cent to 4 per cent. So we are in a very cloudy area there. The eleventh matter related to charging for export inspections. By and large this is being done

and measures have come through this House on that one. The twelfth matter was that the forestry agreement be terminated. That has been done. The thirteenth decision related to meat inspections. Of course that has not been done at all and we all understand the difficulties in that area.
I will turn to the sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority and the way, as I mentioned in earlier comments, the rural establishment acts in matters such as these. Despite six months of turmoil in the wool industry-a period described by the President of the Wool Council of Australia, Mr Ian McLachlan, as one of tedious and unnecessary negotiations-the reason behind the Government's decision is still unclear. The Australian Wool Corporation set the end of September as the deadline for wool industry groups to agree on arrangements for the so-called sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Minister for Primary Industry had agreed in the days immediately following the razor gang announcement that all sections of the wool industry would be consulted in determining the arrangements for the sale. In practice the process of consultation was undertaken through the Australian Wool Corporation, a representative of grower interests.
The Australian Wool Corporation-prepared document was sent to the Minister for Primary In7 dustry on Monday, 12 October. Does this do,cument reflect the opinions of all sections of the industry or is it a reflection of the interests of the Australian Wool Corporation and the Wool Council of Australia, that is, the grower sections of the industry? When will the Minister make an announcement concerning the fate of the Australian Wool Testing Authority? The statement that the report would be considered by a special committee should be scorned as further procrastination in this rather useless exercise. What agreement has been reached on the two issues outstanding following the last meeting of all industry representatives at the beginning of September?
The two issues were, firstly, the division of control between grower and non-grower sections of the industry and, secondly, the price at which the Australian Wool Corporation is prepared to transfer assets to the Australian Wool Testing Authority. The Australian Wool Corporation has put to the Minister a proposal which is said to take into account the views of the early September meeting. But how were the two outstanding issues resolved? No further meeting with all industry representatives has been held. The nongrower section of the industry has not seen the report currently with the Minister. Mr McLachlan put his views on these issues to rural journalists at

2028 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

the end of September, and it is interesting that at deterioration of air safety services to the aviation

this meeting Mr McLachlan appeared to view the industry.

interests of the Australian Wool Corporation and the Wool Council of Australia as one. Mr McLachlan's views of the resolution of the two outstanding issues were, with regard to the first, that it would be essential for the Australian Wool Corporation and the Wool Council of Australia to hold 51 per cent of the ownership of AWTA. Mr McLachlan said that the growers would not use their 51 per cent control to interfere with the day to day management of AWTA. The 51 per cent, according to Mr McLachlan, would be used to decide where the assets would go in the case of a dissolution, to appoint a new chairman if AWTA was going off the rails and to call a special general meeting to appoint members of the board with special qualifications.

It is clear that in the Department of Transport, as in every department, it is the tall poppies who hold sway. They are the ones who make the decisions and who are much more able to protect their positions within the Department than are
those at lower levels and on lower salaries. If we look at the situation in the road transport industry we see that, as a result of this Government legislation to abolish the States' discretionary power to determine which national road construction projects are carried out by public road authorities, turmoil has been created resulting in uncertainty of employment in public road authorities, in loss of key personnel and in general disruption to programs. All these matters arise from the illadvised policies of this Government in respect of

With regard to the second !patter-the most transport.

sensitive issue, because the transfer price deterI turn to the subject of air traffic controllers.

mines the extent of increases in charges for wool The desperate shortage of air traffic controllers

testing to be faced by growers-Mr McLachlan .has arisen from the Government's failure to plan

said that the Wool Council of Australia advocated adequately in recent years for the industry's

a transfer of assets at zero value but with the needs. We were told by the Minister for Transport

working capital of AWTA maintained. Is the (Mr Hunt) during the Estimates Committee and

Australian Wool Corporation likely to agree to in the debate in the last week of sitting that the

this proposal, or is it more likely that the Ausearly closure of Brisbane Airport, due to

tralian Wool Corporation will have sought a situinsufficient numbers of air traffic controllers being

ation in which the new AWTA was funded available to man the airport, was having only a

through loans to the Australian Wool minor impact upon the aviation industry. In fact it

Corporation?

is having a major impact upon the costs of the air-

lines. It has caused disruption to the tourist indus-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- try. As I said, the Minister glossed over those det-

Order! The honourable member's time has rimental impacts. But what he did not mention, in

expired.

referring to what he tended to suggest was a minor

Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (9.24)-1 speak to the estimates for the Department of Transport. Although the time for the consideration of th<? Transport estimates was increased compared with last year, given the wide range of items to be covered and the expenditure involved the time was still inadequate. Unfortunately I received only in the last 20 minutes a copy of the answers provided to questions raised in the Estimates Committee, so I have not had an opportunity to consider in detail the nature of those answers.

alteration to airline schedules, was the fact that Qantas Airways Ltd had suffered considerable embarrassment in Japan because of the restricted availability of Brisbane Airport. Just prior to the commencement of the early closure of Brisbane Airport, Qantas had expended a considerable amount of money in promoting the new service to Brisbane. Now that it is not able to provide the service,it has had to make alternative arrangements for travel from Japan to Brisbane, then to Sydney and out of Sydney back to Japan, when in fact what was proposed was first stop Sydney and

The main point I want to deal with is the Department's cutbacks in staffing and the fact that, whoever one speaks to within the Department of Transport other than at the top policy level, one finds that vacancies are not being filled and numbers are being reduced in the servicing areas, the areas to do with industry, and that it is affect-

then return to Japan via Brisbane, leaving Brisbane at night. That has had a considerable impact upon the airline. It has caused a deal of embarrassment to Australia and to the airline in Japan. In the Minister's comment on the shortage of air traffic controllers that was glossed over; in fact it was not even mentioned.

ing those on the lower income level. That has been I repeat that the proposals put forward by the

reflected in the deterioration of the quality of serMinister and the Department in respect of air

vice provided to industry and particularly in the traffic controllers are band-aid solutions and will

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2029

do little to overcome this continuing shortage. Until such time as the conditions and entitlements of air traffic controllers are brought into line with those in countries that are poaching our highly trained personnel, the present unsatisfactory situation will continue. The Supplement to the Votes and Proceedings of Estimates Committee D carries an amendment which was adopted by the Committee but which was opposed by the Opposition. The original motion which I moved on behalf of the Opposition was:
That this Committee, recognising the disruption being caused to air services and the tourist industry in Australia and the substantial costs being incurred by air service operators arising from the Minister for Transport's failure to ensure that sufficient Air Traffic controllers are employed to keep Australia's airports open during normal operational hours, calls for immediate and effective action by the Government to overcome the shortage of Air Traffic Controllers.
That is fact. The record shows it. This Government has been in office nearly six years and it is its responsibility to 'ensure that adequate trained personnel are available at our airports. But, surprisingly, members of the Government, including the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull), who has so much to say from time to time about the tourist industry, endorsed the amendment that now appears before the Committee and which commends the Government for its immediate efforts. In other words, the amendment condones the failure and incompetence of the Department of Transport and condones the early closure of Brisbane Airport. When the honourable member for Bowman next speaks in a debate with me on this matter, I will promptly remind him of that.
Another matter brought to the attention of the Committee is this crazy program of transferring Department of Transport personnel to Canberra and how it has resulted in the loss of many key and experienced Department of Transport specialist, personnel. In the interests of the transport industry, that program should be stopped and a review should be carried out on the impact of the transfer program on the quality and availability of essential services to the transport industry by the Department of Transport. The answers to the questions I raised have only just come back, so I have not had a chance to study them in more detail.
Similarly, the lighthouse de-manning program has been called into question by thousands of amateur boating enthusiasts around Australia, not for money or for political purposes but because they are genuinely concerned at the removal of rescue and observatory functions of manned lighthouses. They are also genuinely concerned at the reduction in the light intensity and

the visual range of the light emanating from the automatic stations compared with the manned stations. It is common knowledge also that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has already intervened on a number of occasions to change the Department's program. That is something we will talk about in a later debate.
I turn to the other matter I want to refer to. The Minister for Transport was not able to make a statement today about a board of inquiry. He chose again to hide in coward's castle with an answer to a Dorothy Dix question so that there cannot be any response or comment. It is the form he usually follows. He is our leading chicken man. In this matter there was an attempt to cover up to begin with and then an about-face and then the retreat to coward's castle to announce the aboutface and the establishment of the inquiry. There is widespread feeling and belief in Liberal Party ranks and among some National Country Party members of this House, and justifiably so, that the tall poppies of the National Country Party-,-the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) and the Minister for Transport-are responsible for most of the Government's present abysmal performances and difficulties and that those three Ministers are creatures of their departipents who are. unable to speak on their portfolios until their scripts have been written by departmental officers. If the Minister for Transport, who is at the table, doubts the accuracy of my remarks, I suggest that he escape from his departmental bureaucrats and have a few frank talks with some of his colleagues. He has chosen, in line with his ministerial colleagues of similar indolence and arrogance, to besmirch his critics rather than constructively analyse and respond to well-founded criticism of his incompetence and failures. In the very limited time available I am unable to cover in detail the Advance Airlines disaster. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the statement. I issued today in respect of that matter. I do not have time to read it into Hansard.
Leave granted.
The statement read as follows-
STATEMENT BY PETER MORRIS
Shadow Minister for Transport
14 October 1981
Canberra
ADVANCE AIRLINES CRASH INQUIRY 'rOO NARROW
Having initially decided against a public inquiry into the Advance Airlines crash of 21 February, 1980, the Minister for Transport has limited its Terms of Reference to avoid any embarrassment to his Department.

2030 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

He has rejected the powers available to him under Air N~vigation Regulations to empower the Board to inquire into the conclusions in the Air Safety Investigation Branch report that:
'Officers of the Department of Transport were aware of the unapproved practices in respect of standard passenger weights and reduced power take-offs but action had not been taken to regula rise the company's operations.'
Only 3 months before the tragic crash occurred, his predecessor told the Parliament:
-A<;tion is continually being taken to ensure that the required standard of maintenance in general aviation is adequate and is being observed by the industry.'
The report shows that Mr Nixon's assurance on air safety was meaningless.
Unless the Board's Terms of Reference are extended to require it to inquire into and report upon:
I. The extent to which Advance Airlines engaged in any unapproved practices at the time of the fatal crash at Sydney Airport on 21 February, 1980 and the extent to which unapproved practices (if any) contributed to' that crash.
2. The extent to which any other aviation operator within Australia has engaged in unauthorised practices (if any) adopted by Advance Airlines.
3. The officers of the Department of Transport who (i) were aware; (ii) should have been aware; of unapproved practices (if any) adopted by Advance Airlines.
4. The extent to which (i) The Minister for Transport and/or (ii) The Secretary of the Department of Transport (a) was aware; (b) should have been aware; of unapproved practices (if any) adopted by Advance Airlines.
5. The extent of Ministerial and Permanent Head control of the Department of Transport as it affects air safety.
6. The experience and level of competence and expertise of departmental officers employed with responsibilities relating to air safety.
7. The degree of scrutiny by the Department of Transport of the standards of operation of Advance Airlines during the two years prior to the crash of 21 February 1980.
8. The extent of engineering surveillance by the Department of Transport of Advance Airlines' workshop during the two years prior to the crash of 21 February 1980.
9. The measures necessary to ensure the discontinuation of unauthorised practices (if any) adopted by Advance Airlines or other aviation operators.
10. The efficacy and propriety of the methods of investigation and report (including any allegations of premature disclosure) by the Air Safety Investigation Branch.
II. The staffing structure and morale within the Department of Transport as it affects air safety issues.
12. Any question of conflict of interest relating to, or affecting, the Department of Transport in carrying out its responsibilities with respect to air safety.
Lingering doubts about the way air safety surveillance is conducted in this country will remain.

The provisions of the Instrument of Appointment of the Board of Inquiry, unless extended, could well result in the Inquiry being seen as a blatant cover-up of ministerial incompetence and failures of the Department of Transport to carry out its statutory responsibilities in respect of air safety.
Inquiries: Peter Morris 72-6472.
Mr MORRIS-I thank the House. In the instrument of appointment the Minister, under Air Navigation Regulation 287 (1), could empower the inquiry to inquire into the causes of the accident, which he did; but he rejected to use the other power he has to require it to inquire into the cause of the accident and such other matters relating to the accident as are referred to it by the Minister. It is clear from this whole sad episode that this crash was a tragedy that should never have occurred. It is clear from the report that a series of unapproved practices of which the Department is aware was carried on. It is clear from the Minister's statement of 23 September that he sought first to cover for the Department, to protect the Department; but, in the face of public pressure, he collapsed and agreed that there should be a board of inquiry. He anounced that in a flippant and irresponsible way. Again, it was done from coward's castle in an answer to a Dorothy Dix question. When he returned to his seat and I asked him why he did not do that in the first place, his response across the chamber was that it was better late than never, which he repeated in answer to a second question. That indicates his flippant and irresponsible attitude to a tragedy that would never have occurred if the Minister and his Department had been faithfully performing the statutory responsibilities with which they are charged by the legislation and by the Air Navigation Regulations.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SHACK (Tangney) (9.34)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I was a member of Estimates Committee D, as you well know as you were our able Chairman. In that Committee's consideration of the Estimates I took particular interest in the estimates of the Department of Transport. I want to refer to them again tonight. I use the Estimates Committee debate as an opportunity to refer to some Government decisions which were announced last June in the context of the airlines legislative package which was passed at that time.
The first matter I want to refer to is the question of how we are to set domestic air fares in the future in the context of continuing to regulate the domestic airlines environment. I referred to the matter last night in the adjournment debate when I recalled that last Friday the Minister for

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2031

Transport (Mr Hunt) announced the composition of the Independent Air Fares Committee, which is provided for by the Independent Air Fares Committee Bill which was passed last June. I welcomed that announcement last night and I welcome it again tonight. Again, I congratulate those three gentlemen who have consented to give up their time to serve on that Committee.
I want to refer again to the difficulty of their task in the future. In a regulated environment we have assigned to an independent authority the job of approximating the disciplines of market forces. We have asked that independent authority to try to determine airfares in the future on the basis of the Holcroft principles that there should be a nationally consistent formula devoid of crosssubsidisation and that the formula should be based on cost, recognising the need to ensure the viability of the airlines in the future. Also, importantly, in the absence of market discipline, it should take into account that very necessary element of the public interest. I do not hestitate to restress the difficulties because it is important to do so. When there is a nationally consistent air fare formula based on historical cost and when one is trying to preserve the viability of the airlines, one cannot go past the report of the consultants, Price Waterhouse and Co., which concluded that air fares are presently being set to ensure the continued viability of the least profitable operator, being at the moment Trans Australia Airlines, and that if air fares are set to ensure the continued viability of TAA one is virtually ensuring a profit level for the other competitor, Ansett Airlines of Australia. I believe that that is a problem that will have to be faced up to by the Independent Air Fares Committee.
The other question it will have to address itself to is this: When there is a nationally consistent formula which has two const'ituent e1ements-a flagfall component and a distance componentone must ask oneself what is the right formula. I would hazard a guess that in the absence of competitive market forces there is no right formula. As I said last night, to the extent that one weights flagfall one favours the long haul routes; to the extent that one weights the distance component one favours the short haul routes. We went some way down the track in favouring the long haul routes some months ago. Price Waterhouse, when it reworked the Holcroft formula, came up with its own formula, which demonstrates the difficulty I am evidencing tonight. If it had been applied it would have favoured the short haul routes. So ultimately what we come down to is a judgmental arbitrary decision which has to be made, which will obviously take politics into

account. I can only wryly wish the Independent Air Fares Committee all the very best as it tries to face up to that task.
The other matter I referred to in the Estimates Committee was the question of TAA. Honourable members will recall that last June the Minister announced that TAA would be established as a public company with 100 per cent government ownership and that there would be an independent investigation into the possibility of selling off some part of TAA to the public. I know the Opposition holds a particularly strong view on the ownership of TAA. I ask it to look at one matter as it examines its own view. This matter is evidenced by the Price Waterhouse report and by other independent consultants. At the moment TAA is simply not operating as efficiently as its major competitor. As fares reflect the fact that TAA is not operating as efficiently as its major competitor, to that extent the air fare paying public in Australia is paying for that inefficiency. I do not know whether the answer is to sell off shares to the public. I do not know whether the answer is to bring more competitive elements into TAA. But I certainly know that the situation has to be looked at. TAA certainly has to be restructured and some of its capitalisation and superannuation problems have to be overcome. I am not wedded ultimately to the question of its ownership, be it 100 per cent, 90 per cent or 10 per cent; but certainly the problem has to be looked at devoid of ideological blinkers and some improvement has to be brought about. During the Estimates Committee debate the Minister said that the terms of reference of the independent consultants were presently being drawn up and that he hoped to be in a position within a month from that date-I? September-to announce who the independent consultants will be. In June we were given the understanding that the inquiry would take about 12 months. I know the difficulty in framing terms of reference for this type of inquiry. Equally, I know the difficulty of trying to employ a proper set of consultants-the right sort of firm-to do the job. I know the Minister is conscious of his responsibilities in living up to the commitments we have given. I look forward to an announcement being made by the Minister as soon as possible so that in reasonable time-within 12 months-we can have a proper investigation into the very real problems of TAA so that we can bring about some sort of improvement in that organisation vis-a-vis its competitive position with its major competitor, Ansett Airlines of Australia. Certainly, if we improve that competitive position the beneficiaries will be the air fare paying public of Australia.

2032 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The new two airlines agreements now can come into force. The necessary occurrences that had to happen so that it could come into force have now passed, I think on 29 September. I look forward to that Act being proclaimed so that at least for the next five to eight years domestic aviation can be run by that new two airlines agreement. I think everybody knows my attitude to it in the totality, but I think that on balance it is a better airline agreement than we had before.
Finally, I want to say something about the deregulation inquiry. The position adopted by the Government is that there is to be a meaningful and genuine inquiry not only in terms of how we can improve present domestic aviation in the context of perpetuating the two airlines agreement but also in terms of investigating domestic aviation with respect to other possibilities. Those other possibilities are multifold and they are incorporated and encompassed by the term deregulation. I do not have any fixed ideas at this point as to what deregulation might encompass, but I am certainly very keen, and I certainly argue strongly for this, that we should look at all the other possibilities. We are on record as saying that the Parliament will have the benefit of the report of the deregulation inquiry by 30 June 1986 and that the inquiry should be a comprehensive one, taking into account the changes that currently are -happening in the airline industry on the basis of the new two airlines agreement, and taking into account the new equipment decisions that are being made by the airlines. I believe the inquiry should be set up as soon as possible.
The Minister has done the job of appointing the Independent Air Fares Committee. The next task is to appoint the consultants to investigate TAA. I believe that will be done very shortly. The next major job which I believe should be done before the end of the year is to appoint the inquiry into the deregulation of the airline system so that it can run its full five years and can conduct a genuine and comprehensive inquiry into where domestic aviation policy should go in the future. I believe it should be given enough funds so that the members can journey to the United States and we may gain the benefit of that experience.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (9.43)- Having listened to the debate in regard to the estimates for the Department of Transport, the question I ask the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) is: Is he prepared to give an undertaking that Trans Australia Airlines will not be sold before

Christmas, in consideration of what we have just heard from the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) from Western Australia? The issue I wish to speak on is in regard to the estimates for the Department of Primary Industry. After the meat scandal there appears to have been a rather rushed job on the species testing which has become part and parcel of the industry now to satisfy the American market. During the Estimates Committee hearing questions were asked by the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), the shadow Minister, in regard to the meat inspection costs and the question of dual meat inspection. He asked the Minister how much money was to be spent on this. The Minister said:
The Government has provided an extra $6m of Commonwealth funds to meet any additional costs that will be incurred as a result of the changed security arrangements. . . One million dollars of this was estimated to be for the cost of seals--
These are carton seals-
and $5m was estimated to be for the cost of species testing equipment for the various equipment requirements in the v'arious testing places around Australia.
That was fairly straightforward at that stage. The honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) asked this question of the Minister:
Do we take it, then, that the $1 m is a recurring cost and that the rest of it is once off? Is that a fair interpretation?
The Minister replied:
Yes, that is right.
We were to believe that $lm would be a recurring cost and the rest-$5m-would be spent this year and would not be required again. After further questioning two things came out. The $5m was to be just a once off cost for the cost of species testing equipment, for the various equipment requirements in the various testing places around Australia. When I asked where the equipment would be obtained a departmental spokesman, on behalf of the Minister, said:
The main component of the costs is expected to be the cost of the tests in the laboratories.
Therefore the $5m was not to be spent on actual capital equipment; it was to be spent on hiring laboratories to do the job. It also was then said:
There will be a component of equipment costs in the charge that the laboratories make for . . . the testing.
The witness stated:
The costs vary greatly depending on the type of test they are doing and the specific laboratory. They vary from about $3 a test up to $30 a test.
That was fair enough to that stage but then a question was asked of the Minister. I asked:
How many of those tests have been done in Victoria and how many in other parts of Australia?

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2033

Rather than answer that question the Minister proceeded to give this answer:
One of the things we have got to recognise is that this testing is now going to be a regular procedure. We are going to have to install a system that will not cause delay to the meat exporters.
Only five minutes prior to that a member of the Government asked:
Do we take it, then, that the $1 m is a recurring cost and that the rest of it is once off? Is that a fair interpretation?
The Minister said:
Yes, that is right.
The question I asked is: What is right? Is it a once off or is one of the things we have to recognise that this testing will be a regular procedure? The Minister said:
We are going to have to install a system that will not cause delay to the meat exporters.
This is a very serious question that has not been answered by the Minister. It is so serious that we are talking about $5m. This year $5m will come out of the taxpayers' pockets. At this stage we do not know who will spend that $5m in the future. Will it be the producers of beef at the farming end, will it be the taxpayer or will it be the exporter in the middle who virtually, because of the problems that have been caused in that part of the industry, will cost us $5m? I would very much like to have an answer from the Minister to see just what the position is. Of course, the following day we were debating in this House the Meat Export (Penalties) Bill and cognate Bills which were designed to increase the penalties for people who were breaking the law in this regard. The honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd), the secretary to the Minister, spoke about this very thing. In regard to the Minister's statement in this House he said:
Destructible seals are now to be introduced at an an'nual cost of about $1 m to prevent any future lid swapping.
Fair enough. He is in line with the Minister there. But he went on to say:
We are not to have random species testing at a cost of about $5m for the capital equipment.
We do not know from that speech whether he means that the $5m will not be spent on capital equipment or whether the $5m will not be provided for species testing. The Estimates Committee hearing brought out a very important point that needs an answer from the Government. It needs an answer particularly because of the present economic situation. Everybody has been told that they have to tighten their belts. Many sectors of the community are being told that no money is available for the very necessary procedures in the community. We have here tonight in the House educational representatives who are

concerned about losing $400,000 of a very important educational facility in my electorate. Here we have the situation of $5m being bandied around and nobody seems to be able to tell us just who will provide the money-whether it will be the taxpayer, the primary producer or the exporter. I urge the Government, at the conclusion of the debate, to give us a clear indication of where we are going as far as that $5m is concerned.
Mr WALLIS (Grey) (9.50)-ln the debates that take place in this House we hear quite a lot about the capital city airports and the worries connected with them. I know that they are important, but tonight I have a few words to say about some of the country airports a_nd airstrips which this country relies so much upon once we get away from the capital cities. As Grey is a large country electorate, it relies to a great extent on the various types of air services. I refer to the Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia Inc., and to the St John's Air Ambulance Service. The Flying Doctor Service is based at Port Augusta and the Air Ambulance Service at Whyalla. We even have a flying Church of England priest. So we rely to a great extent on our airstrips. Those essential services are provided with the assistance of the very many experienced pilots who operate in outback areas. The Australian Local Ownership Plan is very important to a number of towns with airstrips.
In information I was given by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) at hearings of the Estimates Committee regarding allocations for this financial year, mention was made of allocations to two places within the Grey electorate. One was an allocation of $20,000 to the Port Pirie Airport for the installation of landing lights. Port Pirie had made an application for assistance to seal one of its airstrips, but the Minister did not agree with the submission and it was rejected. At least Port Pirie did get something; it received $20,000 to install landing lights. Another allocation was for Marree, which is situated in just about the centre of South Australia. A grant of $40,000 was made for the establishment of a gravel airstrip there. Those are two projects that are being attended to in this Budget.
Other airstrips deserve attention. Perhaps I could mention a couple of them that come to mind quite readily. One is the airstrip at a small town called Elliston and the other is the airstrip at a reasonably large country town, that at Port Augusta where I live. Approaches have been made to both the Department of Transport and the Minister on those matters. The Minister might not have received my approach to him regarding

2034 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Elliston, but I have made an approach to him regarding Port Augusta also. The district council of Elliston has made an approach on behalf of the Elliston area. Elliston has only an authorised landing area. I have landed on the strip a few times. It is a very short strip. The surface is not the best. I can assure honourable members that when you are taking off in an aircraft you wonder whether you will run out of airstrip and finish up in the scrub before you leave the ground. The Department has made certain suggestions on what can be done by the local council and local people. It has indicated that it will look at the matter and see whether the project can receive assistance under the Local Ownership Plan. I certainly hope that the Minister will give sympathetic consideration to that matter when it comes to his making a decision on it. In a letter the Elliston council wrote to me quite recently it spoke of a tragedy in which a pregnant woman and her unborn child died because an aircraft could not land there at night to take her away for urgent medical attention.
The other airstrip I mentioned was that at Port Augusta. Again, this is only an authorised landing area, but it serves the whole of the north of South Australia. It is a base for the Royal Flying Doctor Service which, as everbody knows, operates in all sorts of weather conditions and at all hours. It certainly deserves a better airstrip than the one it has to operate out of. I think it is a very important service. It gives coverage also to all Australian Government employees who work along the eastwest railway line and the north-south railway line when emergency medical attention is required. That airstrip is used also as a base for most of the State Government departments operating in the whole of the north of South Australia. I refer to the State Department of Education, the police, the Department for Community Welfare and other State departments. Training flights operate from that strip also. It has an active aero club. It is a major stop for Pagas Airlines, one of the major commuter airlines that operate in South Australia. Quite recently Pagas purchased two Bandierante 18-passenger aircraft but, unfortunately, at one of their major stops, Port Augusta, those aircraft could not be landed because of the state of the airstrip. Certain upgrading was carried out and the Department finally allowed Pagas to operate those aircraft from that strip.
In addition to the assistance required under the LOP, more navigational aids need to be provided in those areas. Again, approaches have been made to the Department. The local people have installed lights so that aircraft can land at night. There is also an urgent need for the installation of

non-directional beacons, et cetera, so that aircraft can operate safely in those areas. Flying in from the south to land on the Port Augusta strip aircraft fly down a valley with mountains on both sides for about 12 miles. On one side the mountains are about 3,000 feet high and on the other side they are about 1,000 feet high. The Royal Flying Doctor Service, Pagas Airlines and local Aviation operators at Port Augusta have indicated that there is a grave need for the establishment of navigational aids in the area. In conclusion, I ask that when these issues come before the Minister for consideration he will give them his very sympathetic consideration. Those airstrips provide a service to the northern parts of South Australia, covering an area of 700,000 or 800,000 square kilometres.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (9.57)-Earlier I was adverting to the board of inquiry announced in the Advance Airlines tragedy. I remind the House that three months before that tragedy occurred-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! I wonder whether I might interrupt the honourable member's speech for a moment. There is a problem relating to the fact that the honourable member might have spoken once already on a matter that is not strictly related to. Estimates committees. I apologise to the House. According to the sessional orders relating to Estimates committees at this stage, the time allotted a speaker is 10 minutes. The clerks have reminded me that the honourable member probably spoke for 10 minutes at an earlier stage during the evening on the matter of Estimates Committee D. Is that correct?
Mr MORRIS-I would have spoken for very close to 10 minutes, but I was operating under the old Standing Orders which provide for two 10minute allotments of time. When I rose to speak it was very close to the time for the motion for the adjournment of the House to be put. Rather than spoil another honourable member's speech I was assisting the House by making a few comments to use up that time. That would avoid another honourable member's speech being interrupted.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member is always helpful to the House. However, I wonder whether in this case the honourable member for Bowman would like to fill in the two minutes remaining. That might be more helpful. I call the honourable member for Bowman.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (9.58)-1 too was a member of the Estimates Committee under discussion. I noted the comments made earlier that, especially in terms of the Estimates Committee

Adjournment

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2035

hearings on the estimates for the Department of Transport, although an extension of time was granted we certainly ran well short of the time required to examine sufficiently the activities of the Department during the past 12 months and, indeed, for the future. I wonder whether in future years an adjustment might be made to ensure that proper time is available for that purpose.
One area that certainly was not covered during the Estimates Committee hearings this time was that regarding the future inquiry into Australia's international civil aviation policy. The honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) spoke quite eloquently tonight on what has been happening on the domestic scene. Indeed, w~ are all anxiously awaiting the announcement of just what form that new international inquiry will take. I think there definitely would be a feeling abroad that we should lo.ok at opening up that Department at a time when Australia's international policies have developed to such a stage that we can, as we did with the domestic policies, look towards opening them up to allow a greater freedom in the nature of the operations of international airlines in Australia. I know that meetings have been held with the Premiers. I notice too that the local tourist organisations have been consulted by Sir David Hay and other people from the Department of Transport. I hope also that there will be a certain amount of public input at the hearings of the proposed inquiry.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Allegations Against Member for Melbourne Ports-Meat Industry-Overseas
Aid-Broadcasting of Parliamentary Proceedings-Pension Benefits-Supporting
parents-Child Care Services
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (l0.Q)-1 made a personal explanation to the House earlier today concerning allegations made against me. In the course of making that statement, I indicated to the House that I would make available all the information that was available to me in order to explain some of the accusations which have been falsely made against me. In the course of the day, and following media interviews, one of the questions I was persistently asked was why Mr Wyatt, whom I mentioned earlier, selected me as the object of his allegations. To that I could only say

to the media that I had no explanation for that because I had no knowledge of the man, his motivations or his attitudes. I could not give any reason why .he would want to make the kinds of allegations that he did.
Subsequent to making that statement to the Parliament, information has been brought to my attention which, I believe, I should present in accordance with my undertaking that I would make available all information to the House in respect of this matter. I now table two letters and one article which the Minister has seen and which I put to the House as being perhaps some motivation in respect of Mr Wyatt. I do not put it any higher than that. I simply put it in terms of the material that is available and I ask honourable members to make their own deductions.
These matters, which I will seek to have incorporated in Hansard, at the end of my speech, consist of an article in the National Times of 6 September 1981 which refers to Mr Wyatt as someone who was involved in trade in the Middle East. He went to the Middle East with a letter of introduction from a prominent figure in the Victorian branch of the Australian Labor Party, Mr Bill Hartley. The letter stated in part:
'Charles will keep you up to date with the latest information.
My purpose in writing is to re-introduce Charles and to let you know that I will be in Lebanon after a visit to the Libyan Jamahiriya, presumably in about a month's time . . .
Charles Wyatt will help you in every way he can. He has good connections here and is identified with the struggle against Zionist influences in Australia.
He also has a high degree of political understanding and I am sure that you can safely entrust him with any messages or mission which you may have in mind . . .'
My position in respect of the problems of the Middle East I think are well known, both within the community and within my party. I have always argued within my party to maintain what has been traditional Labor Party policy. That is not merely recognition for the rights of the State of Israel to exist within secure borders. I have done all that I can to see that tensions in that area have been resolved. In that situation, I have not always been at one with Mr Hartley. In fairness to him, I have tabled two letters which explain the basis of his relationship with and his introduction to Mr Wyatt. One is a letter from Mr Brian Pola and the other a letter from Mr Hartley. As I said earlier, I put this information forward to the House for no other purpose than to invite honourable members to draw their own conclusions as to what might have been Mr Wyatt's motives in making allegations against me.

2036 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Adjournment

Mr Hurford~Are you incorporating them in Hansard?
Mr HOLDING-Those letters will be incorporated in Hansard. I make it clear that my explanation to the House is solely in relation to Mr Wyatt's motives. If in fact he is a man who has been deeply involved in those issues and he has a strong view-as he may well have for all I knowabout Middle Eastern issues, that may well be some explanation for the reason why he chose to single me out in the way in which he did in order to make false and highly libellous accusations against me.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable member seek leave to incorporate those documents in Hansard?
Mr HOLDING-I seek leave to have them incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The documents read as jollows-
NEWSPAPER CUTTING FROM NATIONAL TIMES
6 September 1981
New light on Australian arms and armaments deals in Mid-East
By Marian Wilkinson and Margot O'Neill
Following The National Times' story last week on Australians acting as intermediaries in the international arms trade, further information has come to light indicating that the Australian dealers have attempted to move into the lucrative Middle East arms trade.
One Australian middleman named in last week's story, Melbourne businessman John Kennard, apparently attempted to use his connections in the commodities trade to sell a range of military equipment in Beirut.
[n 1979, Kennard operated a commodities business from Melbourne called Arabian Gulf Enterprises. Arabian Gulf also had an office in Kuwait.
Kennard's partner in the business was former abortionist, Charles Wyatt. (Wyatt was convicted on 13 charges of performing illegal abortions in 1970 and sentenced to 4t years jail.)
As part of his work with Arabian Gulf, Wyatt made several trips to the Middle East.
Last week, this paper was given a copy of a letter of introduction written on behalf of Wyatt to a Palestine Liberation Organisation's representative in Beirut, Sd Shafiq al-Hout, in May 1979.
The letter was written by a prominent figure in the Victorian ALP, Bill Hartley.
The letter stated in part: "Charles will keep you up to date with the latest information.
"My purpose in writing is to re-introduce Charles and to let you know that [ will be in Lebanon after a visit to the Libyan Jamahiriya, presumably in about a month's time . . .
"Charles Wyatt will help you in every way he can. He has good connections here and is identified with the struggle against Zionist influences in Australia.

"He also has a high degree of political understanding and I am sure that you can safely entrust him with any messages or mission which you may have in mind . . ."

Hartley confirmed that he had written the letter for Wyatt but said he had done so at the request of a friend.

Soon after writing the letter, Hartley was in Amsterdam

when he received a call from Tom Ryan, an official with the

Food Preservers Union.

.

Ryan told Hartley that Wyatt had been using the letter in Australia and that Kennard had approached him with a copy of it.

Kennard told Ryan that he had been having money problems with Wyatt and Ryan got Hartley's authority to call Beirut and revoke the introduction.

Ryan says at no time did Kennard mention any dispute with Wyatt over arms transactions.

However telexes shown to this paper indicate that soon after the Hartley letter was written, Wyatt and Kennard were in dispute about what they were supposed to be trading in the
Middle East.

In one telex Wyatt told Kennard that his Kuwait partner
"clearly stated to me he wants no part of selling aircraft,
fighers, bombs, rifles, grenades . . . Have guts and sell your own bombs and grenades to kill women and children you have never seen".

The National Times was unable to contact either Kennard or Wyatt last week. Kennard, according to several associates
is in Taiwan and has been for some time.

A business associate of Wyatt's told this paper that he had not been seen for several days but that a number of people had been attempting to find him.

Wyatt was named last week as one of the people who had
made allegations of irregulatities in the meat industry back in 1977 to the Victorian Attorney-General,Haddon Storey.

In other developments last week, one middleman involved in the arms business confirmed that he and other Australians
had been involved in the attempted shipment ofMI6 rifles to Angolia in 1975.

At that time, the CIA was covertly supporting guerilla
forces opposed to the marxist MPLA headed by President Neto.

The rifles were being purchased by a Belgium armaments
group, Commerce International, and were surplus stock from Vietnam.

The middleman said he obtained export licences from the Thai Government and the guns were to be shipped from Bankok.

He said an "end user certificate" showing Libya as the recipient of the rifles had been "bought".

The shipment did not go ahead due to a dispute over the price of the weapons.

NEWSPAPER CUTTING FROM NATIONAL TIMES
Arms deals clarification
Sir, I wish to clarify certain points relating to recent articles on Australian arms deals to the Middle East. (NT Sep 6-12).
I was the friend referred to who introduced Charles Wyatt to Bill Hartley.
I met Charles Wyatt in Pentridge in 1972, when [ was placed there at the request of the La Trobe University Council, the result of anti-Vietnam war activities. I continued a

Adjournment

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2037

friendship with Wyatt in later years through Fr John Brosnan, the well-known Pentridge chaplain, a priest who had a positive influence on Wyatt.
Despite Wyatt's past as an abortionist, or perhaps because of it, he made a successful attempt to reform himself, becoming successful in legitimate business.
As for Bill Hartley, I've known him for many years, cooperating with him in establishing reforms as members of the La Trobe University Council, and as members of the Australian Labor Party.
During the period 1978-9, in discussions with Wyatt, it became obvious that a profitable trade lay open in mutton export to the Middle East. Wyatt had by this time successfully established himself in the meat business at his Melbourne abattoir based company, Wainer's Meats PjL.
Wyatt was able to gather much evidence of irregularities in meat inspection procedures, and I was present at discussions between Wyatt, the then Agricultural Minister Ian Smith, 10m Austin and Health Dept Officials, concerning irregularities, in 1977. The Victorian Government did nothing. As far as I am aware, this evidence of high-level Government corruption in Victoria still exists.
But back to the "arms deals".
Wyatt began negotiations with pastoral companies in South Australia and Victoria, with Wally Curran of the Meat Industries Employees Union and, through me, with Bill Hartley, solely with a view to the mutton export trade. Hartley emphasised he had no commercial interests in the Middle East, his interest being purely motivated by socialist principles.
I thought it proper to assist Wyatt, because the Fraser Government, and particularly Minister for Trade Anthony, had proved inept in establishing trade links with the little understood Governments of Libya, Iraq and the PLO. However, any thought of assisting the supply of arms to liberation movements was never contemplated.
I am equally certain that Bill Hartley would not have been associated with possible attempts by John Kennard, Wyatt's former associate, to supply arms.
There is a big difference between having a policy of support for freedom from oppression and supplying weapons of destruction.
How Wyatt later used his letters of introduction was obviously not a matter for which Hartley or I could be held responsible. However, as soon as Hartley heard that the letters were being misused, he had them revoked, proof enough of his good faith.
Initially, Wyatt proposed I travel with him. However, he left alone, and I left for Perugia, Italy, to study Italian, in Jan 1979.
About May, 1979, I was visited by Hartley in Perugia, and the story of Wyatt and KenJ)ard unfolded. The two had a faIling out over financial matters, and Wyatt had Kennard's financial support withdrawn, leaving Wyatt stranded somewhere in the Middle East. Wyatt asserted he had evidence that Kennard had been attempting to supply arms and Wyatt considered pUblicising this in the Australian Press, perhaps hoping to discredit Kennard.
However, the affair has lain quiet until now. Obviously, a group having it in for Hartley (no prizes for guessing who) has decided to raise the matter at this time in Victoria's political . history. Bad luck. Nice try but it didn't work.
BRIANPOLA,
Fitzroy, Vic.

NEWSPAPER CUTTING FROM NATIONAL TIMES
13 September 1981
BiII Hartley's new introductions policy
How To Write to The National Times:
Address letters to: Letters to the Editor, The National Times, Box 506, GPO, Sydney, NSW, 2001.
We do not publish unsigned or anonymous letters, letters from postal box numbers, or multiple-copy letters.
Sir, It appears that I share with Mr Fraser problems about introductions ("New Light on Australian arms deals in Middle East," NT Sept 6-12).
In case the context impliys that I have some connections with arms deals with the Middle East, please let me immediately dismiss any such suggestion as Iljere fantasy.
Like Mr Fraser, I have now discontinued the practice of giving introductions. In fact, because of the battalions of individuals involved in the dirty tricks business, I will not even speak on the telephone to anyone I do not know.
I advised your reporter, but unfortunately it was not published, that I did not know Wyatt. The recommendation was given at the request of a long-time colleague on the council of La Trobe University and in the ALP, Brian Pola. His assessment of Charles Wyatt, he informed me, was based on the opinion of Father Jim Brosnan.
It is disappointing when you find that people cannot be trusted. It was not Brian's fault, it was mine for letting a busy schedule relax one's guard.
I have always made a personal rule of separating political and commercial considerations and kept well away from the latter field. Wyatt had in fact fought against Zionist interests in the meat trade and his claim to Brian was that he wanted to help the Palestinians, not help himself by flogging meat or anything else.
That is all that I know about the affair.
BILL HARTLEY, North Eltham, Victoria
Mr HOLDING-I thank the House for its indulgence.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman's time has expired.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (10.6)-No one doubts the necessity to have very strict control over the quality of meat, both for export and for domestic markets, particularly in view of the recent problems experienced with contaminated meat which was sent to the United States of America. However, present restrictions placed by the Department of Primary Industry have had a costly and significant effect upon business and threaten the viability of export and domestic operations conducted by the Gunnedah Shire abattoir. On the question of product security, the Department of Primary Industry has declined to supply meat inspectors on a shift basis, that is, 4.30 p.m. to 7.30 p.m. Monday to Friday as requested by the manager of these works. But it has indicated that inspectors on overtime are, and will continue to be, available to perform this duty.
A cost factor of overtime compared with a shift work component is significantly greater and is an

2038 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Adjournment

expense which, having been laid down by the Department, should be borne by the Department.
The cost of export compliance is already crip-
pling, with the wage cost alone to this abattoir averaging $700 a week, to which must now be
added surveillance overtime. I understand that
the inspectors' award provides for shift work. As the DPI is a part of the Public Service it should be
obliged to fulfil that duty at the most economical
cost to the industry.

relNaxotswuritvhesitlalanndciengbythaellDowepinagrttmheencto'snsptrroupcotisoanl

to of

wire mesh barriers with a small entry port for ser-

vice attendants, the cost will not be cheap, but in

the long run it will be less than overtime payments

to inspectors. However, two points come to mind.

Firstly, in view of the many export establishment

closures and low volume of export activity, a large

surplus of inspectors must surely be on hand. If so,

why are theY' not available for shift duty? Sec-

ondly, the succession of telexes being churned out

by DPI almost daily since early September does

not generate confidence. One wonders whether or

not the latest edict on alternative security will be

obsolete one month from now. The failure of DPI

to provide inspectors on a shift basis for the

country meat market at Homebush and the very

great cost of overtime surveillance has caused that

authority to relinquish the export licence for that

market. This has placed Gunnedah operators

using the country meat hall at a serious marketing

disadvantage. Having paid the export and State

inspectors charges, these operators will not now

have the opportunity of dual marketing, that is,

local and export marketing. The loss of this mar-

ket advantage and the competition from totally

local wholesalers we fear will ultimately cause all

local meat to be treated at local abattoirs where

the cost of export compliance does not exist.

In respect of species testing, the Gunnedah abattoir presently is on category C because of independent on-site boning rooms at the works. Management consideration is now being given to a reclassification to category B. This has meant
that this business with a valued operator has been suspended as the client has a category A rating and he has been informed that meat brought in from Gunnedah will alter his rating to category C, requiring a heavier species sampling program for the meat packed and exported by him. Once again, this abattoir appreciates the need for strict control and supervision and feels that the export meat regulations which were effective prior to the substitution scandal were sufficiently adequate to control the export industry.

It is felt that from our experience it is impossible to appreciate how the racket could have oc-
curred had the Department followed the routine
carried out at the Gunnedah works. With a shortage of stock, men on strike and now the consider-
able added costs, the operation will be very difficult to cope with. It is a shire controlled works and, apart from the original loans, it has never
asked any government for further assistance. The
industry is in dire straits. Gunnedah has been one of the few country works operating. I commend
these facts to the attention of the Minister for Pri-
mary Industry (Mr Nixon) and the Department
of Primary Industry.

Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (10.11)-1 raise for the third time this year in the adjournment debate and the sixth time in this House the question of
Poland and our attitude towards events in that nation. The reports which emanate from Poland
almost daily strengthen the argument for the view I have previously expressed that the delicately poised political and social advances made by the
Polish workers in Solidarity and, through them, the Polish people are substantially dependent for
their maintenance on international assistance for Poland's economic recovery. Yesterday and today I presented petitions in this place signed by a large number of electors in my constituency and else-
where which call upon the Australian Government to contribute to this recovery by extending food aid to Poland. 1 know the Government is aware of the full extent of the political significance of the economic question in Poland. I
have had correspondence with the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) on the matter and seek leave to incorporate in Hansard his response
to a letter I sent to him.

Leave granted.

The document read as follows-

Dear Mr Beazley

Minister for Foreign Affairs Canberra

I refer to your letter of 7 August 1981, in which you urge the Government to offer substantial food aid to Poland. I appreciate your interest in the Polish situation and agree entirely with your analysis of the relationship in Poland between the Government, the Solidarity leadership and the rank and file. It is clear that the economy continues to worsen, that shortages are becoming more acute, that strike action will not resolve these problems, and that the potential for serious social unrest and disorder is great while these economic difficulties persist. In those circumstances, the possibility of outside intervention cannot be discounted.
The key to Polish economic revival lies in the rapid formulation and implementation of reform measures, which will probably include price rises and wage freezes. Solidarity's cooperation will be required if these measures are to be introduced with minimal public disorder.

Adjournment

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2039

Western economic assistance, in the form of debt rescheduling and food and financial aid, will play an important part in assisting Poland to weather the coming months until the economy is revitalised. In response to requests for assistance from the Polish Government, a number of West European governments, the EEC and the United States and Canadian governments have initiated steps to provide Poland with much-needed foodstuffs, medical supplies and other products. A meeting of Western bankers in Zurich in July formulated a proposal-for the rescheduling of Poland's hardcurrency debt and the Polish Government is considering this proposal at present.
The above facts demonstrate that Western governments appreciate Poland's need for assistance. The Australian Government also appreciates that need. It was for this reason that, in April of this year, the Government agreed to provide credit guarantees to facilitate the purchase, by Poland, of up to $A40 million worth of wool and hides.
In response to your letter, and similar representations from the Polish community in Australia, departments have under preliminary study the question of what further aid Australia may be in a position to offer Poland in the event that a formal request is made to the Government. As you know, we have not received a request from Poland for further assistance. This makes it difficult for us to determine Poland's precise needs at this time and to know whether there is 'room for Australian action in the light of what others are contributing, including those countries better placed than Australia to respond urgently to the present crisis. It is also unprecedented for Australia to grant such aid to an East European country, and this is a further factor which needs to be taken into account. Nevertheless, we shall continue to examine the issue to determine what options, if any, are open to the Government.
Yours sincerely A.A.STREET
Mr Kim C. Beazley M P Member for Swan Unit2A 286 Great Eastern Highway RIVERVALE Western Australia 6103
Mr BEAZLEY-I thank the House. In that letter the Minister indicates that the Government is seriously considering extending the small amount of aid it has thus far given Poland and I thank him for his courteous and detailed response. The Minister points out that the Polish Government has not yet requested aid. He is also concerned that Australian aid to an Eastern European country is unprecedented and therefore presumably appropriate processes and procedures are not in place. In the Estimates committee consideration of Australian overseas aid, I expressed to the Minister the view that there needed to be more flexibility in our aid program. We need to be able to assist readily in emergent situations like Poland and in countries which may not strictly be of a less developed character. Assistance now is critical. Poland is heavily dependent for fuel and, increasingly, food and financial assistance, on increasingly reluctant Eastern European states and the Soviet Union, which might choose to use an economic lever in Poland's internal affairs preparatory, perhaps, to more drastic action.

Yesterday's Australian newspaper carried a lengthy report of quite unprecedented peace feelers put out by the Polish Government to Solidarity which seemed to suggest a virtual coalition arrangement in governmental economic planning institutions. I seek leave to incorporate the article
in Hansard.

Leave granted.

The article read as follows-

POLISH BID TO COMPROMISE WITH UNION

From Our World Cable Service: Warsaw, Monday
The Polish Government has finally taken a step towards seeking a consensus with Solidarity as economic and social forces become less manageable daily.

Such is the Government's concern at Poland's slide, the Communist Party newspaper, Trybuna Ludu, even mooted the unthinkable in an article yesterday. It mentioned the possibility of a coalition government including communists.
Solidarity members and church leaders.

The Government plans to create a commission to seek solutions to the problems of shortages, rationing and price increases needed for economic reform.

The Polish news agency PAP said the Government presidium had authorised the council of ministers "to urgently put
forth a proposal for establishing a standing mixed commission composed of representatives of the Government and trade-
union federations to permanently discuss and arrange matters related to market deliveries, the rationing of commodities and
price changes".

The move came on the heels of official announcements that this month's petrol supplies will be far below demand.

The Minister for Chemical Industry, Mr Janusz Knapik,

said on television that motorists would only get two-thirds of

the already small usual quantities of fuel.

'

Shortages of meat were causing social ferment. "Our market does not have any reserves and meat supplies are irregu-
lar", he said.

The presidium proposal on the mixed commission would include representatives of Solidarity, the pro-State branch
unions and the unaffiliated autonomous unions.

But Solidarity already is gearing for talks on price reform it demanded during its recent congress. The union threatened a
brief nationwide strike if no agreement came from the talks.

The year-old independent union emerged from its first
national conference last week with the goal of radically transforming the communist system which has ruled Poland and
the rest of Eastern Europe since the end of World War II.

Observers said the disputes at the union congress did not
hide the essential result that a movement of contestation which was illegal until a year ago was able to hold a demo-
cratic debate for 18 days in the heart of the Soviet bloc. Conference delegates even urged reduction of military spending to
aid the staggering economy.

Flexible
Another seeming miracle was that the conference delegates agreed without too much trouble on a moderalely expressed yet radical program that would logically lead to decentralised democracy.
The move also came ahead of expected talks between Solidarity and the Government on the price reform issue and amid fears of drastic winter shortages.

2040 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Adjournment

Food shortages in August prompted street marches and protests which Solidarity had difficulty controlling, and already there have been scattered strike threats around the country over shortages and proposals to increase the price of some basics fourfold next month.
Danger
Dominik Horodynski, editor-in-chief of the influential literary weekly Kultura, told a television interviewer: "There is a very dangerous process of social polarisation taking place in Poland nowadays. There is a real danger that it might get out of control. The situation may be called cold civil war which is equally very dangerous and devastating."
The Agriculture Minister, Mr Andrzej Kacala, said in an interview that the drastic . . .
One Solidarity leader said the conference failed to find a remedy for the economic crisis. But it had aimed higher. He explained that the economy could only recover after workers were reassured that their work would not be wasted in general chaos.
But it remains to be seen if Solidarity will be flexible and conciliatory in the three main battles it has mapped out-for a voice on television, for self-management of enterprises, and democratic elections at the local level.
The dream of arch-orthodox communists to outlaw Solidarity now seems totally unrealistic. Party liberals are now raising their voices. The Central Committee Secretary, Mr Hieronim Kubiak, even advised that the party should struggle for the benefit of Solidarity's millions of members instead of struggling against them.
Notwithstanding conciliatory gestures by communist leaders, agitation continues to threaten.
Mr BEAZLEY-I thank the House. What this means is that the winter months now closing on Poland will bring with them widespread hunger and inadequate fuel for warmth with consequent social dislocation and unrest. Thus circumstances will inevitably provoke a crisis of even greater proportions than that now confronting the Polish Government. If we wish to see the great advances in democratic rights maintained in Poland, now more than ever our money needs to be where our mouths are. There is nothing else that any Western nation can contribute to a successful resolution of Poland's problems other than economic aid. It would be a tragedy of great dimensions if a past reluctance to provide assistance to Eastern bloc states-I realise that was in part based on a reluctance on the part of Eastern bloc states to receive it-should inhibit decisive action now. Australia is an experienced food donor. We have the meats and cereals needed. We have a population highly sympathetic to Poland's plight. I believe we must act now.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (10.14)-My father has a great sense of history. Over the years he has accumulated a number of newspapers and documents of the day that I have found to be very interesting. One such document was a transcript of an Australian Broadcasting Commission debate of 1946 when the decision as to whether the Parliament should be broadcast was doing the rounds

of the Australian Broadcasting Commission. It is interesting to go back over those 30-odd years and see the arguments for and against the broadcasting of parliamentary proceedings. I say tonight in a purely domestic sense and as a private member rather than a member of the Joint Statutory Committee on the Broadcasting of Parliamentary Proceedings that we as a House should be looking at where we are going with the broadcasting of Parliament and making a decision as to whether we should continue with those broadcasts in their present form.
It is a fact that the broadcasting of the proceedings of Parliament are governed by this House and this Committee. There is very little flexibility indeed in the broadcasting of Parliament. The House of Representatives is broadcast on Tuesdays and Thursdays and the Senate is broadcast on Wednesdays with very little flexibility to swing around to some of the great debates of the day should they fall at an off-broadcast time. On top of that, I think seven major stations broadcast the parliamentary proceedings through the ABC. I wonder whether for our own benefit we could open that up somewhat as well. I am suggesting that at the moment, rather than broadcasting Parliament non-stop all day, including some debates which frankly would have very little interest in the public domain, and rather than broadcasting to very small numbers of people-if we are honest with ourselves we will realise that Parliament in sheer commercial terms does not rate-we should be looking at broadcasting the highlights of some of the great debates that take place in this chamber or the other place.
I also think that some discrimination is practised against some sections of the media, especially the electronic media. At the moment the commercial stations and the public radio stations have absolutely no access to some of the debates that take place in the Parliament. From time to time we argue about whether some section of the media has reported accurately the things going on in this House. This is one way in which we may be able to overcome this problem. I believe that the other broadcasting networks should be able to have the tapes of the debates available to them so that they can broadcast extracts on commercial news services or public radio hews services. We could be looking at the possibility of broadcasting features of the debates each day in the Parliament at a set time. Overseas where this has been tried it has proved to be very popular and informative.
I suppose we can also look in the long term at the possibility in the future of telecasting some of the highlights of Parliament. Rather than, as some

Adjournment

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2041

would suggest, telecasting Parliament all day we could use the same formula as a means of getting the great debates and the great information across to the people instead of subjecting them to what can often be the sheer boredom of the parliamentary procedures in the public sense. I realise that many people will not be terribly happy about this because the parliamentary broadcasts give us all an opportunity to talk to one or two people in our electorates. But for the sake of the Parliament, the institution and the public regard of this place perhaps the Joint Statutory Committee, of which I am a member, should look urgently at changing these procedures.
Mr Hurford-And for the sake of the ABC.
Mr JULL-I was going to come to that. Recently I had discussions with the ABC. This is a very real problem for that organisation, inasmuch as it finds it very hard to format its regular programs only to find after a time that those programs have to be taken off the air and Parliament has to be broadcast. I suppose the classic case is Melbourne Cup Day. Although the Parliament is not sitting on Melbourne Cup Day this year, in recent years it has sat on that day. The broadcast of the Melbourne Cup probably draws a greater radio audience every year than most other events in this nation. It has to be taken off the ABC's first network purely because Parliament must take precedence. Obviously that situation is not terribly satisfactory for the pUblic. Perhaps it is one area we should look at in the near future to make sure that the Parliament becomes more relevant in the public domain. Although Question Time may be broadcast on a full time basis the public should have access to the great debates in both Houses of the Parliament at all times.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (1O.l9)-1 remind the House of a matter which I raised in May of this year concerning a 78-year-old pensioner in my electorate who had lost his fringe benefits because of a mathematical calculation which put his annual superannuation payments 50c over the maximum limit of $2,080 set by the Department of Social Security. This was despite the fact that his fortnightly income was $79.80, or 20c below the maximum limit of $80 as set out by the Department.
As I pointed out to the House, this anomaly arose because of a difference in the way the Railway Service Superannuation Board of New South Wales and the Department of Social Security calculate annual income. To refresh the memories of

honourable members, the Railway Service Superannuation Board calculates the annual superannuation allowance by obtaining a daily rate and then multiplying that by 365 days. The Department of Social Security, on the other hand, obtains the annual income by multiplying the fortnightly rate by 26. A quick multiplication shows that this amounts to 364 days, a difference of one day. In case the significance of this difference is overlooked I have prepared a table, which I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard, showing how the same fortnightly income becomes two differing annual incomes depending on which method is used.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

Calculation of annual income ($)

Fortnightly income ($)

Railway Service

Department of Superannuation

Social Security

Board

79.75 79.80 79.85 79.90 79.95 80.00

2,073.50 2,074.80 2,076.10 2,077.40 2,078.70 2,080.00

2,079.20 2,080.50 2,081.80 2,083.11 2,084.41 2,085.71

Mr MOUNTFORD-So that honourable members will understand how this affected my constituent, I will detail briefly the chain of events as they occurred. The pensioner was notified by the Railway Service Superannuation Board that he was eligible for an increase in his pension if he so desired. He had the choice whether to accept or refuse the increase. The pensioner went to a regional office of the Department of Social Security and sought advice on how much income he could earn without losing his fringe benefits. He was advised that he could earn up to $80 a fortnight. The pensioner then informed the Superannuation Board that he would accept a rise which would increase his fortnightly allowance to $79.80. He gave himself 20c leeway. The Railway board then notified Social Security of his increase and did so in the annual amount of $2,080.50, not in the fortnightly amount of $79.80. Upon receipt of this advice Social Security informed the pensioner that he was no longer eligible for fringe benefits and they were withdrawn.
I brought the case to the attention of the Department of Social Security and, after seeking legal advice, the Department determined that the Railway Service Superannuation Board was correct in determining the annual income of $2,080.50. However, it allowed the Board to reduce the pensioner's rate so that by the Board's

2042 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Adjournment

calculation he would come under the $2,080 a year. This was done and his fringe benefits were restored. By accepting the accuracy of the Railway Service Superannuation Board in determining the annual income and thereby requesting that the payment be reduced to a figure even less than $70.80 the Department has shown itself to be willing to accept and, in fact, to condone an inconsistency in its system of determining the level of benefits due to a pensioner. The Department resolved the particular case which was proving embarrassing but it has done nothing to eliminate the anomaly. This is, to my mind, utterly reprehensible; Pensioners who seek advice from Social Security officers or from the pamphlets issued by Social Security are continuing to be misinformed. In the pamphlets on the age and invalid pensions it is stated:
If your other income is less than $40 per week you are entitled to a Pensioner Health Benefits Card and other fringe benefits.
This information is misleading and is incorrect and should, therefore, be changed. The Department knows this and yet it has done nothing. Pensioners can still find themselves caught in the same trap as my constituent. The situation is totally unsatisfactory. At the very least the Department should have warned pensioners of this discrepancy and altered its pamphlets accordingly. A more thorough approach, however, would be for the Department to make a decision on what, for its own purposes, constitutes a year-365 days or 52 weeks. The matter I raised in May and again today shows the necessity for this question to be answered. A consistency must be arrived at. I urge the Minister and his Department to do so so that other aged people like Mr Bell, the pensioner I mentioned earlier, will not be denied their basic pension rights because of a measly SOc a year.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (10.25)-1 want to draw to the attention of the House certain aspects in relation to the growth of the numbers of supporting parents in this country. I do so by asking the House to join me in carefully analysing the affects of the 1973 Supporting Parents Benefit Act and the 1975 Family Law Act. I have sought permission of the Opposition to include in Hansard a table comprising figures which were supplied by the Department of Social Security indicating-I just take two specific years, 1974 and this year-that in 1974 there were 26,000 supporting mothers supporting 43,000 children; by 1981 the figures had grown to 102,000 supporting mothers supporting 185,000 children.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Does the honourable member seek leave to incorporate a table in Hansard?
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Yes.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

Asat 30June

Number of

Women receiving

children of

Supporting Mothers Supporting Mothers

Benefit . Benefit recipients

1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

26,000 36,000 46,000 51,000 55,000 59,000 67,000 102,000

43,000 60,000 76,000 86,000 98,000 105,000 118,000 185,000

Mr DONALD CAMERON-Part of the 1980-81 increase is attributable to the Commonwealth taking over from the States total responsibility from the first day whereas previously it had taken over after six months. Nevertheless, an extra 35,000 women went on to the supporting mothers' pension during the financial year just past and that involved an extra 67,000 children.
Everyone blames the rocketing cost of social security on the increase in the number of those on the age pension. The number of age pensioners increased in the same period Australia-wide by 25,504. The ageing population is only part of the reason. In 1974 the supporting mothers' benefit alone cost the nation $40.6m.
Mr Leo McLeay-So what?
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Okay, so what? That is the Australian Labor Party's policy attitude. Please let me relate the facts. The cost of the supporting mothers' benefit has increased 15 times to $600m in just seven years and there are extras on top of this.
Mr Leo McLeay-What about the women and children?
Mr DONALD CAMERON-I care for the children too.
Mr Leo McLeay-Well, you don't sound like it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fadden is entitled to make his remarks.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Maybe the interjector does not understand that my concern is based on the breakdown--

Adjournment

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2043

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I suggest that the honourable member for Fadden address his remarks to me.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-My concern is based on the breakdown of family life. If he cares about the children perhaps the honourable member who is interjecting will understand. If the trend continues at this rate Australia's ability to care for its aged and disabled will be even more eroded. A supporting mother with two children and no other income receives a pension, free health cover and if in a Housing Commission home, a rental discount. The total value of this is perhaps up to $150 a week and life on that amount is not easy. Nevertheless, it now requires the entire annual income tax contribution of three married men earning $260 a week gross, or three single persons earning $225 a week gross, or three sole parents earning $250 a week gross to supply just one supporting mother with two children with that level of assistance. Seven years ago the entire income tax contribution of about 85,000 wage earners earning just below average weekly earnings went to support the deserted, deserting and unmarried mothers. It now requires the efforts of about 300,000 such people who, despite the average wage of $300 a week, constitute the majority of taxpayers.
We have a continuing responsibility in this field and to the 5,000 extra supporting fathers and their children. However, it is now a question of an epidemic and I believe that, instead of helping we have accelerated the social and economic problems for voluntary organisations, adults, children and government. If we ignore it, no matter how hard a sole parent or government tries, the children of today will be justified in looking back upon us with anger for having assisted in the destruction of the family unit. It is now all too easy to dismiss proper parental responsibility. The Government must examine the theory that caused the old Act to be changed in 1973 and bring back the stabilising factors that existed. I am of the view that the family is important in terms of the raising of a child. If we are inadvertently contributing to the destruction of that unit-I am not advocating the abandonment of those who are being supported-we have an obligation to do something.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (10.29)-We have just heard one of the most incredible attacks of all time on children and supporting parents. It is very indicative of the way that the Government in Senate Estimates Committee G foreshadowed

the repeal of the Child Care Act, the only Child Care Act in this country under which supporting parents had the chance to get equity in the care of and help for their children. The Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) in the evidence he gave to Senate Estimates Committee G on Friday 25 September indicated that that is what the Government wants to do. That is what this member has suggested that the Parliament should do. The Government wants to take away the right of people who have young children and who do not have much income. Officers of the Department of Social Security have suggested that people should pay up to $60 a week for child care. They have said that it is fair to do that.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! It being 10.30 p.m. the debate is interrupted.
Mr Leo McLeay-There are mothers on reasonable income earnings who cannot do that. It is a sham and a scandal.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat when the occupant of the chair is on his feet.
Mr Leo McLeay-Oh! You are with him.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will withdraw that remark.
Mr Leo McLeay-What should I withdraw?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-It is a reflection on the Chair. The honourable member will withdraw.
Mr Leo McLeay-What was the reflection?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The remark you made to me when you sat down.
Mr Leo McLeay-I do not recall that. What was that?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-It is not my fault if you cannot remember it. The honourable member will resume his seat. The House stands adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 10.30 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Howard to present a Bill for an Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Mr Howard to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Mr Fife to present a Bill for an Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

2044 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Requestsfor Detailed Information

Mr Fife to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and for related purposes.
Mr Fife to present a Bill for an Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory in connection with tertiaryeducation.
Mr Fife to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Mr Fife to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Canberra College of Advanced Education Act 1967.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 14 October 1981, pursuant to statute:
States' Grants (Petroleum Products) Act-Amendments of the schedules to the subsidy schemes in relation to the States of New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and Western Australia, dated 30 September 1981.
REPLIES TO REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 28 April 1981, Mr Duffy asked Mr Speaker:
(I) Is it a fact that, despite the increase in salary and overtime expenditure by the Department of the Parliamentary Library necessitated by the (a) National Wage Case decision and (b) interim 4 per cent work value increase approved by the Public Service Arbitrator for 3rd Division clerical officers and all 4th Division officers, additional estimates for 1980-81 have not been sought because a number of vacant positions have been left unfilled for substantial periods, for example, the position of Law Reference Librarian.
(2) If so, why have these positions remained unfilled for various periods.
(3) If additional estimates have not been sought for this reason, how has the Library met these substantial increases from the existing vote.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable members' question is as follows:
(I) to (3) Delays for various reasons in filling vacant or new positions, including those arising from extended leave and secondment, were a factor in enabling the Department to meet its required expenditure from the 1980-81 Appropriation. For example, the Head of the Legislative Research Service did not commence duty until I June 1981. The reply to a request for. detailed information from Dr Theophanous (Hansard 27 August 1981) contained information on those vacancies. I refer the honourable member to that reply.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 28 April 1981, Mr Kerin asked Mr Speaker:
(I) Has the (a) major restructuring of senior staff positions in the Department of the Parliamentary Library on \0 November 1980, (b) recent and planned movements of Parliamentary Library staff from Parliament House to the Hotel Kurrajong, (c) increased employment of consultants in the Library, (d) demonstrated need for extra permanent and temporary client service staff in the Library and (e) transfer of client service staff positions to administrative areas within the

Library incurred either additional expenditure or the transfer of Library funds already appropriated for other purposes.
(2) If so, why has the Parliamentary Library not sought additional estimates.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) to (e) No.
(2) See (I) above. (The honourable member is also referred to the reply to a request for detailed information from MrDuffy).
Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 5 June 1981, Mr Barry Jones asked Mr Speaker:
(I) Does the 1980 Annual Report of the Department of the Parliamentary Library state (a) that the Department had a staff ceiling of 149 including part-time staff and (b) that 54 staff ceased duty in the Department during 1980.
(2) If so, how many of the 54 staff who ceased duty were (a) full-time and (b) part-time.
(3) What was the Department's (a) full-time and (b) part-time ceilings in each year since 1974.
(4) How many (a) full-time and (b) part-time staff ceased duty in the Department in each year since 1974.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) All were full-time.

(3) Year
1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

Full-time
127 \30 134 139 139 139 139 141

Part-time
nil nil nil nil nil \0 10 10

(4) Year
1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

Full-time
34 32 38 34 54 40 54

Part-time
3 2 nil 2 4 I \0

Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 5 June 1981, Mr Howe asked Mr Speaker:
(I) Who were the members of the Working Party on the Code of Conduct referred to in the Annual Report of the Department of the Parliamentary Library for 1980 and what was the reason for the inclusion of each member.
(2) Has the Working Party reported on the Draft Code; if so (a) to whom was the report presented (b) did the report reflect the view of all members of the Working Party; if not, (i) which members dissented, (ii) on what matters did the members dissent and (iii) why did the members dissent and

Requestsfor Detailed Information

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2045

(iv) what action has been taken or proposed to be taken on the report of the Working Party.
(3) Will he table the report of the Working Party.
Mr Speaker-The ariswer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) H. de S. C. MacLean, Deputy Parliamentary Librarian (Chairman), M. J. Brudenall, Assistant Parliamentary librarian, M. J. Bray, Senior Executive Officer, T. W. Lawton, Senior Research Director, all selected by the Permanent

Heat!, and B. Herd, representative of the Combined Library Unions Committee.
(2) Yes. (a) to the Parliamentary Librarian, (b) yes, apart from; (i) Mr Herd, (ii) the matter of staff not using their proximity to Senators and Members to seek directly to involve them in Departmental matters., (iii) Mr Herd's view was that the matter is covered by Public Service (Parliamentary Officers) Regulations, (iv) no further action proposed until consideration has been given to it by all Parliamentary Departments.
(3) No.

2046 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1556)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many (a) cars, (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks were being operated by the Attorney-General's Department, excluding vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services, as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to LPG usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.
(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by the Department; if so, what are the details.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided .the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1563 (Hansard, 10 June 1981, Representatives, page 3579) provided by the Minister for Administrative Services, the Honourable Kevin Newman.
Australian Capital Territory Terminations Committee
(Question No. 1966)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(I) Was the Australian Capital Territory Terminations Committee disbanded by the Capital Territory Health Commission in October 1980.
(2) If so, what reason was given for this decision.
(3) Were any consultations held with specialist committees of the medical profession prior to this decision being taken.
(4) If so, what committees were consulted and what were their respective recommendations.
(5) Has any attempt been made by the Health Commission to reinstate the Terminations Committee.
(6) If so, what was the result of the attempt.
(7) Has the medical committee advising the Capital Territory Health Commission recommended that the Terminations Committee be reinstated.
(8) Have any other official bodies recommended reinstating the Terminations Committee; ifso, which ones.
(9) Does he have the necessary powers to reinstate the Terminations Committee; if so, will he exercise those powers.
(10) Ifhe will not do this, what is the reason.
Mr Hunt-The Acting Minister for Health has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I ) Yes, on 15 October 1980.
(2) The Committee was not a requirement of any law in the A.C.T. nor could its decisions affect the operation of the prevailing law. Its function was to make recommendations to the Clinical Superintendents of Commission hospitals on the use of hospital facilities for the termination of a pregnancy. A

Clinical Superintendent, before accepting a Committee recommendation, was still responsible for satisfying himself that hospital facilities would not be used for unlawful purposes. The existence of the Committee was not essential to the decision process.
(3) No.
(4) Not applicable.
(5) and (6) Yes, on 25 February 1981 a motion to rescind the motion adopted on 15 October 1980 was put and lost by a vote of 5 to 3.
(7) Yes.
(8) No.
(9) and (10) Under sub-section 7 (4) of the Health Commission Ordinance 1975 the Commission is required to perform its functions in accordance with any direction given by the Minister for Health. Since the Commission made its decisions on this matter, the management structure of the Commission has been changed and now consists of a Chairman and 2 full-time Commissioners. Appointments of the 2 new Commissioners will soon be made and this matter has been listed for review by the fuU Commission. I will await the advice of the Commission.
Tsuruga Nuclear Accident
(Question No. 2194)
Mr Scott asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to reports regarding the exposure of 278 Japan Atomic Power Company's Tsuruga nuclear power station workers to radiation following a nuclear waste leak.
(2) If so, can he say whether (a) 19 persons were exposed on 10 January 1981 to a maximum of 55 millirems of radioactivity during a one day period, (b) 45 persons working for a 3 day period from 19 January 1981, were exposed to a maximum of92 millirems a day, (c) 76 persons working for 6 days from 24 January 1981 were exposed to a maximum of 195 millirems a day and (d) over a 16 day period, 138 people were exposed to a maximum of 15S millirems a day from 8 March 1981.
(3) Can the Australian Parliament expect the Uranium Advisory Council to prepare a report on the implications for Australia of the Tsuruga nuclear accident similar to the report that the Uranium Advisory Council prepared on the Harrisburg Three Mile Island nuclear accident.
(4) Was the report by the Uranium Advisory Council on the Harrisburg Three Mile Island accident furnished to him on 27 March 1980; if so, when will he table it in the Parliament.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) I am advised that the Japanese Ministry for International Trade and Ir!dustry (MITI) final report on the Tsuruga Power Station waste leak reports that:
(a) On 14 January 1981 during welding repairs on a high pressure feed water heat exchanger, the maximum dose received by one person among the 19 people involved was 55 millirem and the manmillirem for the group was 133;

Answers to Questions

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2047

(b) from 28 January 1981 to 2 February 1981, the mallimum dose received by one person was 195 millirem out of a group of 76 workers during corking repairs to the high pressure feed water heat ellchanger. The manmillirem for the group was 3,895;
(c) over the period 8 March to 15 April 1981, decontamination of the radwaste building floor, following the overflow at the filter sludge drain tank, occupied a total of 16 days, and the mallimum dose received by one person out of a group of 56 workers was 155 millirem. The manmillirem for the group was 1,961.
The report makes no reference to any radioactivity ellposures during the 3 day period from 19 January 1981 mentioned in Question 2 (b). A final report submitted by Japan Atomic Power Corporation dated June 1981 on the incident mentions leaks of liquid waste from two condensed liquid waste storage tanks having been discovered on 19 January 1981. However, no reference is made to the ellposure of persons during the 3 day period from that date.
It should be noted that the International Commission on Radiological Protection, an autonomous scientific organisation which publishes recommendations for protection against ionising radiation, has set the radiation dose limit for radiation workers at 5,000 millirems per person per year. For the general public this limit is 500 millirems a year.
(3) I am advised that the Uranium Advisory Council is considering the implications of the incidents at the Tsuruga nuclear power station.
(4) 1 refer the honourable member to my reply to Question No. 1004, (Hansard, week ending 10June 1981 page 3532).
Legal Aid Funding
(Question No. 2202)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Attorney-Genenil, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Are witnesses' expenses per day assessed for certain courts at the equivalent of 25c to $6.30 according to economic class, with a minimum of $2.1 0 for professional men and a mallimum of $2 for police constables, etc.
(2) Is this apparent class distinction evident also in travelling allowances for public servants as compared with those for repatriation patients.
(3) Was this attitude reflected in the recent decision of a magistrate giving a doctor the option of six days in gaol in lieu of $27,800 in fines, not foreseeing that the doctor would choose gaol.
(4) Is the Government supporting the concept that some are more equal than others before the law by cuts in legal aid funding which will cause half the applicants to be refused help by the Australian Legal Aid Office in the last quarter of 1980-81.
(5) Will the Government provide adequate legal services so that litigants and accused are not subjected to the stress and hardship of justice delayed which is justice denied.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) No. In general, the scales of witnesses' ellpenses for Federal Courts have been filled having some regard to the financial loss that a witness may incur by reason of giving evidence. I am informed that the figures referred to in the question correspond to those prescribed for witnesses' ellpenses in the Fifth Schedule to the Workmen's Compensation Rules made under the Workmen's Compensation Ordinance of the

Australian Capital Territory. This Schedule has apparently not been revised since it was first made in 1938. I understand that the Schedule is not followed in practice. Instead, witnesses' expenses in matters in the A.C.T. Court of Petty Sessions under the Workmen's Compensation Ordinance are assessed on the basis of the scale applying in the Supreme Court of the Territory. I have not had any complaints about the inadequacy of the scale, and this matter has not previously been brought to my attention. Now that it has been brought to my attention, I have directed that immediate action be taken to amend the Schedule to bring it into line with the witnesses' expenses provided in other jurisdictions.
(2) I am informed that repatriation patients are paid the same tra"elling allowance as third division public servants.
(3) I assume that the case referred to is that of Dr W. V. Russell. There are no grounds to support any suggestion that the decision of the Magistrate in the case was in any way affected by considerations of class distinction.
(4) No. The Government did not cut legal aid funding for the provision of assistance through the Australian Legal Aid Office in 1980-81. The number of eligible applicants for legal aid who sought assistance through the Australian Legal Aid Offices increased substantially during 1980-81, compared with previous years. Steps were taken to meet the increased need for assistance, particularly in Victoria and Tasmania, where the demand for legal aid has been especially high.
(5) Yes, subject to budgetary considerations.
Immigration: Applications for Entry
(Question No. 2682)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) What is the average time of processing applications for (a) temporary residency, (b) tourist entry and (c) permanent residence entry to Australia for each Australian overseas post.
(2) What was the average time taken for processing each application for each year from 1975 to 1980.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(\) My Department does not maintain records of times taken to process applications for entry to Australia.
Times taken for temporary entry processing vary considerably depending on such things as the purpose of entry and the proposed length of stay. Fluctuating work pressures at individual posts can also have a bearing on processing times.
As a general rule posts endeavour to maintain a 24-48 hour service for bona fide tourists and from 1-5 days to service uncomplicated temporary residence applications.
Permanent residence entry processing times vary considerably according to whether the applicant is in a high or low priority category and to the particular circumstances attached to individual applications. Processing times may range between four weeks and nine months.
(2) See answer to I above.
Statutory Authorities under the Minister for National Development and Energy
(Question No. 2843)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:

2048 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the Prime Minister's reply to Question No. 2839 which appeared in the House of Representatives Hansard for 22 September 1981 (Pages 1647-48).
Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Transport
(Question No. 2853)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(1) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1850), which statutory authQrities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I refer the honourable member to the acting Prime Minister's answer to Question No. 2839 (Hansard, 22 September 1981, page 1647).
Disadvantaged Persons Health Care Cards
(Question No. 2894)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
(I) By what sum has the patient contribution per prescription risen since 1975.
(2) Is it a fact that the rise in patient contribution in that period is in excess of 100 per cent.
(3) How do the income test guidelines for the assessment or eligibility for disadvantaged persons health care cards differ from the income test guidelines for eligibility for fringe benefits in relation to the age and invalid pension.
(4) Will disadvantaged persons health care card-holders be entitled to fringe benefits; if not, why not.
Mr Hunt-The Acting Minister for Health has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) At the end of 1975 the patient contribution was $1.50. It is currently $2.75 making the increase over the period $1.25 Or slightly more than 80 per cent. The contribution rate which will apply from I December 1981 is $3.20 per prescription and will represent an increase of slightly more than 100 per cent.
(3) Tlie income test for the assessment of health care card eligibility is based on income received, averaged over the four, week period prior to application, with income limits of $96 gross per week for single persons and $160 gross per week for

married couples or sole parents with one child, plus $20 per week for each additional child. The income test,'however, for assessment for Pensioner Health Benefits (PHB) entitlement is, in fact, the income test applied for pensioner eligibility. When income received, apart from pension, falls below $68 gross per week for a married couple or $40 gross per week for a single person then PHB entitlement will be applicable.
(4) No. The Government decided that the Commonwealth pharmaceutical benefit arrangements for eligible pensioners would not extend to health care card holders. I would mention however that under the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 eligible pensioners and their dependants and disadvantaged persons and their dependants within the meaning of the Health Insurance Act 1973, where those persons are public patients, will receive hospital and inpatient services at public hospitals without charge. Those services would include the provision of pharmaceuticals by the hospital (where the service is provided by the hospital).
Australian Citizenship
(Question No. 2950)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:
(I) In which local government areas were more than 100 certificates of Australian citizenship conferred during 1980. '
(2) How many certificates were conferred in each area.
(3) How many certificates were conferred in each State or Territory.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) The following statistical tables set out for each State and Territory names of local Councils where more than 100 certificates of Australian citizenship were conferred in 1980, the number of certificates conferred by each such council and the total number of certificates conferred in each State and Territory.

Local council where certificates Conferred exceeded 100 in 1980

Ashfield Auburn Bankstown Baulkham Hills Blacktown Botany Burwood Campbelltown Canterbury Concord Drummoyne
Fairfield Gosford Holroyd Hornsby Hurstville Kogarah Ku-ring-gai Lake Macquarie Leichhardt Liverpool Marrickville
Newcastle North Sydney

New South Wales

Number of certificates
conferred
319 338 563 139 652 298 166 155 1,080 128 139 900 101 246 156 119 154 178 200 137 311 720 130 200

Answers to Questions

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2049

Local council where certificates Conferred exceeded 100 in 1980
Parramatta Penrith Randwick Rockdale Ryde Shellharbour south Sydney Sutherland Sydney Warringah Waverley Willoughby Wollongong Woollahra
Total certificates conferred in New South Wales in 1980

Altona Berwick
Box Hill Broadmeadows Brunswick
Camberwell
Caulfield Coburg Collingwood
Corio
Dandenong Diamond Valley
Doncaster Essendon Fitzroy Footscray
Frankston Hawthorn Heidelberg
Keilor Knox Lilydale Malvern
Melbourne
Moorabbin Northcote Nunawading
O a k leigh
Prahran Preston
Richmond South Melbourne Springvale
StKilda
Sunshine Waverley
Werribee Whlttlesea Williamstown

Victoria

Total certificates conferred in Victoria in

1980

.....

Brisbane Gold Coast Ipswich

Queensland

Number of certificates
conferred
429 311 509 659 332 128 206 519 192 465 349 247 855 152
18,119
279 172 196 966 605 163 328 490 229 321 280 103 346 348 144 612 219 133 200 721 276 140 136 262 438 568 319 358 287. 532 301 106 iil5 480 536 449 158 813 182

Logan Townsville

Total Certificates Conferred in Queensland

in 1980

.......

Noarlunga Salisbury Tea Tree Gully Whyalla Woodville

South Australia

Total Certificates Conferred in South Australia in 1980

Armadale. Bayswater Belmont Canning Cockburn Fremantle Gosnells Kalamunda Melville Nedlands Perth Port Hedland Rockingham Roebourne Stirling Swan Wanneroo

Western Australia

Total Certificates Conferred in Western Australia in 1980 ' . ' . . . . . .

Local Councils Where Certificates Conferred Exceeded 100 in 1980

Tasmania
Nil

Total Certificates Conferred in Tasmania in

1980

,....

Northern Territory Nil
Total Certificates Conferred in Northern Territory in 1980

24,263
1,795 166 134

Australian Capital Territory Certificates Exceeding 100 Conferred in 1980
by AC.T. House of Assembly
Total Certificates Conferred in Australian Capital Territory in 1980 . . . . .

162 145
3,572
160 309 176 108 146
3,949
232 132 140 385 180 219 329 140 185 102 560 101 156 104 480 100 565
6,619
660
643
Numberof certificates
conferred
247
1,546

2050 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Answers to Questions

Aluminium Industry
(Question No. 2952)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to Question No. 913 (Hansard, 13 May 1981, page 2370) concerning Alcoa's decision to slow down work on their alumina refinery at Wagerup, Western Australia as a result of depressed international demand, has he now revised his view that any delays in completion of aluminium projects will be temporary.
(2) Which alumina and aluminium projects have been scaled down or abandoned during 1981.
(3) Are there further cancellations and scaling down of projects planned.
(4) What is his revised estimate for growth in the industry to 1984.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) There have been no announcements in 1981 of projects being scaled down or abandoned. However, in May 1981, Alcan announced that it was deferring a decision to proceed with its Bundaberg smelter.
(3) 1am not in a position to respond as to whether cancelations or scaling down of projects are being planned.
(4) Current projections of Australian production capacities are as follows:

Alumina Aluminium

(million tpy)

('000 tpy)

1981

7.5

372

1982

7.5

475

1983

9.3

814

1984

9.3

975

Royal Commission ofInquiry into Drugs
(Question No. 2957)
Mr Mildren asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:
(I) Has the Government taken any action to implement recommendation 156 of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs which called for prohibition of the use and possession of the drug, methaqualone.
(2) What are the side effects of the drug which caused the Royal Commission to recommen~ against its use.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the concern over this recommendation which is being expressed by those persons who used the drug because of its sedative properties.
(4) What other more suitable alternative medications are available.
Mr Hunt-The Acting Minister for Health has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) In response to Recommendation 156, the Commonwealth Government prohibited the importation of methaqualone and its products in June 1980. Methaqualone is not manufactured in Australia. Legislation governing the use and possession within Australia is a matter for the States.
(2) The drug, particularly when combined with alcohol, has marked hallucinogenic properties. All evidence, both

from addicts and expert medical witnesses, pointed to ready availability and widespread abuse both in Australia and overseas.
(3) The Department has received only one representation protesting against the prohibition.
(4) Other effective hypnotics are available. The prescribing of a suitable alternative would require medical assessment of the needs of individual patients.
Air Fare from Sydney to Canberra
(Question No. 2994)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) Did Trans Australia Airlines or Ansett, when applying to him for increases in air fares in March 1981, seek his approval for an air fare from Sydney to Canberra which was less than that proposed in the East-West Airlines no frills fare of $49.50.
(2) If so, and if approval was refused by him, what was the -amount of the fare sought by TAA and Ansett and why did he refuse an air fare which would benefit the consumer.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In January 1981 Ansett and TAA applied for a 7.9 per cent increase in fares to be applied uniformly to both components of the domestic air fare formula. The SydneyCanberra fare of that time was $40.50. The Holcroft Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares reported on 16 February 1981 and the Government deferred consideration of the tariff increases sought by the airlines until it completed its initial review of the Inquiry's recommendations.
(2) Following the Government's initial review of the Holcroft Inquiry's recommendations I announced on I April adjustments to the air fare formula that met the thrust of the Inquiry's recommendations for the reduction of the existing cross subsidisation of short haul fares by long haul fares. At the same time, and following discussions with the airlines, I approved an average increase in fares of 8.9 per cent which took account of the delay in approval of the tariff increase. The increase was achieved by an increase in the first class/ economy fare differential from 37t per cent to 45 per cent, some adjustment to discount fares, and an average increase in jet fares of7.4 per cent. I approved an increase in the economy jet fare flagfall from $21.80 to $40.00, and a decrease in the distance rate from 7.888 cents to 6.848 cents per kilometre. The second distance rate was retained.
As a result long haul fares decreased and short haul fares increased sharply. The Perth-Sydney and Perth-Melbourne economy jet fares were reduced by 5.3 per cent and 4 per cent respectively, while the Sydney-Canberra economy jet fare increased by 38.8 per cent from $40.50 to $56.20.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 3026)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:
(I) Have any cases of tenosynovitis been reported to date in the Department or Statutory Authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(2) If so, will the Minister state (a) how many cases have been reported, (b) in what types of work the affected persons were engaged, (c) of the cases reported how many were in respect of (i) female and (ii) male employees and (d) what age

Answers to Questions

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2051

brackets appear to be most affected, in the Department and each Statutory Authority.
(3) Will the Minister provide similar information in respect of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) According to departmental records, no cases of tenosynovitis have been reported.
(3) One female typist in her early thirties reported a carpal tunnel disorder in November 1976.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 3027)
Mr McMahon asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) Have any cases of tenosynovitis been reported to date, in the Department or statutory authorities under the Minister'sJurisdiction.
(2) If so, will the Minister state (a) how many cases have been reported, (b) in what types of work the affected persons were engaged, (c) of the cases reported how many were in respect of (i) female and (ii) male employees and (d) what age brackets appear to be most affected, in the Department and each statutory authority.
(3) WiIl the Minister provide similar information in respect of carpal tunnel.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) Eleven cases of tenosynovitis have been reported in the past three years in my Department and the statutory authorities under my jurisidiction.
(b) The affected persons were either involved in compensable accidents or the following types of work:
Keyboard Operator Laboratory Attendant Carpentry Unloading Timber Sawing Timber Lifting Gas Cylinders.
(c) (i) Five were female employees; (ii) Six were male employees.
(d) Eight of the eleven persons affected were in the thirty to forty age group.
(3) An examination of the records of the past three years indicates that there have been no, cases of carpal tunnel reported in that period.
Pension Payments: United Kingdom system
(Question No. 3124)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the United Kingdom system of making age-pension payouts.
(2) Would substantial savings in manpower and postage result from the adoption of this procedure in Australia; if so, would these savings be sufficient to (a) catch-up the 6-month lag in making Consumer Price Index adjustments to pensions

and (b) increase Department of Social Security branch staff numbers to alleviate current staffshortages.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Persons in receipt of a retirement pension in the United Kingdom can choose to have their payments made in one of the following ways:
(a) four-weekly or quarterly'in arrears by a crossed order which can be paid into a bank account, or
b) weekly in advance by a book of orders which can be cashed at a nominated post office.
Australian pensions are paid fortnightly either by a not negotiable cheque or by direct deposit to an account at a credit union, building society or bank.
(2) The order book method of payment was in use in Australia when the Department relied on punched card systems to make its payments. However, there were several shortcomings with this method of payment for both the client and the Department and the opportunity to introduce cheque payments was taken when computers were first used in 1967. Some of the disadvantages of order books were:
the need to recall books when entitlement ceased or the rate of payment changed;
the fact that orders could be cashed at only one nominated office;
the amount of commission payable;
the difficulties associated with the production of books; and
the lack of protection against lost or stolen books similar to that provided under the Bills of Exchange Acts for not negotiable cheques.
There would be no financial or manpower savings arising from the re-introduction of this method of payment.
Meat Industry: Royal Commission
(Question No. 3166)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 17 September 1981:
(I) Is the conduct of the royal commission into the meat industry to be under the authority of the Attorney-General's Department.
(2) If so, what is the estimated cost of the royal commission.
(3) Who will meet that cost.
(4) If the cost is met by the Attorney-Genera l's Department' wiIl it be at the expense of existing Departmental' activities.
(5) From where will the staff for the Royal Commission be drawn.
(6) If staff are provided by the Altorney-General's Department, how will this affect the ability of,the Department to remain within its staff ceiling.
(7) Will other functions of the Department be affected by the need to staff the royal commission.
(8) What steps have already been taken by the Commissioner to commence the inquiry.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
(I) No.

2052 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) This is a matter for the Minister for Administrative Services who has the administrative responsibility for the royal commission.
(3) Department of Administrative Services' except as regards the services of a very small number of officers of my Department.
(4) See answer to (3).
(5) and (6) My Department expects to supply only three officers, two of whom will instruct counsel assisting the Royal Commission and one will be a steno-secretary. Approval is being sought for the creation of three temporary positions. These positions will be accommodated within the existing staff ceiling of my Department.
(7) Because of the very small number of officers of my Department involved, the provision of this staff will have negligible effect on the performance of other' functions of my Department.
(8) This is a matter for the Min,ister for Administrative Services.

Invalid Pension: Medical Examination
(Question No. 3170)
Mr Humphries asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 17 September 1981:

Will the Minister supply full details of the instructions given to the Commonwealth Medical Officers and used by CMO's to carry out a medical evaluation of an applicant for the invalid pension.

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

I refer the honourable member to my answer to House of

Representatives Question No. 1067 (Hansard, 3 June 1981,

page 3085).

'

Superannuation Liability of Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Administrative Services
(Question No. 1329)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What statutory authorities under his aegis have liabilities to the Commonwealth by way of employer contributions for superannuation which have not been paid or which have not yet been determined. '
(2) If these contributions have not been paid, what are the amounts involved and how and when is payment to be made.

(3) If the contributions have not yet been determined, when is the liability expected to be assessed and how is payment expected to be made.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1320 (Hansard, 10 September 1981, pages 1265-1266).

Institute of Freshwater Studies

(Question No. 2465)

[In substitution for the answer which appeared in Hansard (page 664) of 20 August 1981.]

Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister represent-
ing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:

(I) Does he propose to take action to establish an Institute of Freshwater Studies in Australia; if so, what action.

(2) What sum has been spent on freshwater studies in Australia by (a) the CSIRO, (b) any other Commonwealth Government entity, (c) each State, (d) any tertiary edu-
cational institution and (e) the private sector in each of the last five years.

(3) Is he able to say what countries have set up Institutes of
Freshwater Studies (or bodies of some analogous name) and what sum is spent by them each year.

(4) Are any of these countries considered to have more serious freshwater problems than Australia; if so, which ones.

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) No.

(2) Expenditures on water research in all sectors is only available for 1979 calendar year as follows:

$m

Commonwealth

5.12

$m

CSIRO

3.73

Australian Atomic Energy Co-

mmission

0.43

Other

0.96

States

5.45

Local Government

0.78

Tertiary Education Institutions

2.16

Private Sector . . . . . .

0.25

13.76

However, more detailed information on the expenditures of Commonwealth organisations is as follows:

CSIRO

1976-77 2,746,077

1977-78 2,991,477

1978-79 3,024,994

1979-80 3,544,488

1980-81 3,802,822

Australian Atomic Energy Commission

430,000

410,000

520,000

340,000

n.a.

Department of National Development and Energy

389,198

389,983

390,000

414,737

470,497

Answers to Questions

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2053

(3) The following countries have national organisations with functions similar to those proposed for an Australian institute of freshwater studies: Canada, Finland, Federal Republic of Germany, Hungary, Holland, South Africa, Spain, United Kingdom and USSR. Reliable information is not available to my Department on their expenditures.
(4) My Department does not have sufficient information to evaluate, water resource problems in other countries vis-a-vis the situation in Australia.
Agent Orange: Pilot Study
(Question No. 3101)
Dr Cass asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 15 September 1981:
In the course of the Agent Orange Pilot Study of medical records of ex-servicemen were (a) the full medical records of each serviceman made available for the study, (b) the medical assessment (PULHEEMS test) (i) on enlistment, (ii) on discharge and (iii) between enlistment and discharge, (c) surgical operations, (d) x-ray examination, (e) pathology reports and (f) blood chemistry abnormalities which could be related to dioxin exposure, all noted.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) Yes.
(b) to (f) All aspects of a serviceman's medical record are available. One of the aims of the pilot study is to establish whether these records are available, and to what extent. The pilot study does not, and could not be expected to, draw from such information conclusions which would be a valid and relevant part of a major study.
Ministerial Document Service
(Question No. 3119)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) What are the guidelines for the substance of statements placed in the Ministerial Document Service.
(2) Are statements accepted which are directly party political in nature; if not, why was the speech by the Minister for Communications to a Liberal Party fund raising dinner in Sydney on Thursday, 3 September 1981 (List No. 160/81), included.
(3) If statements of a party political nature are acceptable, will the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition also be permitted to include party political speeches in future collations.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As a general rule, the Ministerial Document Service reproduces verbatim as received all statements and speeches made outside the Parliament by Ministers, Opposition Leaders and other recognised Party Leaders.
(2) Many of the statements accepted have some political content.
(3) The Ministerial Document Service has included speeches by Opposition Leaders which contained political comment e.g., Mr Hayden's speech introducing State Opposition Leader Mr Casey at the formal opening of the Queensland ALP election campaign on II November 1980 (list No. 210/80). Another example is Mr Hayden's address to

the ALP Tasmanian State Council in Burnie on 4 July 1981 (List No. 119/81).
National Aboriginal Conference Election
(Question No. 3218)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 23 September 1981:
In view of the'statement made in the Senate by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs that the Government is committed to making the enrolment of Aboriginal people compulsory as it already is for all other people (Senate Hansard, 16 September 1981, page 762), will he now urge the Australian Electoral Office to do all in its power to enrol Aboriginal people during its conduct of the 1981 National Aboriginal Conference elections; if not, why not.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The statement by my colleague the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs in no way changes the position as set out in my answers to Questions Numbers 2876 and 3000 in the House of Representatives on 10 and 22 September 1981 (Hansard pages 1263, 1264and 1649).
Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 472)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the rnter-
national Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has his Department made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by his Department; ifso, what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in his Department.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable members question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to Question No. 458 (House of Representatives Weekly Hansard, 10 June 1981, pages 3564 to 3566).
Expenditure Commitments: Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 1214)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does his Department have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of

2054 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1981

Answers to Questions

records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given to Question No. 1216 by the Minister for Finance (Weekly Hansard 10June 198I,page3551).
Superannuation Liability of Statutory Authorities under the Attorney-General
(Question No. 1322)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What statutory authorities under the Attorney General's aegis have liabilities to the Commonwealth by way of employer contributions for superannuation which have not been paid or which have not yet been determined.
(2) If these contributions have not been paid, what are the amounts involved and how and when is payment to be made.
(3) If the contributions have not yet been determined, when is the liability expected to be assessed and how is payment expected to be made.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister representing the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1320 (see House of Representatives Hansard, 10 September 1981, pages 1265 to 1266).
Entertainment and Hospitality: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1426)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by the Attorney-General's Department in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by the Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of the Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in the Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by the Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) to (3) I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Prime Minister to Question No. 1413. Apart from the amount expended through the appropriations of the Prime Minister's Department, an amount of $38,142.07 was also spent on entertainment and hospitality in 1979-80 in connection with the Second International Conference of Appellate Judges.

(4) Expenditure on entertainment and hospitality outside Australia incurred by officers of my Department travelling overseas during this period totalled $215.91.
Head Office, Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 1500)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The following sections of the Department's Central Office are not located in Canberra:
National Machinery & International Relations-35 staff Industry Policy & Operations-44 staff National Policies-31 staff Administrative Support Unit-20 staff
(2) Decisions to relocate units of Government employment to Canberra are taken by Government on the advice of the Location of Australian Government Employment Committee (LAGE), an IDC chaired by the PSB, the advice tendered to Government by the LAGE Committee is based on submissions by the relevant Department, and consultations with interested bodies such as staff organisations. Any plans to relocate the sections in Canberra is a matter for LAGE consideration and subsequent decision by Government.
Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1555)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many (a) cars, (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks were being operated by his Department, excluding vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services, as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to LPG usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.
(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; if so, what are the details.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Minister for Administrative Services to Question No. 1563 which appeared in the House of Representatives Hansard for 10 June 1981 (pp. 3579-80).
Answers to Questions on Notice
(Question No. 2291)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
When may I expect to receive an answer to my questions Nos 561, 563 and 565 which first appeared on the Notice Paper of 24 February 1981.

Answers to Questions

14 October 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2055

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to question No. 561, Hansard, 26 May 1981, (page 2628); No. 563, Hansard, 19 August 1981, (page 541); and No. 565, Weekly Hansard, 10July 1981, (page3566).
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Payment of Pensions
(Question No, 2689)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(\) Is it a fact that the Department of Veterans' Affairs has computer and office facilities available for the direct payment of veterans' fortnightly pensions into a bank or building society but the service is not being provided for these pensioners.
(2) If so, when will the Minister have the present system, whereby veterans have to either wait for a 3 month payment into their bank account or accept a fortnightly cheque posted to their home, adjusted to accommodate a fortnightly bank or building society pension payment:
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes. However, it would take around 4 months to make the necessary changes (for example, to procedures and computer programs) to provide such a facility.

(2) Consideration has been given to introducing fortnightly payments direct to accounts at banks, building societies and credit unions; however, the magnitude of the financial implications in making such a change has prevented this action being taken during 1981-82.
Income Tax Assessment Act
(Question No: 2693)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to my question No. 2021 (Hansard, \0 June 1981, page 3505) relating to the weaknesses' of section 26AAA of the Income Tax Assessment Act, in which he intimated that he expected to receive the Commissioner's advice soon, what action does he propose to lake to strengthen this section of the Act.
(2) If he proposes to introduce amendments in the House to section 26AAA of the Act, will they have retrospective application.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) In the light of advice received from the Commissioner of Taxation, the Government has decided that section 26AAA of the Income Tax Assessment Act should be amended to remedy a defect by which it is possible, through the use of a subsidiary company, to escape tax on profits realised on short-term property transactions.
Details of the proposed amendment are contained in a statement. I made in the Parliament on 10 September 1981, copies of which were provided to honourable members.


