House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 128, 1982 Wednesday, 18 August 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Questions without Notice

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 461

Wednesday,i8 August i982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
BUDGET PAPERS Mr WILLIS-I address my question to the Treasurer. It concerns his protestations that there has been no political interference in the figures produced in the Budget. I ask whether he is aware of a recent statement by the head of Treasury, Mr Stone, who, in evidence to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure on 26 May of this year, said:
. . . the Budget Papers tendered to the Parliament are tendered by the Treasurer. They are his responsibility; they are his papers. He has officials prepare them under his direction. Therefore the content of those papers is his decision . . .
Will the Treasurer now agree that he personally is responsible for all those figures? Can he therefore assure the House that this year's Budget is more soundly based than the infamous 1977 Budget, the benefits of which were quickly whipped away in the subsequent year?
Mr HOWARD-I have absolutely no hesitation at all in saying that not only is the Budget issued under my authority but also the documents attached to the Budget papers are issued under my authority. I regard them as papers for which I am responsible. What I have said-the honourable member gives me the opportunity of repeating it-is that all the revenue figures in the Budget have been supplied by the Taxation Office, in the case of excise by the Department of Industry and Commerce which has within it the Bureau of Customs, by the Treasury or, in any other miscellaneous cases, by the relevant expert departments. Nobody at a political level has in any way altered those figures. I accept responsibility for them. I believe that the figures are correct because they have been given to me by people whose professional competence and integrity I respect and trust.
SYDNEY (KINGSFORD-SMITH) AIRPORT
Mr COWAN-I ask the Minister for Aviation whether it is a fact that the airlines and many airline passengers are concerned about the delays caused by the congestion in landing and taking off at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport? Is the problem there being accentuated by the fact that

the New South Wales Government will not agree to the construction of an extra runway? Can the Minister state the present position?
Mr FIFE-It is a fact that delays are being occasioned at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport. The advice that I have before me from the Department of Aviation indicates very clearly that the position will worsen over the next two or three years. Indeed, it is fair to say that the position is worsening each day. I am sure that many members of the travelling public and many members of this Parliament have been on aircraft that have been delayed in recent times as a result of traffic congestion at Kingsford-Smith Airport. It is also true, as indicated by the honourable member, that the Commonwealth has been prepared for some time to proceed with the construction of a second parallel runway at Kingsford Smith Airport, but up to the present time it has not been able to obtain the co-operation of the New South Wales Government.
We have also indicated that we are prepared to work in conjunction with the New South Wales Government in an effort to identify and to determine a site for a second airport in the Sydney region. It is necessary, of course, to have the cooperation of the State Government in this respect because any airport site that is ultimately chosen will have to be serviced by surface transport-by road and perhaps even by rail. Of course, they are responsibilities of the State Government.
Over the past few weeks I have been giving consideration to this matter. I hope to put some proposals before the Commonwealth Government in the not too distant future. It is a matter of urgency because, whatever decision is taken, the lead time is great. Several years is involved from when a decision is taken until a remedial project is ready for use.
Another point that I make in answer to the honourable member's question is that, contrary to popular belief, the growth in traffic is in the commuter area. There has been a decline in traffic movements by international and domestic trunk aircraft. Commuter aircraft movements have increased considerably over the past five or six years. It is necessary, of course, for international aircraft, domestic trunk aircraft and commuter aircraft to use the same airport because many airlines link in with each other. I give the honourable member an assurance that this matter will continue to have my attention with a view to resolving it in the interests of the travelling public.

462 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Questions without Notice

INDIRECT TAXATION
Mr WILLIS-I address another question to the Treasurer. It relates to his pronouncement last year in this House when he stated:
As a general rule, each additional $500m raised through indirect taxes results in direct and indirect additions to the consumer price index of almost one per cent.
Do not the increases in indirect taxes in this year's Budget totalling $1 ,046m and the many increases in Government charges mean that the increases in the consumer price index in this financial year resulting from the Budget will be about 2 per cent rather than the one per cent which the Government has claimed?
Mr HOWARD-Two qualifications have to be put on the sum that the honourable member has done, The first is that different indirect tax increases have a slightly different impact on the CPI. Some changes have a different or better CPI value than others, if I can put it that way. The other point that the honourable member should bear in mind is that, I am advised, the Australian Statistician does not measure distillate in the CPI. As a consequence the indirect tax gained from the changes in that area would not have any CPI effect at all.
ORDNANCE FACTORY, BENDIGO
Mr BOURCHIER-Can the Minister for Defence Support advise the Hou~e whether the Ordnance Factory, Bendigo, has been successful in its attempt to obtain a sub-contract for the supply of certain parts to a crawler tractor contract recently let by the State Electricity Commission of Victoria?
Mr VINER-This House knows that ever since the honourable member has been the member for Bendigo he has had the interests of the Ordnance Factory, Bendigo, at heart. He has worked very assiduously in the interests of that factory. He has been quite prepared to fight for the interests of the employees of that factory at Bendigo during the period of uncertainty over the last 12 months. The factual situation is that the honourable member, together with my colleague the Minister for Industry and Commerce, was instrumental in seeing that the Ordnance Factory at Bendigo was given every opportunity to tender for work with the State Electricity Commission of Victoria for the crawler frames, being parts of a bucket dredge for the Loy Yang project. Indeed, in April of this year the Minister for Industry and Commerce assured the prime contractor, Demag Industries, that even if the factory were sold or leased the factory would honour its contract if it were granted to Bendigo. I understand that the other competitor for this contract-it is a major one-would be a

German firm engaging in importation. So the House can see what is at stake for the factory and for Bendigo.
I can inform the honourable gentleman that the management of the factory is holding discussions today with the State Electricity Commission of Victoria and Demag Industries to consider price. So far as I am concerned, every reasonable opportunity will be given to the factory to tender at an appropriate price. I am concerned to see that the Victorian Government likewise provides every opportunity to its instrumentality, the State Electricity Commission, to see that the Ordnance Factory, Bendigo, can obtain this job. I understand that there has been some discussion between the Victorian Minister for Economic Development, Mr Landeryou, and the Victorian Minister for Minerals and Energy, Mr White. I hope that Mr Landeryou will see that nothing is done within the instrumentality or by his ministerial colleague to prevent this contract from going to the Ordnance Factory, Bendigo, following these negotiations on price today.
HOME LOAN INTEREST RATES
Mr LES McMAHON-I refer the Treasurer to the Budget proposal to grant mortgage relief. Is he aware that everyone per cent rise in mortgage interest rates results in a rise of $300m in total household interest payments? Is he aware that, because home loan interest rates have risen by 4 per cent since 1980, the interest bill for households has risen by $1,200m? Since the Budget provides $155m in mortgage relief this year, how does the Government propose to compensate home buyers for the rest of the interest burden imposed on them by its economic policies?
Mr HOWARD-I say to the honourable gentleman that no government can responsibly be in the position of compensating everybody in the community for every interest rate rise that occurs. If in fact it is the policy of the Labor Party to offer that, then it has abandoned every semblance of economic responsibility.
UNITED STATES ARMS SALES TO TAIWAN
Mr WHITE-Has the Prime Minister seen the joint communique issued last evening by the United States of America and China concerning United States arms sales to Taiwan? If so, could he comment on this communique in the light of discussions he held during his recent visit to China?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-A joint communique between the United States and China has been issued. I believe that all honourable

Questions without Notice

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 463

members would welcome the substance of that communique because it puts to rest a dispute which had potential for a serious breach in relations between the two countries. It is to the credit of both that an agreement has been reached and that the matter has been put to rest. The critical element in the communique that both countries have issued reads in these terms:
Having in mind the foregoing statements of both sides, the United States Government states that it does not seek to carry out a long-term policj of arms sales to Taiwan, that its arms sales to Taiwan will not exceed, either in qualitative or in quantitative terms, the level of those supplied in recent years since the establishment of diplomatic relations between the United States and China, and that it intends to reduce gradually its sales of arms to Taiwan leading over a period of time to a final resolution. In so stating, the United States acknowledges China's consistent position regarding the thorough settlement of this issue.
A continuing dispute would certainly have had the possibility of having far-reaching consequences in our own part of the world and it would have inhibited a very necessary co-operation between the United States and China in many other areas. While I was in China I. had significant discussions on this issue. There have also been communications with the United States Administration over time and since I left China. It is important to note that in terms of the containment of the aggressive inclinations of the Soviet Union a strong Western alliance is of paramount importance, but of very nearly equal importance is a sensible and good working relationship between the United States and the People's Republic of China. I am glad that that has been preserved by this agreement and it is something that the whole House should applaud.
YOUTH TRAINING PROGRAMS
Mr FREE-I refer the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations to the Government's Budget commitments in the area of youth training programs for 1982-83. I ask: Is it a fact that during 1981-82 the Budget allocation in this area was massively underspent by around $16m or 21 per cent and that the number of participants in youth training programs fell short of anticipated levels by over 25,OOO? How can the Minister explain this situation? In the light of last year's massive underspending, does the Minister concede that there has been very little actual increase in the Government's commitments in the area of youth training programs during 1982-83? Given the substantial increases in subsidies available to employers under the major youth program, the Special Youth Employment Training Program, just to achieve last year's training targets, will the Minister also concede that the Government's

programs in the area of youth training are misconceived and ineffective? Finally, how can the Government justify its total emphasis on training programs when it is patent that the dramatic decline in employment opportunities is the major problem confronting young people?
Mr MACPHEE-Listed for discussion today is a matter of public importance on this subject which I shall go into in more detail later; but let me say now that this Budget aims to do a number of things. It continues the global allocation of funds for training. Last year it was found that there were some rigidities in the administration of the Special Youth Employment Training Program which limited the number of eligible persons entering that program. Many persons in fact instead entered under apprenticeship and other programs, including through the technical and further education colleges. We have eliminated the administrative difficulties. We have increased the subsidies under the Special Youth Employment Training Program and increased the rebates under the Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentices Full-time Training Program. On that basis we expect employers to find it infinitely more attractive to employ younger people than was the case in the past financial year. Moreover, we intend promoting those programs so that eligible young people and employers know all about them. We intend also to concentrate them in areas where there has been the greatest employment shedding.
I refer in particular to some of the capital works programs which have been mentioned in the Budget and which will be amplified by operative Ministers. Each of those represents employment opportunities and many will attract assistance from the Special Youth Employment Training Program as well as CRAFT. Our objective has been to avoid make-work programs of a temporary kind-often performing work which is not needed and certainly work which does not add skill to the unemployed youth. Our objective is to lift the levels of skill, to make it easier for people to retain employment and of course enable them to have the confidence to go where jobs are. The figures which I shall produce in the debate this afternoon will indicate that the programs have been a huge success.
WAGE DEMANDS
Mr HARRIS-Has the Prime Minister had any indication from the Australian Council of Trade Unions that it will agree to moderate wage demands as a result of the benefits contained in last night's Budget?

464 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Questions without Notice

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Budget has been put together against the background in which there was a growing recognition, I hope, in this Parliament and, I certainly believe, throughout the wider Australian community that it is very important for different groups and sections to recognise the interests they have in common and to exhibit a determination as Australians to work together to overcome the problems that Australia faces at present. The Government took very closely into account the points of view that had been put to it in a tripartite meeting between the Confederation of Australian Industry and the Australian Council of Trade Unions. There had been subsequent discussions between the Treasurer and officers of the ACTU in relation to tax matters. There has been ongoing consultation between the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations and the ACTU. We are seeking to build a base upon which it is reasonable to expect a very real degree of wage restraint. As the honourable member and other honourable members in the House would know, there have been some notable examples in relation to that in recent weeks, but it needs building on and there is much to be done. The Budget was put together against the--
Mr Mountford-Answer the question.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable member should have a little patience; I am coming to that, but in my own way. The Budget has been put together against a background in which it would be reasonable to expect a degree of wage restraint. For example, a taxpayer with a dependent spouse and two children on $180 a week income, and taking into account some reduction for the additional indirect taxes that will be imposed by the Budget, will be about $30 a week better off than before the Budget, and that is a very substantial addition to that person's income. A taxpayer with a dependent spouse and two children on $300 a week will be nearly $18 a week better off. This is a very substantial amount and a very substantial assistance to families, and especially to lower income families. It is reasonable to expect that those things be taken into account.
I can well understand how, in the rush of last night's proceedings, the balance of the Budget between the benefit to families and wage earners and the weight of increased indirect taxes may not have been fully understood by some commentators. I was, to a degree, disappointed by the reaction of the President of the ACTU last night. When I saw that reaction this morning I asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations to contact the ACTU and to hold himself available for consultations-that applies also to

either his officers or officers of other departments if there is a need for any technical explanations of details of the Budget-so that the weight of the Budget and the benefit to the wage and salary
earners of Australia w..i11 be fully understood by
the ACTU in coming to its final attitudes in relation to wage determination. The Minister has already been in touch with the ACTU and I am encouraged to believe that the beneficial effects of this Budget will be understood and accepted and will enable this nation to build upon the current climate for wage restraint.
FAMILIES: STANDARD OF LIVING
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister a question, and it follows his application to the generosity of the Government to Australian families. In that context I ask: Is it a fact that, even taking last night's Budget into consideration, the typical Australian family on average earnings pays $7.\0 more income tax a week now than in 1975? Is that family paying $\0.80 a week more in indirect taxes now than in 1975? Is that family, even after the home loan interest concession announced last night, paying $13.70 more a week in loan repayments now than in 1975? Is that family, as a direct result of his Government's economic rigging and rorting, $40 a week worse off than in 1975?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman omitted to advise the House that there was a deficit approaching 5 per cent of gross domestic product as a result of the kind of Budgets that he was introducing, and the people of Australia also had to pay for that in a multitude of ways. I think Australian families will be interested in a comparison of the situation as a result of this Budget with what applied before the Budget was introduced. We are dealing with 1982. I can understand the Leader of the Opposition wanting to stay in 1975 but some of his colleagues want to forget that experience.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I do not think anyone in this House will gain credit by creating a little noise, thus making it difficult for the people of Australia to understand the very real benefits that are available to them as a result of the housing loan interest rebate that has been introduced, as a result of the increases in family allowances and as a result of the family income supplement which, for the first time, will enable all members of Parliament--:-I hope members of the Opposition will also applaud this measure-to go out and say that families even in the lower income groups will be better off than those same families would be on the welfare system and as a direct

Questions without Notice

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 465

charge on the taxpayer through the Department of Social Security. As is so often the case, this imaginative and far-sighted reform is something that has been introduced by a Liberal and National Country Party Government. It is one that represents a very significant first for this Budget. All credit should be given to the Minister who devised it and persuaded his Cabinet colleagues to accept it. It is the kind of far-sighted reform which is of very significant assistance to low income families as is the case with the reform of family allowances which was of great importance to low income families. It was this Government and these parties which introduced these reforms.
Let me repeat that, as a result of the situation that the Budget introduces, a family on a weekly income of $180, with a dependant spouse and two children, will be $30 better off taking account of the fact that there will be some indirect tax increases in accordance with the normal household expenditure. That is a very substantial increase for a low income family and of enormous benefit to people who are hard hit under present circumstances. The other example I gave is of a family on $300 a week which will be just a few cents short, in net terms, of $18 better off than it was before this Budget was introduced.
This Budget, in the truest possible sense, is one for Australian families. It is a Budget for children and it is a Budget designed to assist young people. The very generous increases in the secondary allowance scheme will be a great encouragement to many low income families to keep their children at school in order to gain some education and training. This will obviously be much better to them than leaving school without the necessary job skills. So, from whatever point of view one looks at this Budget, one sees that it addresses the very real needs and concerns of Australians in 1982 and the years ahead of us. It does this in an imaginative way and in a way that assists many hundreds of thousands of Australian families, indeed virtually all Australians.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr O'Keefe proceeding to address a question to the Minister for Primary Industry-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Paterson will resume his seat. The question is out of order.
LABOUR MARKET
Mrs DARLING-I refer the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations to the Budget estimates concerning the labour market situation in 1982-83, Budget Paper No. I, page 61. How can the Government justify its figure of a projected

average of 395,000 persons on unemployment benefits during 1982-83 when at the start of the new financial year already 405,000 people are receiving unemployment benefit, particularly in view of the fact that the Government anticipates a marked increase in unemployment during 1982-83?
Mr MACPHEE-As I am informed, those figures are the Treasury's best estimate of the number of people who will be in receipt of unemployment benefit. The estimate as far as my Department is concerned, as best it can estimate, is that there will be in the order of 7 per cent unemployment as we go into the new year. It could actually exceed that. In other words, until school leavers are placed the unemployment figure early next year might be slightly over 8 per cent-far less than some of the figures spoken of by some members of the Opposition. We do not expect there to be a worsening of the employment situation of the magnitude mentioned by some Opposition members. I am not responsible for Treasury figures. I am indicating my belief that in the next few months we will see a worsening, but nowhere near as dramatic a worsening as the Opposition, for political reasons, would wish to see.
AMERICAN NAVAL VESSELS: ACCESS TO AUSTRALIAN PORTS
Mr SHIPTON-My question is directed to the Minister for Defence and concerns access to Australian ports by American naval vessels. Will the Minister assure the House that the Government will continue to allow access to Australian ports by visiting American naval vessels? Is Australia's commitment to the ANZUS alliance a strong and continuing one? Was any damage done to Australia's international military alliances and standing as a result of some events surrounding the recent visit to Australian ports by the US Goldsborough?
Mr SINCLAIR-Without doubt the very strong stand taken by the Prime Minister and the Federal Government in reaction to the pusillanimous approach by the Victorian Labor Party was the genesis of a very warm reception to the officers and crew of the US Goldsborough during her visit to Australian ports. Indeed, the officer in command of the US Goldsborough, Commander Owen, at the end of his visit to Australia sent a message which said:
I would like to express my appreciation for the nonpariel hospitality extended to us.
In relation to the vist to Melbourne, Commander Owen also reported:
. . . the preparations made and hospitality extended were instrumental in ensuring a smooth and most enjoyable visit.

466 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Questions without Notice

Fortunately the people of Australia have totally rejected the approach taken by the Victorian Premier and, somewhat earlier, by the Premier of New South Wales.
Mr Dawkins-Have you paid that money back? Have you still got that stolen money?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle has continued to interject. I call upon him to withdraw what he has just said. I warn him not to interject again.
Mr Dawkins-I withdraw.
Mr SINCLAIR-I think it worth commenting that in Western Australia, the State from which the honourable gentleman comes, there has been a succession of very worthwhile visits by ships. Indeed, this year there have been around 50 port visits and many of them-30 of them-have been to HMAS Stirling. In that instance they included three carrier battle groups each of nine ships. Perth has won a great deal of respect from United States servicemen not just because of the excellence of the naval facilities there but also because of the hospitality of Western Australians. I am quite sure, however, that it is not just in hospitality terms but in the meaningfulness of the ANZUS arrangements--
Mr BeazleyWould you like to see opposition there to the visits?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Swan has continued to interject throughout most of the question period. I warn him to cease interjecting.
Mr SINCLAIR-I think it is worthwhile, in answer to the honourable gentleman, to mention that the ANZUS arrangement is something that members of this House, certainly from this side, believe to be intrinsic to our defence posture. We believe that it is essential that there be an opportunity for visits by friendly powers and by warships of friendly powers. The communique issued at the termination of the thirty-first meeting of the ANZUS Council held in Canberra on 21 and 22 June reiterated that conviction.
I add, finally, that it is worth noting that the Leader of the Opposition in Western Australia, I understand, supported Mr Cain. Had the Australian Labor Party been in power in that State I presume that those visits which have been so worthwhile for Australia and Western Australia would not have taken place. However, the Federal Government intends to introduce legislation shortly to ensure that the Federal Government's constitutional power is understood in this area. Later in the day I expect to be introducing that Bill into this House.

HOME LOAN I~TEREST REBATES
Mr UREN-I direct my question to the Treasurer. I refer the Treasurer to the vague and open-ended statements about home loan interest rebates in the Budget of 1982-83 and, particularly, to the statement that the rebate will be paid for home loans from any source. Do these sources include finance companies and usurers charging interest rates in excess of 20 per cent? Do they include second and third mortgages? Do they include loans from relatives? Do they include mortgage transfers? Does the Minister accept that the rebates could promote new tax evasion opportunities? Is the Government aware that the rebates will encourage desperate home seekers, rejected by banks and building societies, to enter into risky, high interest, home purchase debt?
Mr HOWARD--=- I am not entirely certain from the honourable gentleman's question whether he supports the rebate. It would be very interesting to know whether the Australian Labor Party supports the rebate, but I will endeavour to answer the honourable gentleman's question. It is intended that the rebate be available for a wide range of loans and not just be restricted to loans from the more conventional home lending sources. There is a very good reason for that. I am surprised that the honourable gentleman did not acknowledge it. The fact is that owing to the relative unavailability of money from banks and building societies because of their incapacity in the past to attract sufficient deposits to lend for housing, many low income people in this community have been forced to borrow at much higher rates of interest. It would be very unfair to those people if we were to restrict the rebate to banks and building societies. I am amazed that the honourable member should be implying that the rebate should not be available to some of the poorer sections of the Australian community.
MR VO DAI TON
Mr BRAITHWAITE-Can the Minister for Foreign Affairs advise this House what the Government is doing to seek the release of Mr Vo Dai Ton, a political prisoner of the Vietnamese, so as to allow his reunification with his family in Australia?
Mr STREET-The Australian Government's capacity to intervene in this case is extremely limited as the gentleman concerned is not an Australian citizen.
INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: FUNDING
Mr BARRY JONES-I direct my question to the Minister for Science and Technology. Is it a

Questions without Notice

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 467

fact that in the 1981-82 Budget a sum of $32,680,000 was appropriated for the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Scheme and in the present Budget this figure has been increased to $32,800,000, a rise of 0.3 per cent? Further, it is a fact that only 37 per cent of last year's appropriation for industrial research and development was actually spent? Will the Minister explain the reasons for the 63 per cent shortfall? Will he tell the House what has happened to the money appropriated but unspent from last year?
Mr Young~ Where was Sinclair?
Mr BARRY JONES~ The Minister can answer that too. Will the money be available to top up the sums appropriated for the scheme this year? Will the Minister give the House an unequivocal assurance that the moneys appropriated for 1982-83 will actualIy be spent and that he will not allow the Department of Finance to stand over his Department and sabotage investment in this vital area which is so significant for Australia's national interest?
Mr THOMSON~I am not sure that I understand the figures that the honourable member brought up. The figure appropriated in last year's Budget was a little more than $49m.
Mr Barry Jones~lndustrial Research and Development Incentives Scheme.
Mr THOMSON~The amount appropriated in this Budget is $49.15m. It is quite correct that the scheme was underspent last year. There were many reasons for that; they will not recur. I can assure honourable members that the very best endeavours will be made to spend that money. The money that was underspent, as usual, went back into Consolidated Revenue but we will spend it this year. Of course, we would like to spend~
Opposition members interjecting~
Mr SPEAKER~ The Minister will resume his seat. I will call the Minister when the House comes to order. Honourable members on my left will remain silent while the Minister is making his explanation.
Mr THOMSON~ The amount of money spent on industrial research and development must be put into context with the other government policies to assist industry. The total package of industry assistance this year is about $1 ,000m. It should be considered also in conjunction with the recently announced depreciation provisions and the new incentives for manufacturing, mining and rural industries. These provisions and the

other incentives given to industry should alIow industry to spend a great deal more money on industrial research and development. I know that the honourable member for Lalor will join me in pressing industry to spend as much as possible this financial year over and above the amount given by the Government. At the moment most industrial research and development done in Australia comes from government funds.
Mr Dawkins~ You have been reading Jones's speeches again.
Mr THOMSON~He has been reading mine. We want to have much more money spent by industry this year. Whilst there is a downturn in industrial capacity this is the time when we should be spending more and more on industrial research and development so that when there is an upturn, which is bound to occur, Australia can take advantage of it.
TAX AVOIDANCE
Mr CHAPMAN~Is the Treasurer aware of continuing concern in the community about tax avoidance despite the Government's legislative program directed against it? To what extent is the legislation proving effective in curtailing tax avoidance?
Mr HOWARD~I think probably the two most contemporary and best pieces of evidence of the success of the Government's campaign in this area are, firstly, the fact that I was advised by the Australian Taxation Office that it would not be necessary this year to make a downward adjustment in the revenue figures on account of tax avoidance losses, as has been done on earlier occasions. Secondly, I draw the honourable gentleman's attention to quite a bit of Press and other comment from the leading accounting bodies and accounting firms, including some correspondence in the national Press yesterday from the national chairman of Coopers and Lybrand, which is one of the major accounting firms in Australia, indicating in very clear terms the success of the Government's legislation.
INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: FUNDING
Mr CROSS~I draw the attention of the Minister for Science and Technology to the figure of $32,800,000 for the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Scheme project in Appropriation Bill (No. I). How does the Minister explain the 52 per cent fall in Government spending on industrial research and development during the last financial year? Can he say why the increases for research and development in last night's Budget do not even restore the position of

468 REPRESENTATIVES .18 August 1982

Questions without Notice

two years ago? Finally, when will industrial research and development receive the stability and level of funding needed to support the innovation necessary for the re-establishment of a sound and growing industrial sector in Australia?
Mr THOMSON-The figure of $32.8m cited by the honourable member was the figure for project grants under the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Scheme; the figure for commencement grants is $11.3m and the figure for public interest grants is $4.975m, a total of $49.075m. I have already said that the amount was underspent last year, mainly due to the problen of forward commitment which was restricted. That problem has now been overcome and the problems which occurred last year will not recur.
SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE
Mr McLEAN-I refer the Minister for Foreign Affairs to recent statements calling for a withdrawal of the Australian contingent from the Sinai peacekeeping force. Will the Minister reaffirm Australia's support for the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel which has withstood the pressures of the crisis in Lebanon? Will the Minister assure the House that Australia will maintain its commitment to that treaty by retaining its presence in the Sinai force?
Mr STREET-The Government does not accept a linkage between the establishment of the Sinai Multinational Force and Observers and Israel's armed intervention into Lebanon. Peace between Egypt and Israel by negotiation rather than military conflict is the most outstanding achievement to date in the search for peace and stability in the Middle East. Israel's withdrawal from the Sinai and the establishment of the Sinai MFO was, and remains, quite vital to the process of maintaining confidence and peace between two countries which, until the peace treaty, had settled their differences on the battlefield. To suggest, for example, as the Deputy Leader of the Opposition is reported as suggesting, that the agony of Lebanon could be stopped by withdrawing Australia's contribution to the achievement and maintenance of peace between Egypt and Israel, is just plain nonsense.
The Government's objectives are the achievement of a negotiated settlement in Lebanon to stop the loss of life and the destruction there, to restore the sovereignty of the Government of Lebanon over its own country and to ensure that the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people are achieved and that the security of Israel is maintained within secure and recognised boundaries. I cannot understand how these objectives or the search for peace in the Middle East could be

helped by putting the hard won peace between Egypt and Israel at risk. Peace, however and whenever achieved, is too important to be pushed around like some sort of bargaining chip. I believe that the Sinai MFO and Australia's participation in it are a significant contribution to peace between Egypt and Israel and the broader goal of a comprehensive settlement in the Middle East. In short, the Government does not intend to withdraw its contingent to the Sinai force.
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-For the information of honourable members. I present the text of a statement by the Minister for Finance relating to the appointment of an independent auditor of the Auditor-General's Office.
ADVANCE TO THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-For the information of honourable members. I present a statement on expenditure from the Advance to the Minister for Finance for April, May and June 1982.
SERVICES TRUSTS FUND
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Defence)-Pursuant to sections 34 and 35 of the Services Trusts Fund Act 1947 I present the annual reports for 1981 of the Services Canteens Trust Fund, the Royal Australian Navy Relief Trust Fund, the Australian Military Forces Relief Trust Fund and the Royal Australian Air Force Welfare Trust Fund.
AUSTRALIAN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation)- Pursuant to section 6 (2) of the Australian Science and Technology Council Act 1978 I present reports prepared by the Australian Science and Technology Council on the Office of the Supervisory Scientist and Earth Resources Satellites; Australian Facilities.
AUSTRALIAN MARITIME COLLEGE
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation)- Pursuant to section 39 of the Maritime College Act 1978 I present the annual report of the Australian Maritime College for 1980.
INQUIRY INTO MANAGEMENT EDUCATION
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation)- For the information of honourable members. I

General

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 469

present a report from the Inquiry into Management Education.
AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF CRIMINAL INTELLIGENCE
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-For the information of honourable members, I present an agreement between the Commonwealth and the States relating to the establishment of the Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence.
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS COMMISSION
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Commonwealth Grants Commission Report on State Tax Sharing and Health Grants 1982-Volumes I and 2.
ABORIGINAL LAND COMMISSIONER
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present a report by the Aboriginal Land Commissioner on the Warlmanpa, Warlpiri, Mudbura and Warumungu land claim.
APPLIED ECOLOGY PTY LTD
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report of Applied Ecology Pty Ltd for 1980-81, together with the text of a statement relating to the report.
ABORIGINAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs)-Pursuant to section 40 (6) of the Aboriginal Development Commission Act 1980, I present the annual report of the Aboriginal Development Commission for 1980-81, together with the text of a statement and the text of a letter from the Auditor-General relating to the report.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)- Mr Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I would like to.
Mr SPEAKERHe may proceed.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN--In the course of answering a question during the Question Time which has just concluded, the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) misrepresented my position in respect of our participation in a

peacekeeping force in the Sinai. It is on record that the Australian Labor Party has always been anxious to obtain peace in the Middle East. It has never been our attitude that we did not want peace in the Middle East. I have been misrepresented in that we have always said that we wanted to see the establishment of a home for the Palestinians on the West Bank and that, until such time as that was done, there would not be any peace in the Middle East. It is a matter of record that, since our peacekeeping force has been in the Sinai, there has been nothing but war in the Middle East.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs well knows that, when the invasion of Lebanon took place on 6 June, I issued a statement suggesting that one way to provide sanctions against Israel would be to withdraw from the peacekeeping force. My reason is that the establishment of a peacekeeping force in the Sinai has protected the southern flank of Israel. It was a premeditated action by the Israeli Government to go into Lebanon once that force was established. It is the principle of the Camp David accords-if they had been appliedthat there be a home for the Palestinians on the West Bank. That has never been achieved. Until such time as the questioner and the Minister aver to that position, there will be no peace in the Middle East.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE SAFE TRANSPORT OF RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES (1982)
Ministerial Statement
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information and consideration of honourable members and in accordance with section 10 of the Environment Protection (Nuclear Codes) Act 1978, I now table the order signed by the Governor General on 29 April 1982 approving the Code of Practice for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Substances (1982). Copies of the code are also tabled. I seek leave to make a short statement.
Leave granted.
Mr McVEIGH-This Code is the second to be approved under the nuclear codes Act, the first being the Code of Practice on Radiation Protection in the Mining and Milling of Radioactive Ores (1980), which was tabled in the Parliament in September 1980. The Code adopts by reference the International Atomic Energy Agency's regulations for the safe transport of radioactive

470 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Transport ofRadioactive Substances

materials, with the modification that the standards for radiation protection are those recommended by the national health and medical research council. The International Atomic Energy Agency's regulations have been adopted in many countries and are the basis for existing regulatory arrangements in Australia. The major purpose of the Code is to provide for the protection of the people of Australia and the environment from possible harmful effects associated with the transportation of radioactive substances. Matters addressed in the Code include packaging and package design requirements, controls for the transport and storage in transit, and test and inspection procedures.
The Code was developed in consultation with the governments of the States and the Northern Territory and it has been made available for public comment. The Government anticipates its early adoption under State and Northern Territory legislation as appropriate. To assist the transport and mining industries and other interested parties in meeting the requirements of the Code, advisory material in the form of guidelines has been prepared and published separately. The Code will be revised and updated from time to time to ensure that it continues to embody the highest standards of protection.
Mr WEST (Cunningham)-by leave-As the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) has said, the Code of Practice for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Substances was tabled within the jurisdiction of the Environment Protection (Nuclear Codes) Act and is based upon provisions outlined by the International Atomic Energy Agency. There is no disagreement about the need to implement such a code. However, I point out that the Opposition considers that the Act is deficient because it depends, in an area of national responsibility, upon the implementation of State legislation. This means that the States first of all must agree completely to everything that is in the Code. There is no guarantee as to the timing of its implementation or uniformity as to the way in which it might be implemented or the way in which it would be policed.
The Commonwealth can act in these matters under the Environment Protection (Nuclear Codes) Act only in the case of an emergency. The States may make provisions relating to the regulation or control of nuclear activities but that is not set out as an obligation in the Commonwealth Act. That is the weakness of the Act. The Commonwealth can make regulations in its own right under the Environment Protection (Nuclear

Codes) Act only if requested to do so by a governor of a State. The point is that in these matters there is a need for a truly national code implemented by a national government to replace existing legislation. This Act fits in to the whole complex conglomeration of Federal and State legislation which sets out to control the nuclear industry. To illustrate what I mean, I shall quote briefly from a report from the office of the Government's own Supervising Scientist in the Northern Territory. It states:
The Supervising Scientist must perform his functions within a complex interlocking network of legislation and agreements. This is a reflection of the conflicts of interests aroused by mining developments in the Region and the need to reconcile Commonwealth control of uranium mining with regulatory responsibilities of the self-governing Northern Territory of Australia.
This Code of practice is dependent for its implementation on the States in an area where the Commonwealth really should have full jurisdiction. It should be fully implemented on a uniform and national basis. Schedule 5 of this Code relates to the transport of yellowcake. It is Government policy at the moment to push companies such as ERA, Western Mining and Pan-Continental into further mining developments despite the weakness of the international market and before it has adequately set up a proper method of national control of the various aspects of the industry, including transport.
I conclude on the subject of the economic instability which hangs over some of the proposed new mining developments. A recent report compiled by the Northern Territory Government itself casts doubt on the availability of long term sales contracts; for instance, that for a $650m development at the labiluka mine. This report states that production from labiluka will be 3,000 to 4,500 tonnes of yellowcake a year compared with current world consumption of about 33,000 tonnes a year and production of 55,000 tonnes a year. It also states that the oversupply is due to overprojection of uranium demand in 1980 and that prospects of uranium sales are extremely limited. It goes on to state that the prospects for large sales and new contracts of uranium from labiluka appear extremely gloomy unless the Commonwealth dramatically lowers its minimum export price or abandons the minimum pricing policy altogether. Further, it weakens its ability to reach acceptable international safeguards agreement arrangements and acts against setting up a proper framework on a national level to regulate all aspects of the industry not only including development, mining and environmental matters, but also transport. In short, the Code is all right, but I

Unemployment

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 471

very much doubt that it will be properly implemented.
UNEMPLOYMENT
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The collapse of the labour market and the Government's acceptance of the economic and social disasters associated with rising levels of unemployment.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number of members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (2.35)-ln this debate we will be dealing with a single most important and potentially dangerous issue confronting our country; that is, the total collapse of the labour market and the increasing permeation of our society by the devastating cancer of unemployment. This disaster is made the more unpalatable by two facts, both associated with the deceptive character of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) as revealed by separate statements made by him in 1975. Honourable members will recall that one of those statements was unequivocally that if he and his Government were returned to power at that time there would be jobs for all in this country. In the light of what was said in the Budget last night one will also recall what he said at that time. He said that what happened in this country was not to be blamed upon what was happening overseas, but was totally within the control of the Government of this country.
To be precise on this matter I will quote from the statement of Malcolm Fraser at an ANZAAS speech on 22 January 1975. It is a most memorable quote. This is what he had to say:
I do not believe that men and women are governed by inexorable events beyond their control. When political leaders say the present situation cannot be helped, it is part of a world situation, they are expressing the futility of their own leadership when if they were men of real stature they would be saying 'We can overcome'.
Mr Morris-Who said that?
Mr HAWKE-That was said by Malcolm Fraser in 1975. We have extensive and growing unemployment in this country today. Out of the mouth of the same man we are being told, 'No, we can't help it, because predominantly it is attributable to overseas events', which make this growing cancer even more unpalatable. Let me first of all

establish the facts both in respect of what has been happening to employment in this country and what has been happening on the other side of the coin to unemployment. Let us deal, firstly, with the employment situation. Between 1975-76 and 1981-82 there has been an increase of only 460,000 jobs in this country or an average annual rate of 80,000 or 1.2 per cent when the actual available labour supply has been increasing by 1.5 per cent. So clearly employment has been growing at a grossly inadequate rate. Since 1980 the annual growth in employment has shown a significant downward trend from rates of between 3 per cent and 3t per cent in the latter part of 1980 to less than a half per cent in the June quarter. The disastrous figure most recently available shows that over the year ended June 1982 the actual level of employment in this country fell; that is, there were less people in jobs in June 1982 than there were 12 months before in June 1981. In respect of the growth in employment that has, in fact, occurred over this longer period, the greatest rate of growth has been in part time employment. In fact, growth in employment is 46 per cent. This has been accounted for in part time jobs. What has happened with regard to employment for our young people? Over the six years to August 1981 the actual number of young people in full time employment fell by 14,500. That was a decline of 3 per cent in the period to August 1981. But since August of last year there has been a worsening of that situation at an alarming rate. During 1981-82 the number of full time jobs held by teenagers actually declined by 54,300, the stark fact being that at the end. of 1981-82, 54,300 fewer of our teenagers were in full time employment than 12 months earlier.
Very briefly, and necessarily briefly, in regard to a disastrous situation I turn to what has been happening on the employment front. We have seen the gradual deterioration, and now the collapse, of the employment market in this country. How has that been reflected in terms of unemployment? We have had a serious trend of underlying deterioration in unemployment statistics over the lifetime of the Fraser Government. In fact at this time the level of unemployment is 50 per cent worse than when this Governm<;nt took office at the end of 1975. But as disturbing as that steady deterioration in unemployment over the life of this Government has been, even more alarming has been the rapid deterioration in the year 1981-82. The June figure for unemployment was the highest mid-year figure since the end of the war and represented a worsening of the unemployment situation-in other words, a 28 per cent increase in unemployment from June 1981 to

472 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Unemployment

June 1982. The latest available figures, which are for July of 1982, show in seasonally unadjusted terms a level of just under 450,000-449,000 to be exact-which in seasonally adjusted terms represents a figure of 6.9 per cent.
Those are the officially recorded figures, but every economist in this country, irrespective of his point in the political spectrum-every independent economist-knows that the recorded unemployment is only part of the story and that the hidden unemployment makes it much worse. This is attested to by the statistical fact that the labour force participation rates have been declining generally over the last year. The level of 60.5 per cent in June of 1982 represents the lowest participation rate in more than a decade and is the clearest indication of the growth in hidden unemployment. I suggest again that no economist in this country, irrespective of his general political position, would in any way deny the fact that when we take hidden unemployment into account with the recorded unemployment the number of people in this country looking for jobs and for whom jobs are not available is well over 10 per cent. That is, worse than one in 10 people in this country who want to work do not have a job available for them.
Coming to the level of youth unemployment, the seasonally adjusted figure shows that in respect of our young people between the ages of 15 and 19 the figure is now 19 per cent. In other words, the stark, disastrous fact is that virtually one in five of our young people between the ages of 15 and 19 who want to get a full time job cannot do so in this economy. That is obviously a situation which is not to be measured simply in economic terms, a fact to which I will come in a moment.
Let me refer to the statistics of the duration of unemployment. Here again we have a stark worsening of the situation. In 1975 the average duration of unemployment was 13 weeks. That has deteriorated; the present average duration is now 30 weeks. Hard core unemployment in the sense of duration is now reaching massive proportions. The number out of work for more than six months has increased dramatically to almost 150,000 in June of 1982. That is, almost one-third of all those who are unemployed have now been unemployed for more than six months.
Having given as briefly as I can the factual situation as it is now, what do we say as to the future? We will find out the significance of what has happened in this Parliament today because the associated papers that were available last night with the Budget Speech of the Treasurer (Mr

Howard) went to this issue. If we turn to page 61 of Budget Paper No. I we find the proposition which states:
. . . that there is unlikely to be any growth in employment in 1982-83.
The paper refers to the decline in the participation rate and states:
. . . So, it is likely that there will be a marked increase in recorded unemployment this year.
But we then come to the figures which have been revealed in this House today. They are not as rubbery but they are as totally unacceptable at least to one Minister in the Government. Of course to his credit, as one would expect from this gentleman, there was not a preparedness to accept figures which, on their face, are outrageously unacceptable. What does this document say? It states:
Consistent with this assessment, and the assumed effect of the government manpower policies, the Budget estimates allow for the average number of unemployment benefit recipients to rise from an averag~ of 332,000 in 1981-82 to an average-
mark this-
of 395,000 in 1982-83.
What were the figures available last night, when these documents were put before this House, about the level of recipients of unemployment benefit in July? What was the latest figure? Let us remember that the Government said that the average unemployment figure for 1982-83 will be 395,000 but last night it was stated that the figure for July was 405,000. Already 405,000 people are unemployed in July 1982, and the Government is saying that unemployment will get worse. It is trying to delude this House and the people of Australia into believing that the average number of unemployed for 1982-83 will be less than the figure for July which is 10,000 above the average which it is trying to put forward. No wonder this Minister, to his credit and as one would expect from him, said today: 'I am not responsible for those figures'. So what has already been revealed in less than 24 hours of this Budget being handed down in this House is that one Cabinet Minister is conceding that there has been a misrepresentation to this House and to the people of Australia.
Mr TuckeyYou could do better--
Mr HAWKE-When we are not dealing with some peripheral matter about drains in some outback block in Western Australia, which is unfortunately misrepresented by the creature opposite, but are talking about the level of unemployment and about the tragedy of people not being able to work, what a tragedy it is that this Government in its Budget cannot do better than misrepresent the position in the way I have outlined.

Unemployment

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 473

In my speech on the Budget. I will deal with the gross inadequacies of the manpower training programs of this Government. At this point let me say simply that the Treasurer last night attempted to trumpet the fact that there is a 21 per cent increase in the Government's expenditure programs in the manpower and training areas. Let me put this statistic simply before the House. Even with that 21 per cent increase in money terms referred to last night, in the lifetime of this Government, between 1975-76 and 1982-83, there will be a 38 per cent drop in real terms in expenditure in this area. That statistic is irrefutable.
We also have a proposition that because of international forces we cannot do anything about unemployment. Let me give you, Mr Speaker, and the House, figures for the unemployment rates in the early part of this year in four countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. The unemployment rate in Austria was 3.2 per cent; in Norway 2 per cent; in Sweden 2.8 per cent; and in Japan 2.4 per cent. It is to be noted that all of those countries, in one form or another, have governments which are committed to the concept of indicative planning within the framework of prices and incomes policies. In other words, if a government is concerned about people, about young people, and about ensuring its resources are made available to provide employment this problem can be reduced to manageable proportions.
Finally, I come to the refusal of this Government to accept the proposition that it must embrace the concept of job creation programs. It steadfastly refused to do this on every occasion when the proposition was put about the Government undertaking the responsibility of establishing job creation programs to help reduce the level of unemployed and particularly the danger of unemployment amongst our youth. We always hear, as I put it, the calculators of the conservatives saying: 'But look at the cost'. We never hear those calculators talking about the costs of not having job creation programs or of the costs upon our health services, social security services and police services of allowing this growing cancer to spread in our society, particularly amongst our young people. The time has come when this Government should recognise the spread of this cancer which has arisen because of the Government's own ineptitude and callousness. We as a community should be led by a concerned and responsible government trying to eradicate that cancer which is increasingly, as I have said, not just an economic problem but also a social disease threatening the very fabric of our society.

Mr MACPHEE (Balac\ava~Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations) (3.1)~I will dispose of one matter which the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) made something of in his remarks. This concerns the Budget calculations of average numbers of unemployment beneficiaries. I think all honourable members will recognise that the key words are 'average' and 'unemployment beneficiaries'. Of course, not all of the persons who are shown as unemployed in the figures of the Australian Bureau of Statistics are in receipt of benefits. The Treasury and the Budget Papers are silent on the forecast of numbers of unemployed persons. The figure which I gave in my answer to a question without notice was an estimate of what I thought would be the situation, around February.
As we know the capacity to employ people rests very heavily on economic growth. A great deal rests also on the capacity to control those things which are within our influence such as wage movements and the reduction in working hours. One will have to say a little about the efforts that this Government has made to place the trade union movement in a position now to exercise wage moderation over the next 12 months to help the employment situation~both the retention of jobs and the creation of new jobs. Not very long ago the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced a package of measures designed to assist industry with investment thereby retaining employment and, in the course of time, increasing employment. As I mentioned in Question Time, we have in this Budget a number of job creation programs, through capital works programs, for work which is of a kind that we need~for example, airports, roads and so forth.
Mr Young~Job subsidisation!
Mr MACPHEE~ The honourable member interjects that we should be looking at job subsidisation programs.
Mr Young~ No, that is what you are doing.
Mr MACPHEE~ What we are doing is creating programs for airports, roads and welfare housing, which are programs of the kind which Australia needs and which will be of value to people, giving them longer term employment than would have been the case with the Regional Employment Development-type schemes. This plan will attempt to give people a level of skill to ensure that when those factors, external to our economy, turn around and lead to a partial recovery of our economy~aided I trust by wage restraint~we will have young people with requisite skills and work experience. The so-called RED schemes, the job creation schemes of the

474 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Unemployment

kind that the Australian Labor Party has advocated, are discredited. In 1980-
Mr Uren-Ask the local councils whether they want them.
Mr HawkeYour own department doesn't say that.
Mr MACPHEE-The experience was not a uniform experience and there are some parts of Australia where people regard those programs as having been successful. That is by no means a universal conclusion. If the honourable member for Wills or any other member of the Opposition wishes to put a detailed program to me for examination I will be pleased to look at it. I have tried to find a couple of speeches which the honourable member for Wills has made. In terms of the costs he has in fact spoken of fairly minimal costs and has looked at what he calls the overall wage costs. The costing which my department has been able to do, on the basis of what the honourable member has said, suggests that the gross cost would be around $730m a year. That is a very substantial addition to last night's quite necessary outlays.
Mr HawkeWhat about the net cost?
Mr MACPHEEThe minimum net cost, as I have been able to calculate it, is some $550m per annum. The Opposition has, in fact, estimated only $250m, ignoring a number of expenses which local authorities would have to meet, including the cost of materials. If the Opposition is serious about putting a job creation program on the table, we will be pleased to examine it and cost it. Having done that, I believe the conclusion most commentators would reach is that we are doing the best we can in a difficult situation. It is a difficult situation. The honourable member for Wills, in a number of speeches he has made outside the Parliament, has acknowledged that difficulty and has acknowledged the role of :!xternal factors.
I believe it is certainly not assisting the confidence of this country for everyone to be talking of a labour market collapse and for suggestions to be made-not today but elsewhere-by members of the Opposition about double digit unemployment. There is a psychological aspect about facing up to the labour market which this Budget is seeking to add~e~s in a positive way. I really think that the OPPosl~l?n ought to assist not only by accepting the realities of the difficulties facing the labour market but also by trying to enable those people in management and trade unions who can improve our competitiveness by their application to

their job to recognise that that and revived productivity growth are the answers for our long term employment.
It is a matter of deep concern to the Government-we have never denied it-that the momentum for employment growth, which we were quite pleased with until 1980-81, has now been lost. The financial year 1981-82 has seen unemployment grow by a little over one per cent over the previous year, compared with almost 3 per cent growth over the previous year, that is, 1980-81. With employment growth falling well short of the labour force growth, unemployment has obviously risen. The number of unemployed persons increased by 26,900 or 6.8 per cent over 1981-82, bringing the number to 419,700. This represents an unemployment rate of 6.2 per cent for 1981-82. In July 1982 the unemployment rate was 6.6 per cent compared with 5.5 per cent in 1981. They are the facts of the market situation which last night's Budget endeavoured to address, while still maintaining economic responsibility.
Mr Hawke-It is going to get worse, according to the Budget.
Mr MACPHEE-It is going to get worse according to the Budget and according to all the best estimates. What we have endeavoured to do in this Budget is adopt a package of measures which, in fact, meets the requests put to us by the Australian Council of Trade Unions and other bodies that came to us in pre-Budget discussions. We believe this package represents a combination of measures that will retain as much employment as possible and put us in a better position to take advantage of economic recovery on a world scale when it comes. Let us remember that our economy has been out of cycle to the better compared with world economies. Sadly, we are catching up to them in terms of unemployment. Unfortunately, our inflation rate is now exceeding that of a number of other countries.
It is reflecting that fact-the fact that we are in the grip of a world recession and that our own competitiveness is worsening rapidly-that the Budget forecast is for no growth in overall activity in the non-farm economy. We know that drought conditions may well act to pull down the overall gross domestic product in the year for which we are now budgeting. The Budget Papers indicate that employment is not expected to grow in 1982-83 and that unemployment will increase. Recognising those serious trends, we have tried in this Budget to cushion the labour market from further decline.
There are a number of initiatives which underpin activity and which will assist employment. Let

Unemployment

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 475

me itemise those very briefly. There is the reduction in personal income tax and other assistance for families. That clearly ought to assist people, especially lower income families. There is the assistance to home purchasers and to welfare housing-very practical measures which are very relevant to the subject of this debate. We have given more generous tax concessions for business. These had been announced before. They were announced earlier deliberately to prevent some of the employment shedding which we knew was about to occur. There are sizable real increases in the capital works. Several Ministers will be unfolding further details of those. Each of those capital works represents a considerable potential to employ people. Even so, we know that it is fairly peripheral to the need for economic growth and for restraint in our cost structure especially in the area of wages.
We have improved and expanded our manpower programs. These have a proven success record, to which I will come in a moment. If the Budget is to be successful then it requires employers to continue to retain staff where they can, to meet early retirement aspirations where they can and to meet part time and job-sharing arrangements where those meet the convenience of the employees and the employers. But a bit of imagination is required on both sides for that to be so. As well, it requires the trade union movement to moderate its wage claims and to remove altogether suggestions of reduced working hours. As a country we cannot return to strong employment growth while our inflation rate is well ahead of that of our trading partners. One of the major factors, but by no means the only one, is to do with hours reductions and wage movements in the past 18 months. The past is past; we are now endeavouring in the spirit of the 7 July conference to provide leadership across the board, regardless of some philosophical differences, to try to get a more sensible approach to the area of wage costs. Provided we can keep our costs under control I believe that we can be in a good position within this financial year to benefit from levels of investment which we can expect to accompany the expansion of the private sector.
I must emphasise that in framing this Budget we have had very much in mind the propositions which were put to us by the ACTU. We believed that the ACTU, like ourselves, understood the recent experiences in terms of wage costs and reduced working hours. We, in response to its log of claims made the substantial reduction in the burden of taxation on pay-as-you-earn taxpayers. We made those increases in family allowances and unemployment benefit. We gave interest relief on

housing and increased expenditure on employment and training programs especially for young people. The expenditure on a range of training programs has gone up from $206m last year to $250m this year. All of those things will give significant assistance to Australian families especially those in the lower and middle income brackets.
Mr Hawke-Mr Dolan did not seem to be too impressed.
Mr MACPHEE-No, he did not. But I understand that the ACTU has the matter under closer study today. I hope that a more measured comment will emerge. These decisions and the Government's submissions to wage fixation tribunals have set an environment which we believe is favourable to salary and wage restraint and therefore conducive to increased competitiveness on the part of our industries. In particular, we have also pursued wage restraint with our own employees. We will continue to do that. We have welcomed similar action by the private sector and by State governments. The approach taken by the number of trade union leaders and, indeed, by the honourable member for Wills in this regard has been consistent with an awareness of the need for wage moderation.
In this year's Budget, $254.7m has been allocated for employment and training programs compared with a total of $210. 5m in 1981-82 and just $116m two years earlier-that is 1979-80. The reasons for those figures reflect the Government's concern with growing unemployment. Whereas we had a situation of employment growth two years ago and we now have none we have attended to that by a variety of measures specifically focusing on employment and training and on the range of other social and public expenditure matters that I have referred to. This increase of more than $44m altogether on the range of training programs is a positive response by the Government to recent developments in the labour market. To have added to the Budget figure a total of $550m or thereabouts-as estimated by our costing, at least, of the job creation program of the honourable member for Wills-would have made it an irresponsible Budget. We were not prepared to do that in economic terms because it could only worsen the state of inflation, and therefore our competitiveness and capacity to employ people.
The 1982-83 allocation demonstrates the Government's full commitment to helping young people and other disadvantaged people including adult persons who are disemployed as a result of

476 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Unemployment

the downturn in our economy. Some of those persons choose to retire but those who seek retraining will have programs available to them. We are satisfied that the work experience programs have been very effective and successful. The record of persons being able to find and retain jobs as a result of going through the Special Youth Employment Training Program, the apprenticeship programs, the School to Work Transition Program and work experience programs we believe justifies their continuation and funding at the levels contained in the Budget. We believe that these schemes, together with the Community Youth Support Scheme and others that have been announced, take account of the needs of people and that they represent a very responsible result in what is a very difficult budgetary situation.
MrYOUNG (Port Adelaide) (3.16)-Nothing exposes the fallacy about members of the Government, the Liberal and National Country parties, being the great economic managers more than this debate today on unemployment. They told us that everybody would work as long as the Australian people elected them to govern in November 1975. A series of Ministers-but only one Prime Minister-has continually told us for seven long years, for seven Budgets, that all we had to do was keep them in government and there would be work for all who wanted to work. There has been a whole series of quotations by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), from the very first time that he was elected as Prime Minister in November 1975 until recently, about the job opportunities that would be available for the Australian people. But this Government will still not admit what is happening in Australia. It will still not tell us exactly what is going on in industry in Australia.
The Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) did not mention that he had a visit from industry leaders this morning telling him about the way in which industry in Australia is being absolutely crippled. He told us at Question Time that the estimates of his Department were that the unemployment level would be 8 per cent in February 1983. I respect the Minister's word greatly. I do not respect the word of many of his colleagues. But I can tell him that no one in Australia believes that only 8 per cent of the work force will be unemployed in February 1983. The most optimistic estimate, if one likes to put it that way, is 10 per cent. Even the Secretary to the Minister's Department is being quoted around Canberra as estimating a 10 per cent level of unemployment in February 1983. Industry leaders who met with the leaders of the Australian

Labor Party in the last two weeks have put the estimate as high as 14 per cent unemployed in 1983.
Since 1975 we have continually asked that committees of this Parliament be established to look at the dangers of unemployment and the way in which jobs are being eradicated from industry, not on a temporary basis but permanently. Jobs are disappearing and never coming back. The Opposition does not have access to all the information the Government has. The Government has far greater avenues to all the information from the industry leaders around Australia on what is occurring to employment opportunities. We know that each year we have to establish at least 120,000 to 130,000 new jobs just to maintain unemployment at the present rate. If we want to keep unemployment down to 6.5 per cent, the present figure, we have to create 130,000 new jobs in the next twelve months.
In wrestling if a person wants to give in he taps the mat. Last night the Government tapped the mat on unemployment. It said there would be no new jobs in 1982-83. Not one new job will be created in the Australian economy. After seven years all these great economic managers could tell us last night was that inflation is going up because of the increase in indirect taxes, interest rates will go up because inflation is going up and unemployment will go up by 200,000. At least 650,000 people will be registered as unemployed early in 1983 as a result of having seven years of these great economic managers! God, we were lucky to have them! Parties are being held all over Australia to celebrate the announcement of John Howard last night, the seventh great statement by this Liberal-National Country Party Government! Its members are the only people who were born to rule; they are the only people who could possibly have achieved all these pinnacles of economic achievement: The highest interest rates we have ever had; the highest unemployment and almost the highest inflation that this country has ever seen!
There is no glimmer of hope at all in the statement made last night. [he Government is just hoping that the newspapers each day will run the charts showing people how much they will save in November. But what does an unemployed person save? For seven years people under 18 years of age who have been unemployed have received unemployment benefit payments of $36. Last night they were told they would receive $40. After seven years of double digit inflation we have increased the unemployment benefit by $4. This Government does not give a damn about the unemployed and never has. There has never been a

Unemployment

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 477

sign that any of its policies aimed at the unemployed have been to do other than try to smother the debacle which has been caused by its economic policies in that seven-year period.
Every member of this House, even the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly), as simple as he is, would understand that industries are closing down in every electorate represented in this House. In every electorate we go into people are being laid off, given redundancy notices or offered voluntary retirement at 50 years of age. All this is happening in Australia and the Government says: 'Well, just wait a while. Sooner or later it will come good.' The fact is that domestically we are in the midst of a recession which is picking up a momentum that no one could have foreseen. The Government does not have any of the strategies that are required to deal with the sorts of problems with which we are confronted. It has not one idea of what is occurring.
For the sake of honourable members just let me rattle off some examples. At Kwinana in Western Australia there has been an increase of 400 in the number of people unemployed. In Wollongong it is just about depression period as Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd has announced that it will reduce its work force by about 5,000. In Newcastle there has been an increase of 2,000 in the number of unemployed people. This has all occurred in the last few months. Members of the Government do not seem to understand the situation. Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd announced a reduction in its work force of 1,300 over the next six months. Last week the State Dockyard in Newcastle announced a reduction of 500. The metal trades industry, which 12 months ago made an agreement with the metal workers union based on what it thought would be a strong pick-up in the economy, has reduced its work force by almost 4 per cent. This reduction has been right across the board in the metal trades industry throughout the country. It has not been only in the unskilled and semi-skilled areas; many of those now unemployed are tradesmen. To layoff boilermakers, pattern-makers and fitters was unheard of in Australia's history. All these people are now on the dole yet this Government tells us that it will increase funding for the Community Youth Support Scheme to around $19m. There is no way that will remedy the sort of recession conditions that employment is going through at the moment. It is like putting a band-aid on a broken leg. The Government will not solve the problems with the sorts of schemes that have come up once again in the statement made last night. All over Australia the same thing is occurring. It is expected that about 3,000 jobs will be lost from the metal trades

industry. At least 10 per cent or 12 per cent of the people disappearing from the industry are tradesmen.
I want to raise the problems with which we will be confronted. Not only did we ask in this House for a committee to be established to look at employment problems in Australia, but also we asked for a committee to be established in the House of Representatives to look at the impact of immigration. We said that the Parliament should make decisions with regard to immigration in a bipartisan way. The Government refused the Opposition the opportunity to look at these things. Now what do we find? We are bringing into Australia 120,000 people, approximately 48,000 or 50,000 of whom want to enter the work force. What does it mean to bring in 50,000 people at a time when the Government, by its own admission, says that not one extra job will be created in Australia? We can run a successful immigration program in this country only with the support of the people who already live in the country. If we try to defy their wishes they will reject us out of hand. There is no way in the world that the Australian people, having heard the statement of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) last night about employment opportunities, will welcome a decision to bring another 50,000 people, at least half of whom are almost totally unskilled, into this country.
There are other measures that should be tightened up by this Government. We understand from figures given to us that the number of visitors legally in Australia but working illegally may be as high as 30,000. The number of people illegally in Australia-those who have overstayed their visitors' permits and who must be suspected of working in order to keep themselves-is between 40,000 and 50,000 at the moment. There are 10,000 people working for multinational companies. We believe many of their jobs could be taken by Australians. There are 16,000 working holiday makers-a loose way of using disguised immigration. Almost 100,000 jobs have been taken by those people. It is time the whole scheme was tightened up.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo) (3.27)-Before supporting what the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) h~s said, I draw attention to some of the remarks made by Opposition speakers. The last comment made by the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) was rather astonishing and, as usual, can be attributed to his natural knack of stretching the

478 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Unemployment

truth or making the cloth to suit the occasion. He said that 50,000-odd extra people would be coming on to the unemployment list under the family reunion guarantee scheme. He knows quite well-if he does not, he should-that under the family reunion scheme people must have a job guarantee before they are allowed to enter the country. The Opposition proposes to increase the number of family reunion migrants with no guarantee of a job. The honourable member was saying that what the Government was doing, in his interpretation, was wrong and that it was his philosophy that he was espousing. We understand why the honourable member is still making such comments.
The honourable member also called for an explanation of what has happened. He said that the Government had not enlightened him as to what was happening in this country. He went on to spell out some of the facts about the levels of unemployment. Of course, everybody is aware of those levels. But we are also aware of what, in many cases, has been the cause of those problems. I suggest that not only economic problems are causing unemployment. I suggest that honourable members opposite consider the effect that their own organisation, the trade union movement, may have had on Australian industry over the years, particularly during the 10 years that the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) was head of it. I recall that during that time we had the introduction of a 17.5 per cent loading on holiday pay for three weeks annual leave.
The unions have fought desperately hard to destroy service industries in this country. Strange as it may seem, every industry in this country is not a manufacturing industry. There are in this country industries related to tourism which are absolutely vital and which employ many thousands of people. Yet how many restaurants are open seven days a week? How many places which provide a service to people can afford to have people working for them for the extra time because of the high penalty rates imposed by the trade union movement? The unions press heavily for a reduction in working hours but not a reduction in pay to match those working hours. I am sure that the honourable member for Wills, who is a fair man, would be the first to acknowledge that if working hours are reduced to 35 hours a week for the same pay packet as a 40-hour week, only two things can occur. The first one is to cause-
Mr Young-That is what you did.
Mr BOURCHIER--I was talking to the honourable member for Wills, the intelligent member of the Australian Labor Party. He would

acknowledge that if working hours are reduced to 35 a week, the employer's costs rise markedly-if he keeps the same salary structure-and productivity goes down. What is the answer to that? The honourable member for Port Adelaide has sought a response. If employers wish to stay in business and keep jobs for the majority of employees, they have to stand people down. If the Opposition is fair dinkum and genuine about its concern for the unemployed it should not say that it thinks the Government is wrong and that the Government must do something. It should come forward with a proposal of its own that it can take to the trade unions. If the Opposition were on this side of the House it would only exacerbate the situation because it is under the control of the unions.
Let us be honest. If the Opposition wanted to do something proper, it would allow the honourable member for Wills, a former leader of the trade union movement, to tell Australia that if the trade union movement were prepared to take away the 17.5 per cent loading, to do away with penalty rates, to seek a fu1l40-hour working week and to try to chase higher productivity every time it sought a wage increase instead of doing the reverse-the honourable member for Wills is so interested that he is yawning; the rest of the people in Australia at least will be taking note of it-Australia would benefit in the long term. As a
former president of the trade union movement, the honourable member for Wills should be leading this call. This is a matter for the whole of the community, not just for the Government. It involves government, employers, trade unions and, last but perhaps not least, the Labor Party working for the benefit of Australia.
To suggest that this Government is not doing anything is utterly ridiculous. At least we have brought in positive measures. The honourable
member for Wills has proposed the reintroduction of a scheme similar to the old Regional Employment Development Scheme. It must be hard to get the message home to the Labor Party. It introduced the RED Scheme in 1974. Bearing in mind that wages were approximately $120 a week in those days, the cost of funding the RED Scheme rose to over $200 per person. It was such a major success that the Labor Party wiped it out the next year! It was there for one year and was a total failure. The Labor Party has the gall to say the Scheme was a success. I understand that. Neither the honourable member for Wills nor the honourable member for Port Adelaide was a member of this place in 1974 when the Scheme was introduced. Had they been, the Scheme may have had extra points to make it succeed. But it

Unemployment

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 479

certainly did not succeed under the Labor Party regime.
The Minister has outlined broadly what this Government has done. I will demonstrate some of those points. I hope that the honourable member for Wills in his generosity will at least be fair enough to acknowledge that this Government has donea lot over the last few years to try to help in the training of young people and to try to assist those who are unemployed. It is no good for us to put our heads in the sand. It is acknowledged that this is a huge and growing problem. The answer is not to run around saying how bad it is. The answer is to say: What can we do about it? This Government has been positive. Included in the unemployment programs which the Minister has introduced and to which he has successfully allocated much greater funds in this Budget are the manpower and training programs, the total allocation for which is up 21 per cent to $254.7m compared with $21O.5m in 1981-82. More than 252,000 people will be assisted under those programs. That is not insignificant. Even the honourable member for Wills would not~
Mr Hawke~A 38 per cent reduction in real terms since you have been in government.
Mr BOURCHIER~ There are 252,000 young people being trained for jobs~a very significant effort on the part of the Government and an 18 per cent increase over the previous year. The Government has significantly increased the benefit for work experience programs. There is a $20 per week increase in the Special Youth Employment Training Program standard subsidy from $55 to $75 a week. The extended SYETP subsidy has been increased by $20 to $100 a week. There has been a 33 per cent increase in the annual intake of SYETP trainees into Commonwealth establishments, commencing on I January 1983. There are 74,200 approvals under work experience programs expected during the year~a 44 per cent increase. The Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice Full-time Training has been adjusted to take account of full wage increases over the last two years, with an additional 10 per cent to encourage employers to take on apprentices. Total expenditure on the CRAFT scheme will be raised by $5.3m to $84m. Expenditure on skills training is to be increased by 29 per cent to $21 m. These are programs that have been brought in by a government that cares. For the Opposition to say that the Government is taking no action is utterly ridiculous.
There are major improvements in the area of benefits and allowances particularly for young people who are receiving the unemployment

benefit or are participating in the Secondary Allowance Scheme or the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme. The maximum TEAS rate payable has been increased to $38.65 a week. Also, we have arranged to bring in a loan scheme to provide extra money on very generous terms for those who may require it to help them get through their school training. The maximum amount payable under the SAS has increased to $16.75. This substantially increases the incentive for young people from low income families to remain at school. The family income test associated with the TEAS allowance and the SAS has been relaxed. In addition to this, major changes to other areas of education and social security benefits include the increase in the basic non-indexed rate of unemployment benefit for persons 18 years and over without dependants to $64.40 a week.
These developments hardly reflect the actions of a government which has, in the words of the matter of public importance, accepted 'the economic and social disasters associated with rising levels of unemployment'. The reverse is the fact. This Government has taken very strong and positive measures to do all within its power. But that is not the end of it. It is not as if we have said 'this is it'. I know that under the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations we will come forward with even more assistance and do everything we can as a government to help people obtain jobs and overcome the problem.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
PETITIONS
The Clerk~Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Taxation
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that whereas the current rates of personal income tax are onerous and destructive of personal incentive, particularly since the cessation of income tax indexation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government formerly call upon the Parliament assembled to legislate such changes to the current taxation law as will~
raise the minimum level at which income tax is first payable to at least $4,500,
proportionately increase the figures at which the higher rates of tax attract,
allow taxpayers to claim the full amount for each item within the Concessional Expenditure Rebate, and
adjust the rates of tax payable so that no higher rate of tax is payable than fifty percent of income earned.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

480 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Petitions

by Mr Sinclair, Mr Birney, Mr Cadman, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Dobie, Dr Klugman and MrMoore.
Petitions received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The heart-rending loss of homes by home purchasers, due to an expanding holocaust of interest rates caused by, and to quote the manager of a \eading bank (26.4.81) "with the growing competition for savings, depositors are looking for higher interest returns on deposits. In order to retain our depositors and to meet the increased costs payable on deposits and operating expenses, it is necessary to raise income from loans of all types, including House Loans."
Therefore it becomes transparently clear that the constant edging up of interest rates for investors by banks, lending institutions, and banking consortiums are collectively responsible for the monetary explosion, lack of employment and all that that entails and is causing grave social disruption to hundreds of thousands. Behind it all, the absence of control that is now politically essential in the interest of justice and fair distribution of burden.
Your petitioners therfore humbly pray that your House urge all politicians to unite nationally to do all within their power to reduce interest rates across the board.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That high interest rates are ruinous to the economy and disastrous to home buyers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government take positive action to reduce high interest rates.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Burr.
Petition received.
University of Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth that: The students and staff of the University of Queensland express their dismay at the lack of adequate federal government funding to our University, which has resulted, inter alia, in the erosion of our library facilities-we note that:
The opening hours of our main library have been reduced from 93t hours a week in 1975 to 72 hours a week in 1982.
The number of new books purchased per year has fallen from over 50,000 in 1976 to under 23,000 in 1981.
The number of books in storage and inaccessable to students and staff has risen from none in 1977 to over 40,000 in 1981.
The number of books discarded in 1976 was over 6,000- -by the end of 1981 over 70,000 had been discarded.

We believe this to be educationally retrograde and economically wasteful.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that government funding levels be increased to a level sufficient to allow the University to restore our previous library facilities.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Donald Cameron and Dr Everingham.
Petitions received.
Excise on Wine
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That any sales tax or excise on Australian wine would adversely affect employment in the wine industry, place a disproportionate burden on grapegrowers and ensure a larger future surplus of grapes;
the reduction in the demand for wine will also threaten the existence of many wine producers and reduce the range, quality and variety of wines offered in the market.
Your petitioners therfore humbly pray that the Australian Government will reject any proposals for a sales tax or excise on Australian wine.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie and Mr Wilson.
Petitions received.
Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Federal Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the humble petitioners respectfully believe that the recent report of the World Council of Churches team which visited Australia, 15 June to 3 July 1981, emphasises the central importance of land rights to the Aboriginal people.
And noting that all attempts by white Australians to manage Aboriginal affairs for them have failed.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Federal Government will accept its responsibility and use its powers under the Constitution to over-ride racist state legislation, particularly to provide Land Rights with freehold title, and
That in addition the Government fulfil its stated policy of self-determination and self-management for Aboriginal people, by funding all housing, health, education, legal, employment strategy and welfare matters concerning Aboriginal people directly through Aboriginal Community-based Community-controlled organisations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Ethnic Broadcasting
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of Australia do humbly pray that the Australian Government extend the services of Channel 0/28 to cover in the first instance the metropolitan area and ultimately the rest of the State of South Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Petitions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 481

by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That adequate Federal funding be provided for children's services and that this funding be increased to cover increases in the cost of living.
That policy decisions about the future of children's services only be made in full consultation with the providers and users of these services.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Satellite Communications System
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth.
I. that the elimination of the Public Service, namely Telecom and Australia Post and the handing of the countries communication system to multi-national corporations: TNT Packers' Publishing and Broadcasting, ITT IBM Joint members of the newly formed BTS Busines Telecommunication Systems is condemned.
2. that the facility of the proposed communications Satellite is to communicate with Pine Gap and other US installations and will furthermore mean the elimination of thousands of Telecom and Postal workers jobs. As the Satellite is only an alternative to the Telecom terrestrial system in the hands of big business.
3. that the pattern of the take-over of Australia's Communication System is taking the system out of the hands of the Australian people, and is identical to the activities of these corporations directed by the CIA in Chile, Iran, Equador and EI Salvador.
Your Petitioners strongly urge that the Communications system remains a Public utility and that the elimination of jobs and handing the system to big business stop and your Petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown.
Petition received.
Proposed Student Loans Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the introduction of a comprehensive student loans scheme will:
I. Restrict Access to Education People from poorer backgrounds will be deterred from
studying by the prospect of incurring large debts. These people, if they enrol, will be forced to amass loan debts. Richer students do not face this handicap.
2. Undermine the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme TEAS should cover the basic living costs of students. Cur-
rently the scheme only assists 38% of full-time students and the maximum level of TEAS is a mere $49.67. Government statements indicate TEAS will be further downgraded if loans are introduced.
3. Disadvantage Women

Women students would be disadvantaged by a loans scheme as they have a lesser ability to repay loan debts, because on average women earn less and have a higher unemployment rate.
4. Disadvantage Mature-Age Students Usually mature age students forgo income to study and
already have large financial commitments. They could not return to study if it meant incurring substantial debts.
5. Distort Educational Choices Mounting loan debts would force students into studying
shorter courses or not continuing with post-graduate study.
6. Result in Massive Attrition Rates Students will attempt to undertake extensive part-time
work or overload courses to minimise their loans. Increased failure rates will result forcing students to "drop-out" rather than continuing study and increase their debts.
7. Cause Administrative and Financial Difficulties Overseas experience shows high default rates will occur on
student loans. Government money will be channelled away from TEAS to paying off banks. The government will also bear the administrative burden of pursuing defaulters.
Therefore, the proposed student loans scheme will have disastrous effects on tertiary education, which we believe benefits the whole community, not just the individual student.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
The House of Representatives will reject the introduction of a student loans scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro-electric developments in South West Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern.
Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the South West of Tasmania but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. This is a national issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resulting from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie.
Petition received.
Immigration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens showeth:
That we protest at breakdowns in our Restrictive Immigration policy which, many senior members of our parliament had vigorously supported in their past promises to the Australian people.
We urge the Government to accede, not only to the wishes of the majority, as expressed in all public opinion polls, but also to act in accordance with their own statements. For example:
I. "We want one Australian people, one Australian Nation. "-Mr McMahon.

482 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Petitions

2. 'The avoidance of difficult social problems following an influx of people having different standards of living." ALP policy 72.
3. "I believe we should do all in our power to prevent the build up of ethnic groups within Australia."-Mr MacKellar.
4. "Our policies reflect the firm and unshakeable determination of the Government to maintain a homogeneous society, a society that is essentially undivided and free of avoidable tensions."--Dr Forbes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrDobie.
Petition received.
Australian-USSR Relations
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. the refusal to grant visas to allow Soviet citizens to visit Australia and
2. the suspension of the Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the USSR on Cultural Co-operation are adversely affecting many vital areas of public concern.
We would instance:
I. A continuation of government to government tension will have a negative effect on Australian-USSR relations in scientific, cultural, academic, sport, trade and other relations.
2. This continued tension in Australian-USSR relations will greatly affect mutual understanding and threaten future prosperity in Australia.
3. Various countries with which Australia has very close relations such as USA, Britain and Canada do not have the restrictions at present in operation in Australia.
4. The value of maintaining a flow of cultural, educational, sporting and general social exchanges with the USSR will add a contribution to the quality of our national life.
5. The need to resume joint research projects and reciprocal exchanges in science and academic pursuits demands urgent action.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that, in the interests of international accord and mutual benefit, the Australian Government will lift visa restrictions on Soviet citizens wishing to enter Australia and undertake the steps necessary to resume exchanges as set out in the official Protocol for Cultural Co-operation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFry.
Petition received.
Proposed Sale of Belconnen Mall and Fruit and Vegetable Markets, Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The decision of the Liberal Government to sell the Belconnen Mall and the Canberra Fruit and Vegetable Retail Markets: takes from the people of Canberra a community-owned asset that has been developed at no cost to the Commonwealth; and is contrary to the interests of the people of Canberra.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will act to prevent the sale of the Belconnen Mall and the Fruit and Vegetable Markets.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFry.
Petition received.
World War I Veterans: Rail Concessions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of Australia shows:
That World War I veterans resident in the ACT are effectively discriminated against receiving free 1st class Commonwealth rail travel as certain concessions for World War I veterans to travel on NSW rail services do not apply to ACT residents.
That the number of ACT residents who could avail themselves of the Commonwealth rail concession only number about 90, of whom at least 55 per cent are totally disabled.
That justice and fair tribute would be done to World War I veterans for the NSW rail concession to be extended to ACT residents particularly since the majority are former members of the famous New South Wales Light Horse and Infantry Regiments.
Your petitioners therefore pray that action be taken to enable the Commonwealth and NSW Governments to reach agreement on extending 1st class rail travel in NSW to ACT resident World War I veterans.
by Mr Fry.
Petition received.
Wine Industry
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
(a) that wine is a beverage of moderation whose use especially in conjunction with food may be beneficial to the consumer.
(b) that per capita consumption of alcohol in Australia has stabilised at 9.6 litres per head, the same as the average over the past eight years.
(c) that the low retail price of wine in Australia has been brought about by a number of factors including an oversupply of grapes and grape products.
(d) that if the price of wine is increased due to factors outside the control of grape growers, wine makers and retailers, sales of wine will be reduced.
(e) that the consequent fall in the demand for grapes coupled with the reduced wine production will affect employment and incomes, particularly in rural areas.
(f) that Australian brandy continues to lose market share to other spirits.
Your petitioners therefore most humbly pray that the Government consider and appreciate the complexities of the widely-spread Australian Wine Industry and be aware that any Government impost will cause further imbalance between the supply of and the demand for grapes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrGiles.
Petition received.

Petitions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 483

Down's Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
"The important wish of the people, to make possible the treatment of Downs-Syndrome (Mongolism) children, to be treated in Australia by the Sicco-cell Therapy. This treatment is now available in Germany and many parents have undertaken the long and expensive tour to Germany. Nearly everyone involved in personal experience is enthusiastic about the results, however the Australian Authorities have not given permission to make this treatment available in Australia."
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you give this important treatment your full attention, even if possible on a trial basis. It would make it possible for every affected child to receive the treatment.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Steele Hall.
Petition received.
Parliament: Prayers
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
That as Australia is now a pluralist society with people following many religions or having no religion the practice of opening sessions of Parliament with Christian based prayers is repugnant to many Australians.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should respond to our plea and discontinue the practice of opening Parliament with prayers. Your petitioners most humbly suggest that in the place of prayers be one minute's silence for private prayer or contemplation according to the inclination of each member of Parliament.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Harris.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(a) the export of live animals for slaughter overseas and (b) the shipment of live horses to Japan sentences such ani-
mals to cruel and inhumane treatment in the export process and at the hands of foreign importers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to ban the export of live animals for food and allow only carcass trade.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Slaughter of Marine Mammals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth that:
I. Since the Australian Whale Protection Act 1980 provides for the banning of importation into Australia of all whale by-products, and

2. the Prime Minister has stated that he and his Government support the international banning of whaling,
3. then consistent with (I) and (2), this Government should immediately legislate to ban the importation of all marine mammal by-products, including the harp seal of Canada, and
4. through the Australian delegate in the United Nations General Assembly, the Prime Minister should state his Government's support for an international ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal for commercial reasons.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that consistent with legislation on whaling, this Government should ban the importation of marine mammal by-products and support an international ban on slaughter of any marine mammal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimental purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States, there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the number of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purposes; and
(b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, Industry and Educational Research Laboratories; and
(c) that in the absence of uniform legislation between States, the Commonwealth introduce legislation to enable the enforcement of humane and responsible conduct for researchers.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Broadcasting and Television Act
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That because television and radio-
(a) affect our social and moral environment, (b) are family media watched and heard by many children
at all times, and (c) present too much explicit violence and sex,
they therefore need stronger control than other media and the existing standards need stricter enforcement in both national A.B.C., and commercial sectors.

484 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Petitions

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray: That the Australian Government will amend the Broadcasting and Television Act, in relation to both national and commercial broadcasters, to legislate-
(a) for adequate and cOP.1prehensive programs in the best interests of the general public,
(b) for a 'Dual System of Regulation' enforced by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal by internal regulation and external control,
(c) for an independent consumer body to represent the best interests of the general public, and
(d) for immediate and effective penalties to be imposed for breaches of program and advertising standards.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Klugman.
Petition received.
Taxation and Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the present taxation system is unjust, and is creating unnecessary hardship to pensioners and persons on the lower income levels. A pensioner now has to pay tax on income of only four dollars above the single rate of pension. Tax starts at seventy eight dollars, at thirty two cents in the dollar. This is far too high a tax level to low income persons in Australia.
Funeral money saved is now taxed, money saved for emergency needs and house repairs, as well as our life savings which has already been taxed once is being taxed again by the present Parliament. Again causing frustration and hardship to pensioners and retired persons.
The foregoing facts impel your petitioners to ask the Australian Government as a matter of urgency to-
I. Make all pensions non taxable not just some. 2. Lower the rate in the dollar of taxation for lower in-
come levels. 3. All pensioners be allowed other income of at least forty
dollars before losing any part of their pension. 4. Fringe benefits be available to all pensioners not some.
And your petitioners in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Klugman.
Petition received.
Funding of Child Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled in Canberra.
We the undersigned, call upon your Government to advise and authorise the Treasurer to guarantee adequate funds in the August budget of 1982 to finance:
(a) Maintenance and extension of pre-school child care; (b) Tax deductibility allowance for pre-school child care; (c) Initiate and fund a movement to develop awareness
and to alleviate the causes of child brutality and child abuse.
For this, your petitioners will continue to pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Immigration
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and the Honourable Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament

assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Commonwealth of Australia, respectfully showeth:
That we are deeply concerned that the present and projected rate of non-European immigration will result in Australia suffering the same type of racial and cultural friction being experienced by some other countries;
And that in view of the widespread opposition to nonEuropean immigration with its far-reaching implications concerning the future of Australia and its institutions;
And because the people of every nation have the natural right to determine which migrants they shall accept;
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will agree to electors having the opportunity to express their view on the present immigration policy at a national referendum to be held in conjunction with the next elections.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Young.
Petition received.
National Highway, North Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of North Queensland respectfully showeth:
That the National Highway is the responsibility of the Federal Government,
The Bruce Highway in North Queensland is of inferior standard for a National Highway,
Queensland has suffered a 15 per cent disadvantage over other States during the past ten years in road funding,
And the state of the Highway is deteriorating as maintenance expenditure is insufficient to maintain even the present standard.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament will allocate sufficient expenditure, to raise the standard of the National Highway in North Queensland to Department of Transport standards, in conjunction with the Queensland Government, within ten years.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite.
Petition received.
Proserpine Post Office, Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Dawson Electorate of North Queensland respectfully showeth:
That Post Offices are the responsibility of the Federal Government,
The Proserpine Post Office has inadequate access for a large number of the community,
Mothers with prams, babes in arms and toddlers, invalid and old age pensioners, and paraplegics, are further incapacitated by the steep gradient of the Post Office steps.
Your petitioners humbly pray that Parliament will allocate sufficient funds to allow tenders to be called for the design and erection of a ramp in a suitable place adjacent to the Post Office for the unlimited access by the Proserpine community and its visitors, within the next 12 months.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite.
Petition received.

Petitions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 485

Great Northern Highway, Kimberley Region
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned residents of the Kimberley humbly petition the House of Representatives to urgently allocate funds for the immediate upgrading of the Great Northern Highway in the Kimberley to an all weather sealed highway and pray that the following matters might be considered in relation thereto:
(a) The grave hardship caused to the many residents of the Kimberley due to the Great Northern Highway annually being impassable by road transport resulting in the towns of Kununurra, Wyndham, Halls Creek and Fitzroy Crossing and the community of Turkey Creek being without adequate food supplies for periods of sometimes in excess of one month.
(b) That this portion of the Great Northern Highway is the last portion which is unsealed and which does not provide an all weather link and we are, therefore, the only residents of Australia who are on a major highway system which is regularly inundated.
(c) Current allocations and plans do not provide for the upgrading of this highway to be completed in under six years.
(d) There is great defence and strategic importance in having an all weather highway system into the North of Western Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Pensions of Italian Immigrants
To the Speaker and Honourable Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled.
The petition of the undersigned residents of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Australian Government take urgent steps to formulate and approve a Social Security Agreement with the Italian Government based on the rights and the needs of Italian immigrant workers in Australia.
Moreover, with the present petition we request that the following important questions related to the pensions of Italian immigrants be urgently resolved within such an agreement; in particular we request:
1. That Italian Immigrants who have gained the right to Australian pensions and are no longer resident in Australia be given the opportunity to apply for and obtain the pension without having to return to Australia.
2. That periods of residence in Australia of less than ten years presently required by the Australian legislation be considered for some entitlement to the Australian pension.
3. That the issue concerning the unfair reduction applied to the pension of Australian residents who are receiving an Italian pension be resolved.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Telephone Services in Remote Areas
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Hallett in the electorate of Grey respectfully showeth:

Subscribers in the Subscribers Connecting Automatic Exchange areas of Willalo and Hallett Gap and those directly connected to the Hallett exchange are experiencing difficulties in making telephone calls due to the low number of lines presently available.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that more lines be made available to the SCAX areas Willalo and Hallett Gap along with extra National lines at the Hallett Exchange to enable a better service to be provided for the subscribers of this area.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Wallis.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition ofresidents of the Illawarra area respectfully showeth:
That Federal funding of children's services which has been reduced by almost 50 per cent in real terms over the last five years should be restored forthwith to at least 1975-76 level in real terms so that children's services can be more equitably provided throughout Australia.
That current plans to impose a means test on the users of child care services will place them out of the reach of the bulk of the users and should be dropped forthwith.
That urgent and positive action be taken by the Federal Government to improve both the quality and the qljantity of child care provision in the Illawarra area of N.S.W. in full consultation with community groups.
That pri"rity be given to provision of multipurpose flexible child care services responsive to the diverse needs in the region particularly those of shiftworkers and ethnic communities.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr West.
Petition received.
INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT AMENDMENT BILL (No.4) 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.42)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill to amend the income tax law covers a range of subjects. It contains amendments to effect income tax exemptions for certain foreign pensions payable in consequence of persecution during the Second World War. The proposal announced on 23 July 1982 to exempt profits from the sale or redemption of discounted securities acquired on or before 30 June 1982 is also being given statutory expression. Exemption is being provided for income derived by the Phosphate Mining Company of Christmas Island Limited. Some extensions of the gift provisions, foreshadowed in recent announcements, are being made. Amendments foreshadowed on 9 February

486 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.4)

1982 to deal with further tax avoidance arrangements of the expenditure recoupment type are included. Other provisions of the Bill will clarify the operation of anti-avoidance provisions enacted in 1978 to deal with schemes which circumvent the sufficient distribution requirements for private companies. Finally, a minor amendment to the secrecy provisions of the income tax law concerning the supply of information to the Australian Statistician is also being made. I turn now to the details of these measures.
Foreign Pensions Related to War-time Persecution
On 3 March 1982, I announced the Government's intention to extend an existing exemption of pensions paid from the Federal Republic of Germany to Australian residents in compensation for Nazi persecution. The Bill will extend the exemption so that it applies to payments of pensions from the Federal Republic where the entitlement arises wholly or partly because periods of Nazi persecution, or flight from such persecution, have been treated as periods during which the recipient contributed to the Republic's pension scheme. Had such contributions actually been made there would have been relief from Australian tax under other provisions of our law.
As also announced on 3 March, the extended exemption will also specifically cover pensions from the Netherlands paid as compensation in respect of Second World War persecution by, or disablement from resistance to, enemy forces occupying the Netherlands or the former Dutch East Indies. There is, however, a need to give the concepts underlying the extended exemption a general application. For this reason, the Bill provides that the exemption will apply to other foreign pensions received by residents of Australia, which are found to relate to, or take into account, Second World War persecution or disability arising from participation in a resistance movement. The exemption will apply to payments made to the person who suffered or to his or her dependants. The Bill provides that payments derived on or after the date of the foreshadowing announcement-3 March 1982-will be within the scope of the extended exemption.
Sale or Redemption of Discounted Securities
Earlier this year, the Commissioner of Taxation publicly affirmed the view that profits arising from the sale or redemption at par of securities issued or acquired at a discount are assessable income. It is accepted by the Government, however,

that a significant number of small investors had purchased discounted securities in the bona fide belief that the profit on sale or redemption would not be assessable. Indeed, the tap stock prospectus of May this year, which contains no indication that the discount component of the amount receivable on redemption of the stock is assessable income, may have contributed to this belief. Accordingly, it is proposed by this Bill to amend the income tax law to exempt from tax profits made on redemption or sale of any securities acquired at a discount on or before 30 June 1982, other than profits made by traders or dealers and profits to which section 26AAA, section 26c or paragraph 26 (a) of the Income Tax Assessment Act applies. The exemption will not affect the tax treatment of profits on the sale or redemption of securities purchased after 30 June 1982.
Phosphate Mining Company of Christmas Island Ltd
As part of new arrangements for the mining of Christmas Island phosphate, the Phosphate Mining Company of Christmas Island Ltd-an Australian Government owned and controlled company-was incorporated on 25 June 1981 to replace the British Phosphate Commissioners as managing agents for the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission. Honourable members will recall that amendments incorporated in the Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 made this replacement possible. The new company has been acting as managing agents since July 1981. That was an initial step pending the winding-up of the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission.
The next step under the proposed arrangements is to obtain the Parliament's approval of a new Christmas Island agreement between Australia and New Zealand which, together with an exchange of notes between the two governments, will enable the Phosphate Commission to be wound-up and the company to assume responsibility for the mining operation. Introduction of the necessary Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill is proposed for the current sittings of the Parliament. Income of the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission is exempt from income tax under the Christmas Island Agreement Act 1958. The amendment proposed in the present Bill will provide a corresponding exemption from income tax for the Phosphate Mining Company of Christmas Island Ltd. The exemption will apply to income derived by the company on or after a date to be notified in the Gazette. The date intended to be notified is that on which

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.4)

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 487

the company replaces the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission as the island's mining operator. Until then, of course, the income from the operations will remain that of the Commission and will continue to be exempt under existing provisions.
Gifts
The gift provisions of the income tax law allow deductions for gifts of the value of $2 or more to specified funds, authorities or institutions. Details of each of the proposed extensions of this concession have been the subject of previous statements and I need mention them only briefly now. One extension will authorise deductions for gifts made after 31 May 1982 to the Connellan Airways Trust. Another will authorise deductions for gifts made after 30 June 1982 to the Queensland Cultural Centre Trust. Further changes will authorise deductions for gifts made in the 1981-82 financial year to Polish relief appeals and to relief appeals established in response to the cyclone disaster in Tonga. Finally, there are provisions which will authorise deductions for gifts made during the 1981-82 and 1982-83 financial years to appeals established for the provision of relief to Falkland Islanders, British servicemen or the families of islanders or servicemen affected by the Falkland Islands dispute.
Expenditure Recoupment Schemes
Anti-avoidance provisions of the income tax law apply to a wide range of losses and outgoings with effect from 24 September 1978. Put broadly, the legislation denies a deduction for a designated loss or outgoing that is incurred under an arrangement whereby the taxpayer or an associate obtains a benefit the value of which, taken with the sought for tax saving, effectively recoups the claimed loss or outgoing. Variants of recoupment schemes with which this Bill deals are ones that attempted to exploit the income tax rebates and deductions for calls paid on shares in afforestation companies and the rebate for moneys paid on shares in petroleum exploration companies. The amendments proposed by the Bill will extend the expenditure recoupment provisions so that no rebate or deduction will be allowed in these further categories of schemes. The amendments are to apply with respect to expenditure incurred after 24 September 1978 under tax avoidance schemes entered into after that date. The decision to do this follows the clear warning given on that day and repeated on several subsequent occasions.
Although I think it is now generally recognised that the Government's unrelenting campaign

against blatant forms of tax avoidance, culminating in the enactment of the general anti-avoidance provisions of Part IVA, has put paid to such activities, the obligation to the general body of taxpayers to prevent the success of any expenditure recoupment type of tax avoidance scheme entered into after 24 September 1978 must, however, be recognised and assumed. I point out that any schemes which seek deductions for calls paid on shares in an afforestation company and which are entered into after 27 May 1981 will not be subject to the proposed amendments. Such schemes would be struck down by the general anti-avoidance provisions of Part IVA which took effect on 28 May 1981. The provisions I now introduce will also ensure that there can be no remaining incentive for proliferation of rebate schemes that are outside the scope of Part IVA. As foreshadowed in my statement of 9 February 1982, any rebate scheme entered into after that date that comes to be covered by the expenditure recoupment provisions of the law will attract 200 per cent additional tax on the same basis as do schemes covered by Part IVA.
Dividends Satisfied by Share or Debenture Issue
A private company is liable to pay additional tax on its undistributed profits if it does not, by way of dividends, make a sufficient distribution of profits to its shareholders. Anti-avoidance measures were introduced in 1978 to counter arrangements under which a dividend, which was not capable of being taxed in the shareholders' hands, was formally paid and that ensured that a substantial benefit flowed back to the company. In these circumstances there was no real distribution of profits. The 1978 measures may, however, operate too widely where dividends are satisfied by an issue of shares or debentures that legitimately have a market value appreciably less than their face value. If such dividends are effectively taxed in the hands of the shareholders, there is no tax avoidance. A reduced market value may legitimately exist, for example, because of factors such as lack of security, lack of ready marketability or uncertainty as to the date of redemption of the debentures or redeemable shares.
The Government is concerned that the law should clearly not compel private companies to pay cash dividends in such cases. Appropriate relief will be provided by the Bill so that, where the Commissioner of Taxation considers it unreasonable for the anti-avoidance provisions to apply to a dividend paid after 20 January 1982 and satisfied by an issue of shares or debentures, the dividend will be taken into account in determining whether a sufficient distribution has been made.

488 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill

Disclosure of Additional Taxation Information to the Australian Statistician
Under the secrecy provisions of the income tax law, information available to the Commissioner of Taxation about the name, address and industry classification of an employer can be provided to the Australian Statistician, but only for purposes related to employment statistics. Consistent with its policy of seeking to reduce, wherever practicable, the burden on businesses of responding to statistical requirements, the Government has decided to amend these provisions in two respects. Firstly, the limitation to use in employment statistics will be removed in order to enable the information supplied to be used for a number of related statistical purposes. Secondly, the Bill will authorise the provision of additional employment information to the Statistician, namely the numbers of male and female employees of persons who are employers for PAYE purposes. An explanatory memorandum providing fuller details of the various measures contained in the Bill is being made available to honourable members. 1 commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.
DEFENCE (VISITING WARSHIPS) BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Sinclair, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Defence) (3.55)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to discharge the responsibilities of the Commonwealth in relation to visits by foreign warships. The House will be aware that in recent months the Government of Victoria sought to exclude certain categories of foreign warships from its ports. Somewhat earlier the Government of New South Wales expressed reservations about visits of these same categories of warships to the Port of Sydney and to other ports in that State. There have also been attempts by some organisations to hinder or put difficulties in the way of such visits. The Government has made quite plain that it will not accept interference with these visits. Visits to Australian ports of foreign warships are an important aspect of Australia's international relations. They have obvious and important implications for our defence and security.
Constitutionally the powers in respect of such matters rest with the Commonwealth. It is the Commonwealth, not the States, that is responsible

for the maintenance of defence and international arrangements with other countries. Quite properly the Commonwealth has exercised exclusive authority in this area. It intends to continue to do so. To ensure that there is no uncertainty as to the legal position applicable to the visits of such ships, it is believed that legislation in the form now introduced is essential.
In addition to asserting in practical terms the exclusive authority of the Commonwealth, the Bill will perform two other functions. It will make provision in formal terms for the authorising, on behalf of Australia, of entry to our waters by foreign warships where such entry is desired. The need for authorisation to precede any such visit has long been recognised as a matter of international law and practice. Secondly, the Bill will provide a legal framework for appropriate action to be taken to safeguard approved visits from obstruction or interference. At the same time, the Government expects that there will continue to be co-operation with the relevant State authorities in regard to the visits of foreign warships. In the vast majority of cases over many years such co-operation has been forthcoming.
The Bill specifically adverts in its objects clause to the co-operation and assistance of the States and their authorities in facilitating access to Australian ports for visiting warships. The Government has reiterated in recent statements the importance it attaches to visits to Australia by the warships of allied and friendly countries in the context of our overall defence arrangements. These visits are of the greatest importance, whether they occur in the course of joint exercises, for resupply purposes, for crew recreation or as a practical demonstration of goodwill. We believe that foreign warships should be as free to visit Australian ports as Australian warships are to visit the ports of our friends and allies. The Government has no doubt that its views in this matter are endorsed by the overwhelming majority of the Australian people. It is also relevant to quote from the joint communique issued by the representatives of the governments of the United States, New Zealand and Australia at the conclusion of the thirty-first meeting of the ANZUS Council held in Canberra on the 21 and 22 June 1982. The communique states:
In particular (the Deputy Secretary and the Ministers) confirmed the high priority each partner placed upon a regular and comprehensive programme of naval visits to each other's ports, as well as to friendly ports in the Asia/Pacific region generally. They recognise the importance of access by United States naval ships to the ports of its Treaty partners as a critical factor in its efforts to maintain strategic deterrence and in order to carry out its responsibilities under the terms of the Treaty. In this regard the Australian and New Zealand members declared their continued willingness to accept visits

Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 489

to their ports by United States naval vessels whether conventional or nuclear powered.
In the light of statements made by the Premier of Victoria and earlier by his counterpart in New South Wales, it is believed that this undertaking may not be capable of implementation without the passage of this legislation. The Government accepts that concerns have been expressed, quite understandably, with particular regard to ships which are nuclear powered or ships which could be carrying nuclear weapons. So far as nuclear powered ships are concerned, the Government's position continues to be that expressed by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in his statement to the House of 4 June 1976 on this matter. Subject to compliance with appropriate safety procedures, visits of nuclear powered ships can proceed without significant risk of adverse consequences. With regard to visits by ships which could be carrying nuclear weapons, as has been repeatedly made clear, the position is that the foreign governments concerned will not confirm or deny that a particular ship is carrying nuclear weapons. Again, if I may quote from the ANZUS communique:
(The Ministers and the Deputy Secretary) noted and accepted that it is not the policy of the United States Navy to reveal whether or not its vessels are armed with nuclear weapons.
To do so in particular cases would over a period of time provide valuable information to potential enemies about the capabilities of the naval forces concerned and, of course, as to the particular ship. The Government accepts this position and will not be seeking disclosure as to whether a particular visiting ship is or is not carrying nuclear weapons. In relation to the safety of nuclear weapons which may be carried on visiting allied warships, the precautions and procedures that are known to be taken by the navies concerned are such as to preclude the possibility of an accidental nuclear detonation. The risk of accidental explosion of the conventional explosive in such weapons is judged to be as small as the risk of an accidential explosion involving conventional weapons carried by our own naval vessels. Such an accident has never happened.
Against this background I turn to the terms of the Bill. As I have already mentioned, the Bill includes an objects clause stating that it is intended to establish procedures for the discharge by the Commonwealth of its constitutional responsibilities and powers. The clause also declares the intention that in furthering the object of the Act the co-operation and assistance of the States and their authorities be sought and utilised, so far as it is appropriate and practicable to do so, in facilitating accesS to Australian ports for warships visiting

Australia. However, the Bill is expressed to operate to the exclusion of any State or Territory laws that would prevent or obstruct any act or thing that a warship or person is empowered or permit-
ted to do by the Bill.
Central to the operation of the legislation is the power given to the Minister for Defence to grant approval for a specified foreign warship, or class of foreign warships, to have access during a
specified period to Australian ports or to specified Australian ports. Such an approval may be made subject to conditions. It is envisaged that, in practice, all such approvals will be subject to compliance with conditions relating to navigation and safety, and health, quarantine, customs and immigration requirements. Provision is also made for the Minister to give directions to the commander of a foreign warship in respect of which an approval is in force. Directions may be given about the movement of the ship or its crew or about the loading or unloading of goods. Directions of this nature would essentially be supplementary to the conditions attached to an approval, and could be necessitated by circumstances arising after an approval is given. Where an approval is in force, a foreign warship covered by the approval will be entitled to enter, remain in and depart from an Australian port covered by the approval. In addition, goods may be loaded onto or unloaded from the ship and services may be supplied to the
ship.
Under clause 9 of the Bill, the Minister for Defence is empowered to give directions to facilitate access by a foreign warship to an Australian port, where a relevant approval is in force. These powers would be exercised only as a last resort where access by a foreign warship was being frustrated or significantly hindered by a refusal or failure to provide the goods, services or facilities normally required for that purpose. These might include the provision of pilotage or tug services, the availability of berthing facilities, or the supply of services such as water or electricity. Clause 9 provides that a direction may be given only where the Minister is satisfied that giving the direction is necessary to secure the entry, stay or departure of the ship, or the safety of the ship, its crew or other persons, or is necessary or convenient for the effective operation of the ship. Provision is made for compensation for loss or damage sustained as a result of compliance with a direction. Provision is also made for payment for the provision of goods, services or facilities, or other things, pursuant to a direction.
The Bill will establish offences of preventing, hindering or obstructing the entry of a ship to, the berthing of a ship at, or the departure of a ship

490 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

from, an Australian port in respect of which a relevant approval is in force. Other offences are provided relating to failure to comply with a direction by the Minister for Defence under clause 9, and of preventing, hindering or obstructing other specified activities relating to a ship. As I have already said, the Government believes that visits to Australian ports by the warships of our friends and allies have the overwhelming support of the Australian people. The Government is confident that this legislation, prompted by threat to the continuance of such visits, will have similar support. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.

The Australian facility comprises a transmitter and associated equipment located on Common-
wealth land near Derriman in Victoria, and monitoring equipment located on Commonwealth land
near Carrajung, also in Victoria. The facility commenced transmitting on a fully operational basis
on 16 August and is to be officially opened in October this year. Being an integral part of the world-wide Omega system, it is essential that the Government take all necessary steps to ensure the
uninterrupted operation of the Australian facility. The Government believes this Bill to be an appropriate measure to deal with any threat of irresponsible action to interfere with transmissions by the Australian facility.

OMEGA NAVIGATION FACILITY BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (4.5)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is intended to ensure that the Australian Omega navigation facility can be operated free from unnecessary interruption. The Australian Omega station completes a world-wide network of eight stations. The other seven stations are operated by Argentina, Japan, Liberia, Norway, France, and the United States of America at Hawaii and North Dakota. The Omega system is a long-range radio navigation system for use by aircraft, ships and land vehicles to determine their position in virtually any part of the world and in any weather. Each station transmits omnidirectional signals in the very low frequency radio band. In the usual mode of operation, a receiver needs to detect signals from at least three Omega stations to determine a position fix. Omega receivers of varying complexity are available from commercial sources throughout the world.
The governments of Australia and the United States of America entered into an exchange of notes in 1977, agreeing to the establishment and operation of the Australian station. The agreement has been previously tabled and is reproduced in the Schedule to the Bill. The agreement provides that Australia is to be solely responsible for operating, managing, staffing and maintaining the facility and that each government is required to ensure the continuous operation of its respective facilities.

Under the Bill, where circumstances necessitate, persons who ordinarily supply goods or services required for use in connection with the Omega facility may be directed by the Minister to supply such goods or services. Obstruction of the supply of goods or services, and refusal to carry out a direction of the Minister, are defined in the Bill as offences. The Bill also ensures access to the facility by persons whose access is sufficiently important to warrant protection. One of the objects of the Bill is to secure State co-operation in the continued operation and maintenance of the Omega facility. State laws consistent with that object are preserved. However, State laws that conflict with the purposes of the Bill are set aside. The Bill operates concurrently with other laws, particularly those relating to protection of property and the safety of navigation aids. In addition it contains a provision to ensure that the prosecution of offences in relation to Omega can be undertaken by the Commonwealth without having to rely on State action. If a person suffers loss or damage or property is acquired from him as a result of the operation of the Bill, he is entitled to compensation from the Commonwealth on just terms.
In conclusion, the Government's objective is to provide effective navigational aids for the safety of ships and aircraft operating in and around Australia, particularly those engaged in our coastal and overseas trades. The establishment of the Omega facility is a significant step towards the achievement of that objective, and the purpose of the Bill is to ensure that the operation of the facility is not disrupted. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.

Defence Force Discipline Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 491

DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 17 August, on motion by Sir James Killen:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (4.11)-When the debate was adjourned I was referring to the merits of this measure to reform our military law and in particular to the introduction of a uniform tri-Service code in the place of the three older codes. I was using the new definition of mutiny as an example of this uniformity in place of the provisions of the old codes, two of which did not have a statutory definition and one of which did. To conclude that section, mutiny, as defined under the Defence Force Discipline Bill, is a combination of two or more Defence Force members: Firstly, to overthrow lawful authority in the Defence Force or allied forces; secondly, to resist authority to the substantial prejudice of operational efficiency; or thirdly, to refuse important service. The new penalties are now more fitting, and incidentally more lenient. The first two categories of mutiny involve a maximum term of 10 years imprisonment and for the last category, a very specific and serious one, the maximum penalty will remain life imprisonment.
Another example of an area where a necessary unification as well as a rationalisation of Service law has come about is in the provisions of the Bill regarding desertion. Under clause 22 of the Bill different legal definitions of desertion among the separate Services, as well as different penalties, have been unified and rationalised. Under the Bill's provisions the offence of desertion will be confined to conduct formerly generally known as constructive desertion; that is, conduct manifesting an intention to refuse particular duties by absenting oneself from duty. In particular the Bill will penalise absence from active service. Other types of absence will be treated as absence without leave. The new maximum penalty for desertion, replacing penalties ranging from life imprisonment to imprisonment for two years, will be five years imprisonment.
When one examines the ways the Bill has rationalised and reformed Service law, one area which stands out is that large field of law concerned with war crimes. This is not a field with which we in Australia have had to be particularly concerned in the past. Nevertheless since, and indeed before, the days of Breaker Morant bitter experience-especially the horrible crimes committed during the Second World War-has focused the attention of jurists and legislators on the

necessity for extending the rule of law to servicemen on active duty. Some of the high crimes dealt with at Nuremberg and other tribunals of that kind-that is, broad crimes against peace and humanity-cover conduct which is outside the capacity of ordinary members of the armed Services. This Bill will not as a rule cover such conduct in enemy forces. However, the Bill does cover the kind of situation which is portrayed in the film Breaker Morant in that it seeks to apply as far as possible the restraints of civil law to Service personnel on active duty. To this end the Bill brings about a very necessary modernisation in its treatment of the jurisdiction of Service tribunals over
serious crimes.
The present law, as it stands before the reforms we are debating, preserves significant interService differences and some features of imperial law. The Army codes lay down that offences against the laws of England are triable only by a Service tribunal if they are committed outside Australia or Her Majesty's dominions or more than 100 miles in a straight line from any town or city where the accused could be tried by a civil court. The Royal Australian Air Force has the same unusual legal boundaries. The Royal Australian Navy, on the other hand, is permitted to try offences against both the laws of England and the Commonwealth of Australia but only if the offences are committed outside Australia.
Under clause 63 of the Bill before us, serious offences, if committed in Australia against the law of the Commonwealth or the Australian Capital Territory, will be triable by a Service tribunal only with the permission of the Attorney-General. This would mean that normal practice will be for such crimes in Australia to be dealt with by the civil courts. I certainly commend this bias in favour of civil procedure in Australia. It emphasises the point that members of the armed Services are not some special section of the community but remain Australian citizens subject to the laws of the land-the rights as well as the obligations. To emphasise this as the Bill does is to emphasise the universal rule of law throughout our whole community.
An important consideration relating to war crimes is the definition of the responsibility of the individual serviceman or servicewoman in obeying unlawful superior orders. The Bill tightens up the tests in the various older service codes. Under clause 14 a serviceman can be convicted for obeying an illegal order not only if it is unlawful but also if he knows, or ought reasonably to know, that it is unlawful. The precise decision on the difficult points involved here is a matter for the individual tribunal judging the individual case but the

492 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Defence Force Discipline Bill

guidelines laid down are adequate protection for the individual serviceman concientiously performing his duties while extending the rule of law over the operations of the armed Services.
Another area where the Service codes will be clarified and unified under the Bill is the conduct of Defence Force members when prisoners of war. Clause 19 of the Bill creates the new offence of failing to take reasonable steps, or preventing others or discouraging others from taking reasonable steps, to re-join the force to which a person belongs. The maximum penalty provided is five years imprisonment. Another new offence, following American experience, covers conduct of prisoners of war. This is conduct such as behaving in a manner detrimental to other POWs, or, when in authority over other POWs-including when appointed by one's captors-ill treating the other POWs. The maximum penalty is also five years
imprisonment.
These and the provisions relating to collaboration with the enemy in clause 15 of the Bill meet the pressures of modern ideological and psychological warfare against POWs familiar to us from the Korean and Vietnamese conflicts. It should be noted in this connection that under clause 15 a statutory defence is provided where the accused has reasonable excuse for his behaviour. The Bill, of course, applies only to members of the defence forces, not Australian civilians. It is worth noting that the only Australians 1 know of suspected of this sort of conduct have been civilians. Once again this is a matter for particular application by the courts. However, it does lay down the necessary guidelines. We know from both the Korean and Vietnamese wars of the extreme pressures which ruthless captors of totalitarian disposition can apply to the POWs in their power, either to subvert their loyalty or to produce propagandistic statements or so-called confessions from their victims. We know also the kind of manipulation of group loyalties that can go on in such prison camps of totalitarian direction. Therefore the Bill is to be commended for its endeavour to uphold both the essentials of discipline in such difficult situations as well as its capacity to provide for the special circumstances introduced by pyschological warfare.
This Bill deserves the support of the House. 1 was glad to hear from the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) that the Bill, in all but minor detail, is receiving that support. It represents nine years of concentrated labour as well as some years before that of slightly less concentrated labour. It provides a code of discipline for the armed Services that is modern, unified and Australian. The penalties introduced are uniform and consistent

between all three Services. The moderation of the penalties, relative to the older codes, reflects both the thinking of the wider society of which the Australian armed forces are part and the more rational discipline of modern military life. 1 believe the Bill is a major reform and a major achievement for Australia as a whole.
Mr MORRISON (St George) (4.19)-1 take the opportunity, given the presence in the House this afternoon of the former Minister for Defence, Sir James Killen, to make a couple of observations. It is a cause for a great deal of regret that those of us who have been associated for some time with the defence area may lose the picturesque language that the Minister often inculcated into his speeches. 1 notice that in the introduction to the second reading speech of the Defence Force Discipline Bill in the last session he referred to the previous disciplinary law as a 'Serbonian bog of archaisms'. 1 do not doubt that the Minister and certainly other honourable members of the Government have a greater familiarity with Serbonian bogs of archaisms. 1 confess that certainly the legislation which this Bill now seeks to replace could be so described. It brings together in one Bill a large variety of often conflicting legislationBritish and Australian. To that extent 1 certainly congratulate the Minister for having brought it forward.
Again alluding to the Minister's second reading speech, 1 believe he dismissed too readily some of the more interesting features of the inherited legislation. 1 notice he made an observation about the deletion from the code of discipline of that wonderful phrase 'behaving in a scandalous manner unbecoming the character of an officer and a gentleman'. 1 make only one suggestion which is that instead of having that in a code of discipline for the armed forces the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) might consider having it in a code of discipline for Ministers of his government.
The other observation concerns the ancient occupation of sutlery. 1am sure the former Minister will recall that spectacular phrase in Henry V when Pistol proclaimed to his colleagues:
. . . I shall sutler be.
Unto the camp, and profits will accrue.
The ancient art of sutlery is alive and well. Any of us who have been associated with defence will know that profits do still accrue. It goes well beyond the farthings and pence of Shakespeare's day. Those of us who have been associated with negotiations with foreign corporations and foreign military sales operations know that the supply and equipment of stores to the armed forces runs into hundreds of millions of dollars. This, of

Defence Force Discipline Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 493

course, is the meaning of sutlery. I am sure that we all welcome the introduction into some form of defence legislation the provisions of sutlery so that we might continue to have some control over the activities of the modern-day sutlers.
This legislation has had a record gestation period. It started just after the Second World War. It was revitalised, as many other things were revitalised in the defence area, in the period 1972 to 1975. The Australian Labor Party revitalised the working party back in 1973. The legislation has taken a long time. The reason it has taken a long time is that it has been an enormously complicated and difficult task. The issues that have been included in the legislation are certainly not easy.
I will come now to some of the principles that have to be considered in this legislation. We are all aware of the Nuremburg trials. I suspect that was more a political trial than a legal trial. I suppose it is one of the advantages of being a victor in a war that one can proclaim certain moral values. In the associated trials in Nuremburg there was one very essential feature that had to be consideredwhether it was an attempt to establish the locus of guilt of the German nation. The matter really came down to the proposition whether guilt for war crimes resided with those who gave orders, with those who carried them out or with both. Also as members of this Parliament we are very well aware of the My Lai incident and the trial in the United States of Lieutenant Calley. This is still the very nub of the question of discipline of forces and the rule of law. It is almost a contradiction in terms to have a rule of law in the affairs of war. I think this legislation goes part of the way to attempting to settle some of the issues that affect servicemen in a war time situation. It is a very complex problem.
The provisions of the Bill to which I want to refer are those that deal with the execution of orders or lawful commands. The Bill deals with this matter in a couple of provisions. Clause 14 which is headed 'Act or omission in execution of law'reads:
A person is not liable to be convicted of a service offence by reason of an act or omission that-
(a) was in execution of the law; or (b) was in obedience to an order, not being an order-
(i) that was clearly unlawful; or (ii) that the person knew, or ought reasonably to have
known, was unlawful.
We have to keep thinking back in our minds about this question of the locus of guilt, whether it resides with those who give orders or those who take orders. This matter is taken up again in clause 27 of the Bill which reads:

A defence member who disobeys a lawful command given to him by a superior officer is guilty of an offence for which the maximum punishment is imprisonment for 2 years.
The import of that clause-lam not quite sure whether the drafting of the legislation completely covers it-hinges on what constitutes lawful command. There is a mass of definitions in the front of this Bill but there is no definition of 'lawful command' in this Bill. There was not even an explanation of it in the second reading speech of the former Minister for Defence.
It seems to me that clause 27 refers to oral commands because subsequent clauses, particularly clause 29, deal with compliance with a general order. The definition of 'general order' set out in the front of the Bill seems to indicate written regulations issued by authorities within the Defence Force or within the Department of Defence. So we are dealing with an oral command. This raises the problems which exist in the heat of battIe of what, in fact, are the rights and obligations of those giving the command and those taking the command. The Minister, in his second reading speech, explained:
. . . a member of the armed forces can be convicted of disobeying a superior order only if it is lawful . . .
That question of what constitutes lawfulness is presumably left to the court martial to decide. The Minister then added:
. . . that a member of the armed forces . . . cannot be convicted for the consequences of obeying a superior order unless the order was clearly unlawful.
In this context at the time when the command is given the onus is placed on the recipient of the order.
I notice some honourable members present in the House today who have been on active service. We could all ask: What opportunity is there for a soldier in the heat of battle to disobey an order which he believes is unlawful but which his superior regards as an order to be carried out immediately? We have that dilemma which has been referred to in the explanatory notes and which was explained by Dicey.
Speaking of the serviceman, he said:
He may . . . be liable to be shot by a court martial if he disobeys an order, and to be hanged by a judge and jury if he obeys it.
This is really a very significant part of the legislation. Whilst I suppose I can excuse the drafters of the legislation for not really coming down to it, I think this is the least satisfactory part of the Bill.
In response to queries raised in, I think, 1977 by the honourable member for Prospect (Dr

494 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Defence Force Discipline Bill

Klugman), the Minister indicated that consideration was given whether there should be a provision imposing an obligation on a serviceman to refuse an order which is unlawful. In the explanatory notes-I must compliment those responsible for the explanatory notes because it is a very useful document-this was considered but it was not taken up in the Bill for, I suppose, the reason that it was a very complicated problem to solve.
In the generalities in the approach to the drafting of this legislation and the drafting of Defence Force discipline we have an endorsement of the traditional position. That traditional position in effect is that a serviceman can be convicted of disobeying a command or an order only if it is lawful and cannot be convicted of the consequences of obeying an order or command unless it is clearly unlawful. Just stating those propositions raises the very real problem of accepting the orders of command and the very real difficulties of trying to establish within a Defence Force discipline code the proper method of handling it.
One point to which I particularly want to refer-I think there may be some opportunity to incorporate this in the drafting of the legislation-is the need for a reference in the Bill to the Geneva Convention of 1949 which attempted to establish the rules of war and the conduct of forces in a variety of areas during the war. I hope that there will be some opportunity for that to be directly referred to in the legislation. I know that we have hit upon the idea-I suppose it is a useful idea; I am not fully conversant with all the implications of it-of accepting the Australian Capital Territory laws. I presume that the laws of the Commonwealth in force in the Australian Capital Territory comprehend the Geneva Convention. But I think we would all agree that this is an exceptionally remote and indirect reference.
I suggest to the Government that there should be some direct reference to the Geneva agreements in the Defence Force Discipline Bill. I think this is important because I know that our forces and particularly our officers go through training programs on the rules of war. This new Defence Force discipline code will be a basic test for them. But they might not have the benefit of going through the Geneva Conventions and understanding and comprehending those to the fullest extent. I think some direct reference in the Bill to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 would be an advantage.
I also note and welcome the inclusion of a new clause, clause 62. It states:

A defence member who commands or orders the commission of a service offence is guilty of an offence punishable on conviction . . .
This means that the responsibility now, for the very first time in the legislation affecting Australia, places the onus on a commanding officer to act lawfully; and the orders and commands that he gives have to be on the basis of law. If he is found guilty of not giving lawful commands-still leaving aside that question that we have not defined a 'lawful command'-that imposes an obligation on all superior officers in the Defence Force when they are giving an order to a junior to ensure that the command is within the context of the laws of the Defence Force. If they move away from that position they are subject now, under clause 62, to a charge. I hope that these points that I have referred to can perhaps be more clearly set out. Clause 62 is fairly clear but, again, we have this great difficulty with definition.
I believe it is important that we continue to look at the Defence Force discipline codes. The honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) has indicated that the Opposition will be moving in the Committee stage of this Bill for a review of the operations of the code after a period of three or four years. I do not want the Government just to reject that out of hand. It is a proposition that we have thought about. This code has taken a long time to put together and I do not think anybody in the House would argue that it is perfect. After we have had an opportunity of seeing it in operation there may well be parts of it that should be subject to review. I believe it is very important that this Parliament takes an active interest in the legislation and the results of the legislation. I hope that the Government will act on what I regard as a sensible suggestion. I have always taken the position that this Parliament, in making the laws, has a very real responsibility to ensure that those laws are kept up to date and are maintained for the purposes for which this Parliament designed them. I believe that the suggestion that will be put by the Opposition for a review after three or four years of the operations of this Bill when it becomes an Act should be accepted. I trust that the Government will accept that suggestion in the very sense that it is made by the Opposition because I believe it is a useful suggestion. I trust that the amendment will be accepted when it is moved by the Opposition.
Mr KATTER (Kennedy) (4.36)-1 will be very brief for one very obvious reason: I have been included in a line-up with brilliant talent to debate a Bill of this nature when the legalistic side of the matter is being stressed and I wish to indulge in just one or two generalities. I will develop that

Defence Force Discipline Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 495

theme a little further. Eminent lawyers in both the present Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair) and the former Minister for Defence have been handling the matter. Lined up to speak are the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman), the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock), the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock), the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) and the honourable member for Chisholm (Mr Harris). So it would be futile of me to attempt to go into the legalities of this matter in any way.
1 would just like to comment on one aspect and, in doing so, inevitably 1 must accentuate the attributes of the former Minister for Defence. It is not surprising that he should attempt, first of all, to review a very antiquated system, but 1 think he would probe a little deeper because, as we who know him and have seen his association with the defence forces are quite aware, he is sensitive to the necessity for morale, discipline and good common sense. That the whole of the system was very antiquated was against everything he stood for. One thing that was fairly obvious to me in my short term as Minister for the Army was that one could not regard the defence forces-in my case the Army-as a world apart. This concerned not only the manner in which the legal system was approached and carried out but also more minor things. 1 remember well making an inspection at Singleton on one occasion and seeing one or two hair pieces on the tables in the various rooms and, on questioning, finding out that the fellows would wear them to dances and so on because they were a little tired of the old Army haircut. 1 have been informed that my predecessor in the portfoliothe honourable member for Kooyong, who is just leaving the chamber-had not been wildly excited about there being a new haircut. However, it was introduced.
Mr Sinclair-The Leader of the House is growing one at the moment, actually.
Mr KATTER-I take on board the good sense of the present Minister. The process of law is vitally important. 1 think people who enter the forces-it is a new world to them-look for discipline most particularly and they look for a system which would see the matter of discipline carried right through. Where there are breaches they see a court of appeal which would go beyond the ordinary court martial stage. This has been provided by the Defence Force Discipline Bill.
1do not think 1 have aything more to add. 1just wanted to bring forward the point that the former Minister attempted to fuse these various qualities of morale, discipline and good common sense and,

in doing so, was able after many years to produce the Bill that is before the House today. 1 am sure that we would commend him for it. 1am sure that everything else that has to be said will be said by
the other honourable members who are to speak on this Bill.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (4.40)-1 am indebted to the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter) for his remarks. I trust that his very generous remarks about the competence of others who will follow him in this debate will not be in any way diminished by the incompetence of those who endeavour to speak on this very complex matter. I am not necessarily speaking for my colleagues when I say that; but certainly, for my own part, I must say that I have never had any experience in the law in this very difficult area. I was struck by the complexity and the difficulty that those who have practised in this area must have experienced when 1 read the part of the speech of the former Minister for Defence where he gave us some particulars of the number of laws and the places that one had to look to seek the information necessary to guide those who were to be dealt with by way of discipline in one way or another.
Before 1 expand on that, I would certainly like to commend the Vice-President of the Executive Council (Sir James Killen)-my colleague the honourable member for Moreton-for his willingness to pilot this very important legislation through notwithstanding the fact that he is no longer departmentally responsible for it. The Defence Force Discipline Bill is a monumental piece of legislation. 1 think it is one of those items of legislation that people, looking at this Parliament in the years ahead, will see as beacons. It may not be that many people will speak on it or that there will be great contention. Rather it may be this will be another of the pieces of legislation that have helped to develop an Australian identity and enhance our national pride because we have a law of our own that operates in this area.
At the moment discussions which are obviously designed to enhance Australia's nationalism are going on in numbers of areas. 1 am certainly pleased that the States and the Commonwealth are starting to put aside their differences, although not completely, and consider the residual links that the States have with the British Crown. A number of reforms are likely to be developed and introduced into Australian law shortly for which there will be necessary and complementary British legislation to give us an independence which we will accept with a great deal of pride and which we recognise enhances our reputation as a nation. I think that the fact

496 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Defence Force Discipline Bill

that we have come so far after operating for so long in this area with three United Kingdom Acts, two of which have ceased to operate in the United Kingdom, four sets of United Kingdom rules or regulations, all of which have ceased to operate in the United Kingdom, and three Australian Acts and nine sets of regulations under Australian Acts indicates what I mean about Australian
nationalism.
I think it is important that we have a Defence Force disciplinary code of our own. That it will operate for members of the Australian defence forces in each of the three areas of expertise is equally important. I was interested to read that a uniform code for the Navy, Army and Air Force was developed in other countries well before this code of ours. We have seen a uniform code adopted in the United States of America and Canada. The former Minister for Defence, in his second reading speech, mentioned that whilst this is largely a uniform code there are some special areas, particularly in relation to the Navy, where, very often because people are isolated and away for long periods, unique provisions might still have to operate. That is well and truly understood. But we will have a law which will largely be uniform among the three Services. It will be much clearer, it will use modern language and it will remove many of the ambiguities of the existing legislation. The honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman) put it very simply when he made his worthwhile comments in this debate. I think he picked up some of the words of the former Minister. This is a Bill that is Australian, modern and uniform. For that reason I think it will be welcomed by all members of the defence forces and certainly by all Australians.
I wanted to speak on this legislation because the former Minister said that representations had been received on the need for reform in this area. I guess I was one of those who made some representations. I was concerned particularly about the area of penalties. I will give honourable members the benefit of the representations that were made to me without identifying the people involved so that they might be aware of why there was an important need for legislation of this sort, why it was important that the complexities and difficulties be removed and why we developed a system which took into account the relationship that ought to exist in a modern system between military and civil law. Before proceeding to identify those representations I will note some of the principles that the then Minister said were so important in relation to this legislation. He stated:
The Bill deals with three principal matters and a number of ancillary matters. These may be briefly described as follows: It

prescribes offences that apply to members of the Defence Force and certain civilians who accompany the Defence Force; it creates tribunals for the trial, conviction and punishment of such offences; it provides machinery for appeals against, and reviews of, convictions and punishments; it deals with ancillary matters such as investigation of offences, trial procedures, and serving of sentences.
I wish to deal with the latter matter in particular because it was in this area that I became aware of certain gross inadequacies affecting people serving in the Defence Force. I will simply apprise honourable members of the nature of the representations that were made to me. In 1981 I was approached by a constituent, a Mrs' X, who produced a copy of a letter she had received from the former Minister for Defence. In that letter the Minister indicated some of the provisions of the Naval Discipline Act that applied to a serviceman who had been punished for certain offences and who had been committed to gaol in New South Wales for two years. He indicated that the provisions of the Naval Discipline Act gave effect to the New South Wales remission procedures and that as a first offender the serviceman was entitled to some remission of his sentence for good conduct. The Minister also indicated that the Naval Discipline Act gave naval authorities the power to suspend or remit the unexpired portion of a sentence in certain circumstances but, essentially, that arose only where there was a change in the serviceman's position. The letter stated:
You will see from the above that there are provisions whereby your husband's sentence could be suspended or remitted.
The important sentence was the next one. It stated:
A naval court martial has no power to make an order in relation to parole and the New South Wales and Commonwealth legislation does not apply in the case of your husband.
I was somewhat alarmed to find out that there was no scope for parole in circumstances such as this man faced and that he was in a very different position from other people serving two-year sentences in the gaols of New South Wales. Other prisoners had the prospect of a non-parole period being fixed and being released on parole. When I spoke to the officers concerned with this matter I was told that although there was no scope for parole in this case, this factor may well have been taken into account by the court martial when it determined the severity of the sentence to be imposed. But, of course, there was no statement to that effect and it was very much a conjecture on the part of the officers as to whether those who sentenced the man might, in fact, have taken into account the fact that there were no parole provisions whereby the court could say that the man may have to serve, say, one year in gaol and thereafter may be able to be paroled. For that reason I

Defence Force Discipline Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 497

was most concerned and I corresponded for some time with the former Minister for Defence and with the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) because I was anxious about the lack of such provisions in the existing legislation.
I was alerted to the prospect of these matters being dealt with in the Defence Force disciplinary code when it was ultimately developed. Therefore I must say that although my constituent has been released from gaol and certainly was not able to avail himself of the provisions in this code I am pleased that others will be able to take advantage of the corresponding civilian procedures that operate in relation to the sentencing of offenders. Clause 68 of the Defence Force Discipline Bill sets out a scale of punishments that a service tribunal might well be able to impose in decreasing order of severity. I do not intend to list them all. They can be found in the Bill itself. Clause 70 sets out the principles that are to be taken into account in sentencing offenders. It sets out many matters to be taken into account in extenuating circumstances. It is pertinent to note the wide range of matters that' can be taken into account. Sub-clause (2) sets out the following matters:
(a) his rank, age and maturity;
(b) his physical and mental condition;
(c) his personal history;
(d) the absence or existence in his case of previous convictions for service offences, civil court offences and overseas offences;
(e) if the service offence involves a victim, his relationship with the victim;
(f) his behaviour before, during and after the commission of the service offence; and
(g) any consequential effects of his conviction or proposed punishment.
Those are obviously very important matters that need to be taken into account in considering the type and severity of the sentence that ought to be imposed on an offender. I draw the attention of the House to some further clauses in this Bill which, I think, help to bring the legislation into line with that operating in most of the States of Australia today. I am particularly pleased with clause 72 of the Bill. It is a new provision. There have not been provisions of this sort before. It requires a court-martial or a Defence Force magistrate to order a non-parole period whenever imposing imprisonment. I think that is a very worthwhile reform. It brings the defence forces into line with the type of civilian code that operates throughout Australia. It will certainly mean that if a member of the Defence Force has committed an offence and is sentenced to a term in a State gaol he will not be there on a substantially different basis from other offenders serving their

sentences for whatever offences they have committed. Clause 72 (2) of the Bill applies the Commonwealth Prisoners Act to orders for non-parole periods made under sub-clause (1) to which I referred earlier. The Commonwealth Prisoners Act sets out the procedure to be followed with regard to parole for persons sentenced to imprisonment for offences against laws of the Commonwealth.
There are some other worthwhile provisions in this legislation relating to punishment. I refer particularly to clause 75 which involves a procedure that is well known in the civilian area. It is a new procedure to operate in relation to the Commonwealth whereby a court may proceed to a conviction in a case where an offence is proven, but not proceed to punish a person. Very often the simple recording of a conviction is sufficient in relation to an offence and is the sort of minimum penalty that ought to be imposed in particular circumstances. It means that the officers or the magistrate involved will be able to record the conviction and not impose any punishment in an appropriate case. As I mentioned, this is a new provision but it is a very worthwhile reform. It was intended in 1973, when a draft code was proposed, that there be a provision of this sort. I am certainly very pleased to see that such a provision exists in this legislation. In clause 82 we see that there is provision for the remission of punishment of detention on imprisonment. By this clause a punishment of detention, whether suspended or not, is remitted if the offender is subsequently sentenced to imprisonment. Whilst in the existing law some provision was made for naval personnel to be dealt with in this way, there were no similar provisions previously in relation to the Army or the Air Force. I guess it was a form of double punishment that could be offered and it seems to me to be very important that such remissions operate.
Finally, I draw clause 174 to the attention of honourable members. Whilst this is not a particularly new provision, I think it is important because it provides that the State or Territory law in relation to certain prisoners-that is, servicemen who are sentenced to imprisonment in a State or Territory-will apply. If honourable members look at that clause they will see why I think it is particularly important, having regard to the experience of my constitutent. The clause states:
Where a prisoner is detained in a prison of a State or Territory under a warrant of commitment issued under section 170, the prisoner, while so detained, may be dealt with in the like manner and is subject to the like laws, including laws relating to the reduction or remission of sentences, as if the imposition of the punishment of imprisonment by the service tribunal by reason of which the warrant was issued had been a sentence made or pronounced under a law of that State or Territory.

498 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Defence Force Discipline Bill

Honourable members will see that that provision is particularly important because it enables the prisoner to be dealt with in a like manner to people who are imprisoned under State law. It means that if in those States provisions operate by way of work release programs or special consideration for parole taking into account the conduct of a prisoner while he is in gaol, he will be treated in a like manner to any other prisoner in that gaol who has broken a State law or other laws. I think that is particularly important. I do not think Service personnel, particularly in peacetime, ought to be discriminated against in State gaols. I regard these reforms in relation to punishment and penalties as very worthwhile reforms. I am pleased that the Leader of the House has been associated with them and has been able to see them into fruition. I have no doubt that this very important legislation will be passed. It will be a beacon in the years ahead when many people will say that this was the year in which this code was implemented and that Jim Killen, if I might say so, was the man responsible for it.
Mr PEACOCK (Kooyong) (5.0)-1 wish to speak briefly in this debate on the Defence Force Discipline Bill. I will not detain the House for too long. Firstly, I congratulate the Minister at the table, the former Minister for Defence and now Leader of the House (Sir James Killen). He would wish me to congratulate all those who, over the years, have played a role in the eventual formulation of this Bill. I see in the advisers' box Brigadier Maurice Ewing, the Director of Army Legal Services in the days when I was Minister for the Army. He is still in that position. He and his colleagues have put in countless hours on this matter.
I recall the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison) saying earlier in the day that this Bill has evolved from the actions of the Australian Labor Party when in government. The fact is that the current Bill is based on the 1973 working party on the Defence Force disciplinary code. Of course, it had its germination in approximately 1946. When my colleague the Leader of the House was Minister for the Navy and I shared a Service portfolio with him we were involved in looking at what was described in the 1960s as a uniform defence or disciplinary code. So its germination has been long. Painstaking work has been involved in the revision of the defence disciplinary laws. Therefore, it is a matter for congratulation of the Minister, all those officers and men in the various Services who have worked on it and the civilians who have advised on it.

I say as well that it is pleasing that the Opposition, despite the fact that it will move an amendment for a review, which will be considered during the Committee stage, is supporting a Bill of this nature. The previous speaker, the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock), described the Bill as monumental, and indeed it is.
I mentioned a uniform disciplinary code. Without wishing to be pedantic-many will know that it is many years since I was involved in active practice in the law-I think it is a misnomer to
describe it as a uniform disciplinary code because the regime created under the legislation, as I read it, is not entirely uniform; nor is it, strictly speaking in a jurisprudential sense, a code. The Bill is based on common law principles and is not based on a criminal law code. As I said, it is based on a report of the 1973 working party on the defence disciplinary code and undoubtedly follows widespread consultation with members of the defence forces, members of parliament and the public. Indeed, the Minister indicated when introducing the Bill that he would be receptive to representations from the community. I understand that he will be putting further amendments-this has been foreshadowed-when we reach the Committee stage. The resulting Bill is one which should be acceptable to all those concerned.
In introducing the Bill the Minister referred to the existing body of law dealing with Defence Force discipline as a 'Serbonian bog of archaism'. I noted with interest that the honourable member for St George alluded to this. We will miss this type of language in defence material which is brought before the House unless the Leader of the House continues the active and keen interest he is showing today by carrying the legislation through. It is not often that I need to refer to a dictionary when I listen to the Leader of the House, with his capacity for well chosen words, but having been a student of Milton I thought I would look at the dictionary. I note it reveals that the phrase comes from Milton. The dictionary describes the term used by the Minister as 'a situation from which escape is difficult'. The dictionary is somewhat remiss in my view because, as I recall Milton's own words are more appropriate than those found in the dictionary. Milton described the phrase as referring to a place 'where armies whole have sunk'. The existing laws may not have swallowed or sunk our Services but I am sure the escape through this Bill will certainly be a welcome relief. At present each of the Services is subject to different Acts and regulations. The Army and Air Force rely on United Kingdom Acts and regulations long since discarded in the United Kingdom, while the Navy's disciplinary laws are based

Defence Force Discipline Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 499

on more modern United Kingdom statutes. Differences exist, for example, with respect to rules of evidence, provision for laying charges for civil offences, maximum punishments, et cetera. Moreover, unlike the other two Services, the Army draws a distinction between offences committed during peacetime and those committed while on active service. Many offences under existing law are clearly outmoded~the Minister referred to this in his speech~while some modern offences, for example, drug offences, are not dealt with specifically. The objective of the review process has been to achieve a cohesive body of law which is Australian, which is simple and clearly worded, which reflects contemporary attitudes to offences and to the administration of the law and which will meet the requirements of Defence Force discipline for many years to come. This new Bill will, I think, achieve those objectives.
The Bill contains a completely revised set of offences common to all three Services. Obsolete offences are eliminated and other offences are added, so that there will be less reliance on the general catch-all charge of 'conduct to the prejudice'. In future the charge of prejudicial behaviour will apply only to minor offences; it cannot apply, as I understand it, to the more serious offences. As I have said, offences are expressed in modern language that is more easily understood by all Service members. This, of course, is a particularly important point, since for the most part those administering Service law are not in fact lawyers.
Moreover, there will no longer be a need to keep abreast of United Kingdom law which, to put it mildly, was an extraordinarily difficult and time consuming task for even the most sagacious lawyer. The Act, as I said, will be entirely Australian and, in respect of civil offences, triable by Service tribunals. The relevant body of law will be the law of the Australian Capital Territory, not the law of England. As I understand it Defence civilians will now be subject to Service tribunals for certain offences and the scope of Service tribunals to deal with both Defence members and Defence civilians committing civil offences has been widened. The system of punishments has been revised so that maximum punishments reflect modern approaches to the law. A distinction is made between serious and minor offences and this is reflected in the maximum punishments applicable. Outmoded penalties such as cashiering and dismissal with disgrace will disappear. It is worthy of note that the death penalty has been abolished, and properly so. In line with the prin-

ciples on which it relies, the Bill allows for sen-
tencing tribunals to have regard to circumstances of the offence, the convicted person's prior record, maturity and so on.
The Bill provides sentencing criteria to be observed by Service tribunals, allows for sentences to be served concurrently, makes provision for the recording of convictions without punishment and so on. In other words, the Bill brings military law into line with practices and procedures of civil courts for sentencing offenders. Similarly, procedures relating to summons, arrest, custody and suspension of duty have been modernised. With respect to the investigation of offences, the Criminal Investigation Bill 1982 will apply. The administration of Service law will be rationalised with a view to achieving greater uniformity. There will be a two-tiered system of courts martial and a three-tiered system of summary authority. In addition there is provision for Defence Force magistrates, who will be suitably qualified and experienced lawyers and who will have similar authority to a restricted court martial. This innovation, I believe, should allow for
cases to be dealt with more expeditiously, especially when complex legal matters are involved.
The major area where uniformity has not been achieved is in the powers of summary authorities. At present naval summary authorities enjoy much wider powers than their Army or Air Force counterparts. That this is so~and will to a degree remain so~reflects the very special operational conditions of the Navy. However, the discrepancies between the Services will be reduced and there will be greater supervision over the imposition of more severe summary punishments. There is, of course, provision for the automatic review of findings, sentences, et cetera and for the reviewing authorities to obtain legal advice. Consistent with the overall approach embodied in this Bill, there will be one Judge Advocate General, with a Deputy Judge Advocate General from each of the Services.
There is no doubt that the objectives of the review process of the Defence Force discipline laws have been more than adequately met. This Bill is Australian; it is contemporary; in practice it brings military law more closely in line with that applying in the Australian community generally; yet it meets the practical requirements of a modern defence force. There must be those~and I think I heard it said earlier outside the precincts of the House~who have laboured for so long and who now find this day almost surprising as it reaches its fruition. Many years of dedicated work have been spent in bringing this legislation about.

SOO REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Defence Force Discipline Bill

Those involved, from the Minister down, in this long and laborious task, are to be congratulated. The Bill ought to be supported.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (S.IO)-ln my opening remarks in this cognate debate I pay tribute to the former Minister for Defence and now the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen), who is at the table, for introducing this legislation into Parliament in the last session and letting it lie on the table, thus enabling consultations to take place and the legislation to be looked at and examined. I think it is an example that should be followed by many other Ministers in respect of other pieces of legislation. Undoubtedly we will get better legislation if this is the format and procedure adopted. I pay tribute to him as Minister for tying all the various strings together and bringing together the pieces of this legislation into this one uniform code. As has been said before in this debate, and as the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) just said, this legislation Australianises the law for military purposes. It modernises it and makes it uniform. I congratulate the Minister for
that.
I hope and suspect that this Parliament will be in a new era of participation by honourable members in complicated legislation. Knowing the
Minister's great love of. or attitude towards, parliamentary committeesI say this as much in jest as anything else-we may well see when this Bill goes into the Committee stage a new approach and a new attitude to the Committee stage in the House. In seriousness, I think the number of honourable members on the Government side who have spoken today shows the respect for the Minister in the job that he has done. I think it may be the start of a new interest in complicated and detailed legislation in this House. I wish the Minister well and I will watch with great interest the Committee stage of Bills in this session of the Parliament.
Mention has been made of the hard work that has gone into this Bill over many years. From the task force in 1973-74 to the days when the Leader of the House was Minister for the Navy and the honourable member for Kooyong was Minister for the Army this legislation has been talked of. I think those in the Attorney-General's Department and in the Department of Defence need to be congratulated. It has been a prolonged exercise. There has been a thorough review. I pay tribute also to the Defence Force legal reserves, including the Army, the Air Force and the Navy. They have borne a large burden of this work over many years. I know that they have felt frustrated inasmuch as this legislation has not come to pass before now, but I think now that it is here they

would understand that something as complicated as this, which undertakes such fundamental changes as does this legislation, inevitably takes time. The work of the legal reserves of the Army, Navy and Air Force-the seminars they conducted, the discussions they held and the bringing together of their experiences-has played a very important and fundamental part in bringing this legislation together from the three threads of the respective arms of the Defence Services into one piece of legislation applicable to all three. I am sure that Brigadier Ewing, who is in one of the seats occupied by the advisers, would pay tribute to his colleagues in the Navy and in the Air Force in that regard. I can remember Toby Nicholls in the Air Force years ago having seminars and living in hope that this legislation would come sooner than later. As I said, it is here and I think it is timely. It reflects the hard work and the time that its preparation. has taken. It has been a worthwhile exercise.
It is important, however, that the legislation be kept under review. It is new and may need modification and change. It is Australian and it is called an Australianisation. I think that is important. Let us not take it as settled, let us not regard it as perfect. Let us see whether the legislation needs changing and reviewing from time to time to meet the changed circumstances that may exist as something might have been omitted. It standardises basically for the Army, the Navy and the Air Force. Inevitably there will be some differences. Conditions on a ship at sea for long periods are different from conditions applying in the headquarters of an Army base in a capital city. Similarly being in the front line in an Army situation is different from sitting at naval headquarters. We must keep the legislation together and not let it split to return to the three various arms of military law. It is important that we keep the strings of the three threads of the Services-the Army, the Navy and the Air Force-tied together and as uniform as possible. This will reflect the differences that need to be respected in the different Services.
I am afraid that I did not consult any dictionary on this matter and I do not have any poetry to quote on this occasion. Some of my colleagues have done so. I find it very hard to treat this matter lightly because it is a serious subject. The legislation has to be straightforward in order to be understood. It is important that it be serious but simple because not every platoon commander, regimental officer, sergeant major, regimental sergeant major or non-commissioned officer has a lawyer with him or her in any particular situation. The law has to be clearly and simply understood

Defence Force Discipline Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 501

and administered by those who have to administer
it in the defence forces. That is why the legislation is serious and, therefore, should be straightforward.
I suspect the community at large will have a greater understanding of this sort of legislation than ever before because, whilst we are having an Australianisation of defence law relating to Defence Force discipline, at the same time in the Australian community there has been a great rebirth of the film industry. Numbers of the more successful films have been ones that have related to military forces where the interpretation of military law has been part of the theme. I think of films such as Breaker Morant. Gallipoli and the recent Australian Broadcasting Commission success 1915. If members of the community were to stop to reflect on the situations in some of those films, they would see how important it is that we have a simple military law, an Australian military law, that captures the spirit of the original Gallipoli. But it has taken until this time for us to have a completely Australian discipline law to apply to our military forces. We do not have to rely on United Kingdom statutes. We do not need to have a myriad of books to consult from various jurisdictions; in fact we can go to one place at the one time. The former Minister for Defence pointed out that the previous system was a mixture of the United Kingdom and Australian law and certainly provided ample scope for errors to occur.
I have reflected and spoken about the time taken in the preparation of the Bill. It is worth saying that the offences have been completely revised and brought up to date. We have seen offences such as the illegal use of vehicles or the possesssion or use of narcotic drugs brought into the legislation. This is only sensible. In the tying together of the law and bringing it into the one enactment for the three Services three levels of summary authority are provided. The extensive summary powers conferred on Navy commanding officers have been substantially reduced but, on the other hand, there has been an increase in the powers of Army and Air Force summary authorities. Greater supervision has been provided over the imposition of the more severe summary punishments. This is an example of the bringing together of and the compromising among the various arms to have a common denominator applicable to all the services.
The honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman) made an excellent contribution in his speech to the House. He said that the Bill brought about major reforms, Australianised the military law, and replaced the British law with a new and

more appropriate Australian law. As I have also said, it modernises our military law which, until now, as the former Minister for Defence in his second reading speech has pointed out, has been notoriously out of date. The honourable member for Wentworth also said in his thoughtful speech that it provided a uniform code, which I have mentioned, and it simplifies the military law in its rules and procedures.
This legislation Australianises and modernises the law as to Defence Force discipline in Australia in introducing, for the first time, uniform legislation. I congratulate the Minister at the table. I commend the legislation to the House, together with the amendments that I know the Minister proposes to introduce.
Mr HARRIS (Chisholm) (5.23)-These Bills will, when passed, finally consolidate and modernise our disciplinary law in this country as it applies to our Defence Force. The Defence Force Discipline Bill provides new disciplinary legislation for our Defence Force and for the first time in one Act the disciplinary law applicable to the three arms of our Force. The Defence Force Discipline Bill is based on a report of the 1973 working party on the Defence Force disciplinary code which was tabled in Parliament in April 1974. As has been noted by a number of previous speakers, the origins of this legislation in fact go back to about 1946. It has taken a further eight years since the tabling of the report to get to this point.
I note that the Opposition supports this Bill. One hopes that the legislation will have a speedy passage when it gets through to the Senate. I join with those honourable members who have spoken in paying tribute to all those who have worked to get this very large piece of legislation to this point and in particular to the former Minister for Defence and present Leader of the House (Sir James Killen), who is at the table, who has had and still has the carriage of this legislation.
The Defence Force Discipline Bill provides new disciplinary legislation. I will not attempt to deal with all of the essential features of the Bill which include the creation of service tribunals with a power to try members of the Defence Force on charges of Service offences against the Bill. It will provide these tribunals with the power to try civilians accompanying the Defence Force outside Australia or on operations against the enemy for some of those offences in certain circumstances. Civilians are not otherwise to be liable to be tried by service tribunals, nor are any offences created by the Bill to be triable by civil courts.

502 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Defence Force Discipline Bill

The Bill provides a system of internal appeal against, and review of, convictions and punishments complementary to the system of external appeal against, and review of, convictions provided by the Courts-Martial Appeals Act. The Bill also makes provision for related matters, such as investigation of offences, suspension from duty, powers of arrest, power to order restitution of stolen property or payment of reparation for damage or loss caused, conviction without punishment, approval of certain punishments by higher authority, suspension and remission of punishments, execution and enforcement of punishments, and parole.
Reference has already been made by the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) to the desirability of parole and the problems which have occurred in the past with the inability of the Services to allow for that. The additional, different and varied forms of punishment available in this legislation allow service tribunals and courts-martial to apply punishments of a kind which are generally accepted in civil courts as being appropriate in these times. The Bill provides
for service tribunals to operate at two principal levels: At the lower level there are summary authorities; at the higher level there are courts-
martial and Defence Force magistrates. No offence is to be tried by a court-martial or a Defence Force magistrate unless there has been a preliminary hearing by a summary authority.
The procedure under the Bill by which charges against an accused person are heard and brought to trial is in many respects analogous to that by which an alleged offence is heard and tried by a civil court. The function undertaken by a magistrate of disposing of minor charges and conducting a preliminary hearing of charges that are to be brought to trial before a superior court is, in relation to offences under the Bill, to be undertaken by a commanding officer. The Bill provides three levels of summary authorities. In ascending order these are: Subordinate summary authorities, commanding officers and superior summary authorities. The manner in which an alleged offence will initially be dealt with will depend upon the nature of the offence and the circumstances of its discovery.
Where the facts are straightforward-for example, a member is detected in the commission of an offence-the member will immediately be charged with an offence. In the case of some offences, such as theft or fraud, the laying of charges may have to be deferred pending an investigation by Service or civil police in order to establish the identity of the alleged offender or to obtain sufficient evidence to justify the laying of charges. In

the case of apparently more serious offences, including those involving injury or loss of life or the negligent operation of a ship, the laying of charges may have to be deferred pending the holding of a Service court of inquiry or board of inquiry. An accused will not be placed under arrest unless there is a particular reason for doing so, such as to prevent him repeating the offence, destroying evidence or absconding.
Where the accused is a sailor, soldier or airman, he will, after he has been charged and such police investigation as is necessary has been completed, attend before the subordinate summary authority for a formal hearing of the charge. The charge will be read to the accused and, if necessary, explained to him. If the subordinate summary authority has power to try the charge and proposes to try the charge himself, the accused will be asked to plead to it. The evidenc!,! will be given orally, on oath and in the presence of the accused, who will be entitled to cross-examine the prosecution witnesses and to call witnesses in his defence. This is, of course, essentially the procedure which we find in our normal civilian criminal courts. If the subordinate summary authority tries the charge and convicts the accused he will, before imposing a punishment, hear any plea in mitigation of the punishment that the accused wishes to make and consult the previous service record of the accused. When dealing with a charge that will be referred to the commanding officer a subordinate summary authority will usually not hear all the evidence; it will be his function to hear sufficient evidence to ensure that relevant matters will be brought before the commanding officer.
In the Royal Australian Navy, as has been mentioned by at least one other speaker, there will be two tiers of subordinate summary authority: The officer of the watch, whose powers of punishment will be the same as those of an Australian Army or Royal Australian Air Force subordinate summary authority, and the executive officer, whose powers of punishment will be greater. Offences by sailors will normally be considered first by the officer of the watch and then referred by him to the executive officer or to the commanding officer as appropriate. This difference in relation to the Navy is, of course, a product of the differences of naval service. For example, it would be very difficult to convene a court-martial when a ship is away on exercise or, even more so, if it is operating in distant waters. Even if it is not a court-martial but is a matter to be heard by a Defence Force magistrate, the problems of getting the accused, witnesses and the like to the Defence Force magistrate would be both time consuming and costly.

Defence Force Discipline Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 503

When a charge comes before a commanding officer he has several options: He may try the charge, direct that it not be proceeded with or refer it to another commanding officer, a superior summary authority or a convening authority, depending upon the circumstances of the case and the jurisdiction that may be exercised by himself and other authorities. The superior summary authority will have power to try charges against officers, warrant officers and civilians only. He will try a charge or refer it to a convening authority. There will be two levels of courts-martial: General courts-martial and restricted courts martial. The only difference between the two is that the latter will normally consist of fewer members with a less senior president and will have restricted powers of punishment equal to those of the Defence Force magistrate.
The procedure of trial by court-martial appears not to be essentially altered from that of the past in that certain functions of a judge, such as ruling on questions of law or summing up, are performed by the judge advocate. The members of the court martial will perform the role of a jury but will also determine the punishment. The president of the court-martial will be responsible for ensuring the proper conduct of the trial. This procedure, as I said, would appear to be essentially that which existed previously. The appointment of Defence Force magistrates will be made from qualified service lawyers whose names are on the judge advocates' panel. I join the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) in paying tribute to the many officers of the Reserve legal panels who have contributed and assisted over a long period and, no doubt, will continue to do so.
One final matter I wish to refer to is the question of review. There will be an automatic review of all convictions and punishments imposed by service tribunals. This is a highly desirable measure. I recently had brought to my attention a situation in which injustice would undoubtedly have occurred had it not been for a further review of the particular case. Convictions and punishments imposed by a subordinate summary authority will be reviewed in the first instance by the commanding officer, who may obtain a report on the proceedings from a designated legal officer. The proceedings may in certain circumstances be subsequently reviewed by reviewing authorities appointed by each Chief of Staff or be reviewed by the Chief of Staff himself. In the case of all reviews by reviewing authorities and Chiefs of Staff the obtaining of a report on the proceedings from a designated legal officer will be mandatory. As I said, I think this is a most important provision in the legislation.

In the nature of things, errors can occur, certainly in summary punishments. For what is thought to be for the good of a particular establishment, matters might be disposed of too swiftly and, possibly, to the injustice of an accused person. As I said, this legislation is a notable advance. One hopes that we will not take 37 years next time to introduce changes to Defence Force discipline legislation. One hopes equally that the vast amount of work which has gone into this legislation will mean that we will not have to have such dramatic and considerable changes for a long time. I support the legislation.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
Clauses 1to 71-by leave-taken together.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Vice President of the Executive Council) (5.36)-by leave-I move:
(I) Clause 3, page 10, at the end of the clause add the following sub-clause:
'(IS) For the purposes of any law of the Commonwealth other than this Act, an offence against this Act or the regulations shall not be taken not to be an offence against a law of the Commonwealth by reason that it forms part of the law regulating the relationship between the Commonwealth and members of the Defence Force and other persons.-
(2) Clause 14, page 14, lines 22 to 25, omit paragraph (b), substitute the following paragraph:
(b) was in obedience to-
(i) a lawful order; or
(ii) an unlawful order that the person did not know, and could not reasonably be expected to have known, was unlawful.'
Amendments agreed to.
Clauses, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 72 (Non-parole period to be fixed).
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (5.37)-1 move:
(3) Clause 72, page 37, omit the clause, substitute the following clause:
Application of Commonwealth Prisoners Act
'72. (I) The Commonwealth Prisoners Act 1967 (other than sub-section 4 (3) applies in relation to a service tribunal that imposes a punishment of imprisonment for a specific period on a convicted person as if-
(a) the service tribunal were a court of, and the person was convicted in, the Australian Capital Territory; and
(b) the reference in sub-section 4 (2) of that Act to matters to which a court is to have regard in fixing a lesser term of imprisonment in pursuance of subsection 4 (I) of that Act included a reference to the need to maintain discipline in the Defence Force.
'(2) The fixing of a minimum term of imprisonment, or the giving of a direction, by a service tribunal under the Commonwealth Prisoners Act 1967 in its application by

S04 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Defence Force Discipline Bill

virtue of sub-section (I) of this section to the service tribunal, shall be taken, for the purposes of this Act, to be an order fixing that minimum term of imprisonment, or.giving that direction, as the case may be, made by the servIce tnbunal under this part.'
I understand that this amendment will give greater certainty to the outcome which 1 am very anxious to achieve in this legislation, that is, that service tribunals have the opportunity to fix a lesser term of imprisonment which a person might serve before he is released on parole. Whilst the
amendment, as proposed, certainly does not state that that is the objective I understand that for greater certainty the matter has to be dealt with by reference to the Commonwealth Prisoners ~ct 1967 which also gives effect to that. 1 would lIke to draw honourable members' attention to the explanatory memorandum which states:
Sub-clause (I) requires service tribunals to make orders fixing non-parole periods as if they were courts of the Australian Capital Territory; the Parole Ordmance 1976 (ACT) is to be applied. Sub-clause (2) allows these orders to be deemed to be orders of the purposes of the Commonwealth Prisoners Act.
1 simply reiterate the matters that I mentioned in my speech at the second reading stage of the debate. It is very important that servicemen who are committed to prison be committed in relation to like offences in the same way that people might be committed to prison for the commission of of-
fences under civil law. 1 mentioned that 1 was aware of a particular case where a prisoner was committed to prison for some two years by a defence tribunal. He was left in the invidious position of having no parole period fixed. He had to serve the sentence that was given to him while others, who had two year sentences, of course could be released somewhat earlier because a period for parole had been set when the sentence was imposed. Whilst it might be surmised that those who are involved in setting sentences would be aware of the fact that there was a difference between the defence provisions and the civil law that is not a matter that ought to be left to chance. It is a matter that needs to be dealt with by the law. I understand that these provisions will give effect to that and for that reason 1 am very pleased that such provisions will be included in
this Bill.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (MoretonVicePresident of the Executive Council) (S.40)-Mr Chairman, I would be indebted to you if you would correct me if I am wrong but 1 think it is some time in this House since a private member has moved a Government amendment. However I thought it proper that the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) should move this amendment because some years ago he drew to my attention a set of circumstances for which 1 had a great

deal of sympathy but there was absolutely nothing 1 could do about them. It involved a case where a sailor had been convicted and sentenced to two years gaol but there was no opportunity for his sentence to be reduced or for parole to be granted. 1 felt keenly about the issue at the time but all 1 could do was to offer sympathy to the honourable member for Dundas and 1 am indebted to him for his sense of perseverenee over the years. 1 repeat that 1 think it is thoroughly appropriate that he should have moved this amendment.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (S.41) - The Opposition does not oppose the amendment. However, the suggestion has been raised that this is not necessarily an adequate explanation for the deletion, in a subsequent amendment, of clause 174, which is said to be' covered in this amendment. 1 ask the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) whether either prior to the passage of this amendment or prior to dealing with, 1 think amendment IS, he will assure the House that the provisions of clause 174 are fully and similarly covered in this amendment. That amendment will be moved a little later.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (MoretonVicePresident of the Executive Council) (S.42)-1 take this opportunity to explain to my friend that he has not caught me completely unawares. Clause 174 effectively duplicates the provisions of section 19 and 20 of the Commonwealth Prisoners Act. Clause 72, as amended, now applies those provisions and most of the other provisions of the Commonwealth Prisoners Act to persons sentenced. For that reason clause 174 is redundant, it is otiose, and should be omitted.
Amendment agreed to.
Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (MoretonVicePresident of the Executive Council (S.43)-by leave-I move:
(4) Clause 133, page 66, lines II to 13, omit sub-clause (I), substitute the following sub-clause:
"( I) Subject to section 134, in any proceeding before a court martial-
(a) the President shall preside; and
(b) every question shall be determined by the members of the court martial.".
(5) Clause 134, page 66, lines 27 to 31, omit sub-clause (I), substitute the following sub-clause:
"( I) In proceedings before a court martial, the judgeadvocate shall give any ruling, and exerCIse any dIscretIOn, that in accordance with the law in force in the Australian Capital Territory, would be given or exercised by a judge in a trial by jury.".

Defence Force Discipline Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 505

(6) Clause 134, page 66, lines 38 to 40, omit sub-clause (3), substitute the following sub-clause:
"(3) Notwithstanding sub-sections (I) and (2), in a proceeding before a court martial, the members of the court martial shall determine what action shall be taken under Part IV in relation to a convicted person, but the judge advocate shall give a ruling on any question of law arising in connection with the making of such a determination.".
(7) Clause 138, page 69, line 17, insert ", or cause to be administered," after "administer".
(8), Clause 154, page 77, line 7, omit ", or of mixed law and fact, .
(9) Clause 154, page 77, line 14, omit ", or of mixed law and fact,".
(10) Clause 155, page 77, line 28, omit ", or of mixed law and fact,".
(II) Clause 162, page 81, lines 15 to 21, omit sub-clauses (6) and (7), substitute the following sub-clauses:
"(6) Where in a review it appears to the reviewing authority that a service tribunal has imposed a punishment of imprisonment on a convicted person and has not fixed a lesser term of imprisonment during which the person is not to be eligible to be released on parole under sections 4 (I) and "(2) of the Commonwealth Prisoners Act 1967 in itsapplication, by virtue of sub-section 72 (I) of this Act, to the service tribunal, the reviewing authority may fix such a lesser term of imprisonment.
"(7) Section 72 applies in relation to the fixing of a lesser term of imprisonment under sub-section (6) as if the reviewing authority were the service tribunal concerned.".
(12) Clause 174, page 85, lines 24 to 31, omit the clause.
Amendments agreed to.
MrSCHOLES (Corio) (5.44)-1 move:
Page 94, after clause 197, insert the following clause:
Review of Defence Force discipline law
'197A. (I) The Minister shall, as soon as practicable after the expiration of 3 years after the proclaimed date, establish a Board, to be known as the Defence Force Discipline Legislation Board of Review, consisting of such persons as he determines.
(2) The Board shall, within 12 months after it is established, prepare and furnish to the Minister a report relating to-
(a) the operation of this Act and the regulations; and
(b) the operation of any other law of the Commonwealth or of the Australian Capital Territory in so far as that law relates to the discipline of the Defence Force.
(3) The Minister may determine-
(a) the manner in which the Board is to perform its functions; and
(b) the procedure to be followed at or in relation to meetings of the Board, including matters with respect to-
(i) the convening of meetings of the Board; (ii) the number of members of the Board who are to
constitute a quorum; (iii) t he selection of a member of the Board to preside
at meetings of the Board; and (iv) the manner in which questions arising at a meet-
ing of the Board are to be decided.
(4) A member of the Board shall be paid such remuneration (if any) as is determined by the Remuneration Tribunal.

(5) Subject to the Remuneration Tribunals Act 1973, members of the Board shall be paid such allowances as the Minister determines.
(6) The Minister shall make available to the Board such secretarial or clerical assistance as is necessary to enable the Board to perform its functions.
(7) The Minister shall cause the report of the Board to be laid before each House of the Parliament within 15 sitting days of that House after the receipt of that report by the Minister.'.
As I indicated to the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) earlier the Opposition has deleted two sub-clauses of the amendment. Obviously clause 9 has been renumbered to become clause 7. The deletion involves certain technical matters which relate to freedom of information. We feel these should not be written into this type of amendment which is designed specifically to bring about a review of the Act by a board of review after this proposed Act and other related Acts have been in operation for a period of not less than three years. This is a fairly complicated piece of legislation. This Parliament is certainly covering new ground in Australian law in relation to the Australian forces. We believe that it is not possible to anticipate problems in a piece of legislation of this magnitude but it should be mandatory that a review take place after a reasonable period when any defects in the operations of the Act have shown up. For that reason we are proposing that a review take place after three years.
I point out the great difficulties that there are of reopening a subject such as this at a parliamentary or even a political level once it has been dealt with and the traumas of getting legislation such as this before the Parliament. I mentioned in the debate at the second reading stage that this piece of legislation is the result of an initial order of the Minister for the Army as far back as 1946. It came before this Parliament as an initial draft in 1973 and again in 1975. One would think that given that type of history it would be better to have a provision in the Bill which requires that a review take place rather than depend on the fates of history, politicial activities and who happens to be in power at a particular time.
It may well be that the reviewing committee would find nothing wrong with the Bill but I think it is better to have an automatic review. There is already provision for automatic reviews of all cases heard under this legislation. It would be better to have an automatic review built into the legislation than to have to wait until substantial deficiencies occur that would require a review. Minor deficiencies can be just as debilitating to those people involved but these would very rarely bring about the political action necessary to change them. In dealing with the amendment

506 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Defence Force Discipline Bill

dealt with earlier I think the Minister indicated that a deficiency in a Bill is not always corrected merely because it becomes apparent.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Vice President of the Executive Council) (5.46)-1 believe I understand the sentiment of the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes). This is a Bill which, after a long period, is on the threshold of passing through this chamber to another place and, I hope, on to the statute book. It was the then Army Minister, Mr Frank Forde-who is still alive today-who commissioned Mr Justice Reed to make certain inquiries. The honourable member has a sense of anxiety that there may be a lacuna in this proposed Act. In his view there may be deficiencies and the legislation should be reviewed. Having said that, I wonder whether my friend's amendment meets his sentiment. It reads:
The Minister shall, as soon as practicable after the expiration of three years after the proclaimed date, establish a Board-
That is, a board to review. That amendment could be read two ways. Firstly, what if a deficiency were found three months afterwards? One would seek to review it. I am one who does not take a cynical view of this world. I think reason still has a role to play in the conduct of our affairs. Irrespective of what kind of government it may be, I would hope that with legislation of this character if deficiencies were found the government would attend to the matter. I have reflected on what my friend said and circulated on his amendment. I have taken the opportunity of discussing it with officers who have had a very long association with the legislation. I cannot see a convincing argument in favour of the amendment. I am not being obstinate about this. Plenty of Bills have passed through this chamber on which I would have liked to tack amendments. I am thinking of what my friend would call the halcyon days, 1972-75, when I would have liked to tack on requirements for reviews in one month, three months or six months. That would not have been within the realm of practical politics.
It is for that reason that I cannot respond to the plausible and courteous argument which the honourable gentleman has pressed on the Committee. I say to him and to his colleagues to be of good cheer. If there are flaws in the legislation I am sure the Minister of the day, whoever he may be, and the government of the day, whatever its political colours, will attend to them.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (5.49)-1 merely say there are two aspects. Firstly, the drafting of the Bill is that of the draftsman who drafts it in order to achieve a purpose. I think the Defence Force Discipline Bill is not necessarily the same as the

general run of Bills which go through the Parliament. I believe, as the Minister has indicated, that if a major flaw in a piece of legislation such as this turned up it would be immediately corrected. The purpose of any review would be to review the operations of the proposed Act in its totality in order that any changes which were necessary or recommended or which had become apparent were undertaken. It is quite possible in an act of this nature for that to cover a fairly widespread area without having any major deficiencies. An Act which seeks to impose an almost totally new concept of law, which one would hope is not of a political nature but concerns the rights of various individuals as they relate to the Bill, should be respected, should be capable of review and should be reviewed after a period of operation.
This Bill is new law and whilst the basis of it may be well established it is not an area-such as those areas the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) mentioned-where political considerations may come into effect. In fact we are not suggesting that there are any political motives or any deficiencies in the Bill at the moment. I am sure there are a number of areas in which my colleagues and I could have drafted amendments. We did not. We believed that it would be far better to test the operation of the Bill in practical terms, through its actual operation, and to ensure that the results of those operations are subject to an automatic review-not one which has to be dredged up through the political system, given the pressures which exist in this place and in government for matters of lesser political consequence to be given lower priority. I do not suggest that any Minister would wish to neglect this but I point out that the traumatic history of this legislation would suggest that without a provision such as this in the Bill it would be extremely difficult to have it reviewed in any reasonable time. Unless major reasons were able to be advanced, rather than minor reasons, I think it would be impossible to get a review established at a time when I believe the operations of the Bill should have become apparent.
Amendment negatived.
Remainder of Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Vice President of the Executive Council (5.53)-by leave-I move:
That the Bill be read a third time.

Wildlife Protection Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 507

I thank honourable members who have spoken on the Defence Force Discipline Bill for their generosity of language. I have said two prayers: One for their extravagance of reference to me and the second because I was tempted to believe what they had to say. I appreciate the response of the House. What I have done has been but very little compared with the very great efforts of officers who have advised on this Bill. I include those on the Service and civil sides of the Services and those who interest themselves in the Services in a reserve capacity. It has been their sense of diligence and persistence that has enabled the Bill to reach this stage in its history.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a third time.

DEFENCE FORCE (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL 1982 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 29 April, on motion by Sir James Killen:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

The Bill.

In Committee

Sir JAMES KILLEN (MoretonVice-
President of the Executive Council) (5.56)-by leave-I move:

(I) Clause 52, page 16, line 34; omit 'period', substitute 'period or by a fine of an amount not exceeding $500'.

(2) Clause 52, page 16, line 37, omit 'first-mentioned
period', substitute 'first-mentioned period or by a fine of an amount not exceeding $500'.

Amendments agreed to.

Bill, as amended, agreed to.

Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave-adopted.

Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Sir James Killen)-by leave-read a third time.
Sitting suspended from 5.59 to 8 p.m.
MEMBERSHIP OF COMMITTEES
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-I have received advice from the Government Whip that he has nominated the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman) to be a member of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence in place of Mr Carlton, the Minister for Health.

Mr Speaker has received advice from the Government Whip that he has nominated the honourable member for Warringah (Mr MacKellar) to be a member of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation in place of Mr Hodges, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.
WILDLIFE PROTECTION (REGULATION OF EXPORTS AND
IMPORTS) BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 6 May, on motion by Mr Wilson:
That the Bill be now read a second time
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (8.1)-World traffic in fauna and flora is a lucrative business which has endangered the survival of many species in the wild. The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora-that is, the CITES agreement-signed in 1973 is the result of international attempts to control this illicit trade. The Convention seeks to regulate strictly trade in species which are endangered. Seventy-three countries have ratified CITES but certain countries, notably Singapore, act as a clearing house and also a laundering facility for illicitly procured wildlife. At present the illegal trade is extremely lucrative with profits approaching those of drug trafficking, without the risks. The live animal trade involves great cruelty with up to 90 per cent of the specimens dying en route to market.
Australia ratified CITES by introducing the Customs (Endangered Species) Regulations in 1976 under the Customs Act. These regulations control the export and import of species listed in appendices of CITES. Unfortunately the Customs Act provides for penalties of up to only $1,000 in fines. I was informed by the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) in answer to a question on notice that in spite of the fact that illegal wildlife trade is estimated to be worth $40m a year there have been only two convictions made under the Endangered Species regulations since 1976 with fines totalling only $250. This situation must be changed. The Opposition, with some qualification, supports the proposed legislation. It should help by providing penalties of sufficient size to act as a deterrent to smugglers and reversing the onus of proof in certain cases.
This legislation consolidates other regulations concerning prohibited imports and exports and

508 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Wildlife Protection Bill

gives legislative teeth to Federal intentions regarding wildlife. It will regulate trade in Australian native fauna, species which are endangered by reasons other than trade and species which Australia considers a special case on the grounds of animal welfare or national policy. The welfare of live animals is considered as to whether institutions or circuses and travelling exhibitions can humanely keep the species in captivity. Strict rules apply about the non-release to the environment of imported species. I understand that the Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill covers some weaknesses of CITES by protecting endangered species not affected by trade and so not in the CITES appendices and by regulating the import of wildlife or their products which are considered to be personal effects.
I understand that the States were consulted on this legislation and that they have supported it. The Opposition, considering this legislation necessary and long overdue, supports it also. Under present arrangements the Minister responsible for Customs is in charge of the regulation governing the import and export to Australia and is also the management authority regulating CITES. Wildlife authorities provide assistance, I understand, but it is a most unsatisfactory arrangement to have the Minister responsible for Customs in charge of wildlife protection legislation. Under this Government there have been examples where a Minister responsible for Customs has made decisions on wildlife export or import without any consultation or without sufficient consultation with the Minister for Home Affairs and the Environment. The legislation before the House places control of wildlife firmly in the hands of the Minister responsible-that is, the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment. The Act is to be administered by his Department and the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service. They will, and should, handle inquiries, publicity, applications, permits and authorities while Customs officers should still enforce the Act on the ground. In certain cases wildlife officers from the Commonwealth or a State may enforce the Act also. Such arrangements should result in more effective control.
The legislation will operate through a series of schedules which list species which require or do not require a permit issued under its provisions. Import or export without a permit of species on Schedules I, 2 and 3 and those Australian native species not on Schedule 4 will be liable to the maximum fine of $ 100,000 for a person or $200,000 for a body corporate and/or a gaol term of up to five years. The first three schedules list plants and animals which may not be exported or

imported without a permit. Export of live native Australian animals, except for fish and certain marine vertebrates, is prohibited for commercial trade on welfare grounds. The public cannot keep exotic pets as easily as it does dogs and cats. I agree that protection should be offered to those Australian wild animals that are not on Schedule 4 to prevent unregulated trade in that area because we have to be responsible for the ultimate welfare of the animals in question. It may be very easy to argue that because we are shooting kangaroos or killing parrots in Australia it is acceptable to export them even under a management plan in large numbers as it is to shoot them. But the point is: Once we get Australian kangaroos, birds, et cetera becoming part of the world pet trade it is very easy for people, say, in apartments on Manhattan Island to take a spot decision to purchase a small kangaroo. It is easy to buy, but it is much more difficult to look after the animal. I do not think Australia wants to get into the situation where we are not unwilling to crack down on this undesirable trade.
Schedule I contains those species on Appendix I of CITES threatened by international trade, those Australian plants and animals considered endangered by the Council of Nature Conservation Ministers and other species in danger for reasons other than trade-that is, habitat destruction, et cetera. There are stringent rules, I understand, in granting permits for these species. Export and import can be for scientific research or inter-zoological garden transfer. If a species is not a live Australian animal, it can be exported for commercial purposes if it was bred in captivity. The Australian institution which receives the plant or animal must be an institution approved to care for that class of specimen.
Schedule 2 includes CITES Appendix 2 species which may become threatened if trade is not regulated. Commercial trade in these species is allowed if the species was bred in captivity or was taken in accordance with a management program approved by a designated authority. Schedule 3 includes all the cetacea-that is, whales and dolphins-with stricter control than Schedule I since no commercial export from this Schedule is or should be allowed at all. Schedules 4, 5 and 6 contain reverse lists of species of plants and animals which may be impor!ed or exported without a permit. These are species involved in primary industry and regulated by other legislation-for example, fisheries. Schedule 4 includes all species of marine fish, barramundi and marine invertebrates, such as mussels.
All native Australian species not on this Schedule require a permit to be exported. Conditions

Wildlife Protection Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 509

for export are similar to those in Schedule 2. None of these live animals, except freshwater fish or household pets, can be exported other than for research programs or inter-zoo transfers. Freshwater fish can be exported live if caught under an approved management program or bred in captivity and household pets can be taken out with the owner if they have been in the person's care for three years. Schedules 5 and 6 list animals which can be imported without a permit. Schedule 5 contains a list of domesticated animals well established in Australia. I understand that Schedule 6 is comprised of species of freshwater and marine aquarium fish which may be imported into Australia without a permit under this Act but after meeting the provisions of the quarantine Act to ensure that they do not introduce disease or pests into Australia.
I understand that an area of the Bill not included in the schedules deals with imports of animals for travelling circuses. In this case, as with zoos and scientific institutions, a prime consideration is the welfare of the animal in captivity, as it should be, and the prevention of its release into the Australian environment. Only species not listed in Schedules I and 2 are allowed to be imported with the circus. While dealing with the subject of animal welfare, I foreshadow an Opposition amendment to this Bill. Schedule 3 is designed to protect on welfare grounds. It includes whales and dolphins. In light of the brutal Canadian seal hunt, the harp and hooded seals should be placed on Schedule 3. The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) issued a Press statement today stating that Australia will participate as an observer at the International Council for the Exploration of the Seas conference on the seal hunt. However, I think the Government must act now to put the seals in Schedule 3.
A couple of points in this Bill might make it an effective piece of legislation. Most decisions on rejected permits will be appealed against through the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. The onus of proof is reversed in clause 53 (I) (b) in which a person possesses a specimen and knows or has reasonable grounds to know that it has been illegally imported. The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation, in its 1978 report on trafficking in fauna, stated that once a smuggler gets past the point of entry he or she is virtually impossible to bring to justice. This Bill will not cover interstate trade. But I note in clause 75 that the Minister can collect statistics on interstate as well as international trade. It is here we should consider the establishment of an office of traffic to monitor

properly the CITES trade, the interstate trade and, if possible, the illicit trade. More staff in the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service would be needed to do this. Since there is no comparable office of traffic in the Western Pacific or South East Asian region it would serve an important function internationally to monitor the regional trade.
Australian wildlife fetches huge prices overseas. A breeding pair of golden-shouldered parrots in appendix I of CITES have been claimed to have been sold overseas for $30,000 while the sulphur-crested cockatoo fetches in the order of $1,000 to $1,500 in the United States of America. A pair of New Guinea's birdwing butterflies may fetch $1,000. In the past controls have been most ineffective. Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport is considered a major channel for illegal fauna smuggling yet convictions have been few and far between. In 1979 there were six prosecutions for 160 bird seizures. In 1980 there were three prosecutions for the seizure of 80 birds and 21 reptiles. In 1981 there were seven prosecutions for the seizure of 161 birds. Clearly, these successful prosecutions do not reflect the extent of the problem. From October 1979 to June 1980, 39,000 birds native to Australia were illegally imported into the United States, mainly through European countries. Assuming an 80 to 90 per cent mortality rate for illegally smuggled birds, between 100,000 and 200,000 must have left Australia.
There have been allegations of a lack of cooperation between wildlife and Customs authorities hampering proper operation of the present regulations. The Government, I think, has been lax in investigating these allegations. I hope the situation will improve when this legislation is proclaimed. The Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill is a complicated piece of legislation which will require a major commitment in staff and funds if it is to be effective. Before it is proclaimed an information campaign should be established to inform citizens and relevant bodies of the requirements of Australia's legislation. If the public can be educated not to carry back products of endangered species, staff can be released to catch the more unsavoury individuals involved in the massive illegal trade. Success would also depend on co-operation between State and Federal wildlife authorities and Customs officers.
A Labor government will seek co-operation with the States to ensure that the Act, amended if the Labor Party sees it necessary, works efficiently. It will be important that the Government thoroughly examines overseas management programs before approving species to be collected

510 REPRESENTAT]VES 18 August 1982

Wildlife Protection Bill

to ensure the preservation of not only the population but also the habitat and that any collection is carried out in as humane a manner as possible. The Act should be proclaimed as soon as possible because under this Government there has been an inordinate delay in combating the cruel trade in endangered species and Australian wildlife and in the completion of this legislation. Now is the time to implement what this Government says it stands for without any undue delay.
Mr FISHER (Mallee) (8.19)-] am very happy to support, with some qualifications which ] will mention later, the Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill introduced by the Government to strengthen arrangements for the protection of Australia's animals and plants and world wildlife generally by improving the effectiveness of our import and export controls. ] am sure we will all agree that the uniqueness, diversity and quantity of Australia's flora and fauna place a special responsibility on all of us in this Parliament to do our utmost to ensure that we avoid species becoming extinct. Regrettably, many species of our flora and fauna have become extinct in recent times. The causes, as the second reading speech by the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) suggests, include thoughtlessness, overexploitation and simple lack of knowledge and
understanding.
Possibly the most devastating impact on wildlife has been the destruction of the natural habitat which for many species has made survival impossible. I believe Australia has traditionally set high standards of protection and in some respects we have provided world leadership. For example, ] mention the particularly significant legislation that was achieved in 1980 with the enactment of the Whale Protection Act which prohibits the taking of cetaceans in Australian waters or by Australians elsewhere. At meetings of the International Whaling Commission Australia continues to playa most significant role in reducing the catch quotas and in arguing for a complete moratorium on harvesting. As the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) said, in 1973
Australia and about 70 other countries negotiated the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna. This arose, of course, from a world-wide concern about the adverse effects of unregulated trade on the world's wildlife.
I turn now to this new piece of legislation and its accompanying amendments. The Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill consolidates wildlife controls into a single Act. It will allow the Commonwealth more effectively to

implement the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species. A permit system will be used to impose conditions appropriate to the status of the species being traded. The Bill also provides for maximum penalties of $100,000 or five years imprisonment, plus forfeiture of goods and equipment involved in the case of individuals. The maximum penalty is $200,000 plus forfeiture in the case of organisations. I believe these penalties are appropriate to the high potential rewards involved and to the indications of organised criminal activity in wildlife trafficking. The possibility of a gaol sentence is a necessary deterrent, as illegal traffickers customarily offer to pay fines and all other expenses for couriers. The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation in its 1976 inquiry of which I was a member-the Chairman was the honourable member for Petrie who is now the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges)-reported on the trafficking in fauna and the wildlife smuggling that OCGllrs in remote areas of Australia. During our inquiry we found that the international smuggling of Australian native birds is a highly capitalised and organised
activity involving land, sea and air operations and a network of contacts throughout Australia and overseas. It was a thriving commercial activity involving an annual turnover estimated then by some to exceed $2m and by others to be several times that figure. The involvement of light aircraft and ocean-going yachts is an indication of the extent of the huge profits available.
Australia's strict controls over the export of fauna and the existence of many unique native species have created a demand overseas and a strong incentive to smuggle. The range of profitable smuggling lines is extensive, ranging from rare species to common varieties of birds and reptiles. Australian birds, especially parrots, are the most popular item in demand overseas. Conservative estimates of the prices of Australian parrots on the overseas markets during the year in which we made our inquiry ranged from $100 a pair for crimson rosellas to $3,000 a pair for the rare golden-shouldered parrot. Evidence was given to the Committee that the current value of a matched breeding pair of golden-shouldered parrots ranged from $8,000 to $10,000. Other witnesses representing the Bureau of Customs referred to a prosecution of couriers for attempting to smuggle out of this country 14 parrots concealed in an overcoat. These birds had an estimated retail value in Europe of $27,000. The total fines imposed amounted to only $1,740. Allowing for a casualty rate in the birds being smuggled of 50 per cent or even more this

Wildlife Protection Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 511

attempt, had it been successful, would have resulted in a considerable profit and was well worth the risk to the smugglers.
Resulting from the widespread inquiry that the House of Representatives Committee carried out, many recommendations were made in relation to the relaxation of import controls. Criticism was constantly made during the course of our inquiry that restrictions on the export of Australian fauna since 1959 had been responsible for the increase in demand for our wildlife overseas. These have created the climate for commercial exploitation
and smuggling as it exists today. Arguments were advanced by witnesses in favour of the relaxation of Australia's export controls, indicating that the present export policy does not discriminate between rare and endangered species of fauna or common or pest species. Species considered as pests are given the same export protection as the rare and endangered ones, hence the absurd situation of smugglers earning large sums of money abroad for fauna which is being destroyed daily in Australia because it is a pest. The honourable member for Cunningham cited the case of the sulphur crested cockatoo which is bringing $1,000 per bird in New York. Many primary producers in the west Wimmera area of my electorate would be prepared to send millions of sulphur crested cockatoos to New York for nothing.
Various institutions overseas are able to breed rare species of marsupials in captivity. The success in New York of breeding the platypus before it was achieved in Australia is an interesting illustration. Thus to allow exports of these species may help the survival of that species. Some aviculturalists consider that certain species of birds, although rare and endangered in the wild, have been so successfully bred as aviary birds that they are now common in captivity and should therefore be available from aviary stocks to aviculturalists overseas. The relaxation of export controls for common or pest species would allow authorities to concentrate their efforts on the conservation of a considerably smaller number of species. Australian Government fauna export control policies are stricter than those of any other national government and go further than is required by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora to which Australia is a signatory.
Of course, many witnesses in the course of our inquiry argued that Australia's strict export regulatIOns should be retained. The main arguments placed before the Committee were that, regardle~s of any relaxation of the existing policy to permIt the export of common or pest species, there would always remain a demand for rare and

endangered species and the situation would be virtually unchanged. It was argued that restricted export of a limited number of species would establish the principle, that Australian native fauna was a commercial commodity and that pressure would develop for the quota of individual species and for the number of species approved for export to be increased. The profit motive for the export activity would ensure that this pressure was maintained, thus distracting officers from more important work. It was also argued by witnesses opposed to opening up the export markets for Australian fauna that although government would control the quantity of fauna exported and its destination, it had no power over the scale of demand.
In weighing up the evidence we heard, the Committee recommended that the export policy be relaxed to allow government-controlled export to individuals and institutions of all common aviary-bred birds, of uncommon aviary-bred birds which are ringed or banded and registered with a State fauna authority, or for wild, trapped, common and pest species of birds provided that, firstly, such birds were trapped under the control of a State fauna authority and, secondly, that harvesting was based on sound conservation practices.
I support this Bill, believing that it will achieve our aim to develop legislation reinforcing other Government measures to conserve Australian flora and fauna and to ensure that international trade threatening wildlife is responsibly controlled. However, I believe that the Bill could have gone further. We have to expect that from time to time some of our wildlife-even our unique wildlife-can assume pest proportions and must be controlled according to appropriate and sound conservation principles. It always interests me that in places such as this Parliament we can accept and project family planning programs, and even sometimes more radical means of controlling human population growth, but whenever we suggest a means of controlling some of our wildlife all hell breaks loose.
I believe that if we do not adequately harvest and control some of our wildlife, some of our unique species, we may even threaten their extinction, particularly at times when they assume plague proportions. Two excellent examples of this at present, even in my electorate, are certain species of kangaroo and some common species of birds, such as long billed corellas and sulphur crested cockatoos. In the north of my electorate kangaroos are presently destroying drought affected crops and encroaching on

512 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Wildlife Protection Bill

farmland. They themselves will be faced by starvation and death unless there is some control and suitable management techniques are employed. In the south of my electorate, throughout the Wimmera, as I have already mentioned, corellas and cockatoos are devastating, with a very heavy financial loss, many cereal crops and pastures. There are huge flocks of suphur crested cockatoos in the west Wimmera in my electorate. One farmer west of the Grampians area has estimated that some 7,500 long billed corellas and sulphur crested cockatoos are invading his property. I understand that two employees are firing some $30 worth of ammunition every day in an attempt to save 320 hectares of crops sown this season. Even so, the birds have already taken a quarter of that crop. This places these farmers in an intolerable situation.
The Victorian Government, unfortunately, has
failed to respond satisfactorily to farmers' requests for help. Some have asked for permission to poison troublesome birds. Surely it would be preferable to commercialise the species and have the State fauna authority mount a trapping program. It would reduce flock numbers and at the same time earn overseas income for Australia. I am deeply conscious of the need to protect Australia's unique and endangered wildlife, but urgent action has to be taken against such species as sulphur crested cockatoos which are now costing farmers many thousands of dollars in crop loss and inconvenience. Both the present and former Victorian governments have procrastinated on this problem for years. Research is about to begin in Victoria to produce a cockatoo repellant, a chemical, that may be available in a couple of years. This legislation, however, will allow limited and controlled exports but, as I said earlier, I believe it could have gone further. I accept that the suggestions I have put forward would not overcome the very real problem we have, but they may have alleviated it. They may have helped Australia to gain export income. They would, I believe have satisfied a demand overseas and would have allowed our wildlife authorities to concentrate their efforts in ensuring that our endangered species are not threatened.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (8.34)-ln rising to support the Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill and the amendment moved by the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) I recognise that this Bill consolidates in one piece of legislation what has previously been covered by several Acts. It is no doubt a tidier arrangement and as such is to be applauded. I wish to say how surprised I was by the speech of the honourable member for Mallee

(Mr Fisher). It was eminently sensible. It is regrettable that the Government did not take this opportunity to rethink this whole question of fauna management. It should be recognised that the export of live fauna has never endangered a single species. In fact some have been saved from extinction. An example is the Per David deer, whose natural habitat has been destroyed but which happily thrives in Europe where it was taken earlier this century. There are birds and other animals in the same situation. Sadly, the exploitation of animal products has wiped out or seriously threatened many species. Today in Australia kangaroos are shot for pet meat yet it has not been possible to export a live kangaroo on a commercial basis since 1 January 1960, despite the fact that live kangaroos are worth far more than carcasses. Apparently a live kangaroo exported depletes our fauna yet a dead one does not. Frankly, I do not understand this phenomenon and I wonder whether the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) does.
In relation to our fauna management, this Bill is philosophically negative and defeatist. In respect of Australia's fauna exports it is not a commitment to international agreements; rather it is the result of the Government's overreaction to an emotive campaign conducted by ill-informed city based conservation groups. It arose primarily out of a justified outrage at the appalling conditions under which marsupials were shipped from Victoria in 1958. Never considered at the time was the highly efficient trade conducted from South Australia where the main shippers carried their own insurance and guaranteed live delivery. The Government's response was a total ban on all exports of fauna on a commercial basis as from I January 1960. In the peak year of 1959 fewer than 7,000 kangaroos were shipped, mainly to the United States of America for zoological gardens and private collections. That many are destroyed every week to feed dogs in Australia.
This brings me to the ridiculous situation in which we now find ourselves, where we simultaneously ban exports of all our birds and animals yet declare some of them to be vermin and kill them in great numbers. Due to the expansion of the wheat industry we have provided a source of food unknown to cockatoos in previous years. At the same time we have removed many of the trees in which they nest. So they now have abundant food and have multiplied, wreaking havoc on wheat crops and utilising existing trees to a far greater degree. One of the habits of these birds is to ringbark the gums in which they ,raise their

Wildlife Protection Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 513

young. The resultant hard, smooth but dead surface is good for deterring predators such as goannas and cats but not very good for the trees.
All this is happening at a time when we are starting to consider the importance of trees in our efforts to combat salting of our agricultural land. Nature in all its ferocity can and does wipe out vast numbers of birds. Sometimes they are trapped in water holes that dry up or are caught in fires that either kill them directly or destroy their environment. I have seen 20,000 gallon tanks full of dead budgerigars which have drowned as they have desperately sought to obtain a drink. Twenty thousand gallons of budgerigar soup contains more budgies than we could export in many years. This happens again and again in our hinterlands. They are simultaneously dry and lush, kind and cruel-and always capricious. Developments such as that on the Ord River have produced hundreds of miles of permanent fresh water where finches thrive, but where they cannot be trapped, for it is the nature of the ttade that they cannot be commercially netted adjacent to large expanses of water. While we enhance their breeding grounds and make it impossible to trap them, we simultaneously poison them. They are killed in great numbers in the most indiscriminate manner to protect the experimental sorghum harvest on the Ord River farms. I ask the House whether this is what is meant by management.
The Minister laments the cruelty of bird smuggling. He is correct; it is a heartless and ruthless business, offering a greater reward than drug smuggling yet lacking the social approbation of the former. The rewards are such and the chances of getting caught so slim that the new penalties will not stamp it out; they will simply drive up the prices in response to the market, a process that I am convinced few members of the Government understand. The Minister should recognise that it is this very embargo on exports that has made the smuggling industry so viable. Prior to 1959 there was a general recognition of the protected list and trappers themselves tended to enforce it. Selfregulation has gone and it is self-deception to believe that the Department of Home Affairs and Environment has the necessary money, or even the expertise, to stop smuggling. Under this Bill rare species such as Alexanders, Princess Regents or golden shoulder parrots may be smuggled as well as cockatoos or Red Rumpts. The Naretha parrot is almost identical to the Blue Bonnet but much rarer and infinitely more valuable. The penalty in either case is the same.
I have been presented with the spurious argument that we must stop the sale of all Schedule 2 classifications, that is, animals not considered

rare, because the Department says it cannot be sure what environment these animals may end up in. A review of the situation prior to 1959 showed that zoos and collectors constituted the overwhelming market for fauna. Birds went to fanciers, and cockatoos and budgerigars went generally to the same market that we cater for locally where they are usually well cared for. A controlled industry that kept up its prices could ensure the well being of all animals sold. What should be done? We should recognise that the easy emotional response of passing legislation such as this and abhorring all nasty facts is simply not enough. Conservation can be enhanced by proper management of our national parks which are currently a disgrace and, in many cases, merely shaded areas on maps. Conservation and tourism are not incompatible. Both need far more money than they have received.
In 1959 the export trade in fauna, which included feral ostriches and camels, was worth £ 1.5m to South Australia. It is worth noting that we used to compete successfully with South Africa for the sale of ostriches. Our camels were in demand due to the freedom from foot and mouth disease in Australia. This trade is useful but is not viable in isolation. Conservatively, a rigorous government-controlled export industry could net $30m a year in export income from which the Government could take half for the development of parks and the enhancement of our fabulous natural heritage. I have an Aboriginal group in my electorate which is a world leader in its endeavours to commercialise emus. The emu, which is a valuable commodity, returns something close to $\00 gross a year. This is far more than will be returned by sheep or cattle. The emu is able to survive in much worse conditions. The industry is hampered by a variety of export regulations such as those relating to the selling of spare emu eggs which can be a useful addition to the overall economy. In times of hardship it would be very beneficial to pastoralists to be able to obtain licences for the export of some of the cockatoos, galahs and other common parrots that abound in that area. I hope that a more rational policy can be developed. I will be working towards this end.
Mr BURR (Wilmot) (8.45)-1 congratulate the Government for introducing the Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill to protect our native flora and fauna. It is very heartening to see a bipartisan approach to this Bill being adopted from both sides of the House. This measure is obviously not something that any of us in this place would want to see involved in the day to day political battles that sometimes occur. It is very heartening to see both sides of the House

514 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Wildltfe Protection Bill

agreeing on the measures that should be taken and agreeing to support this Bill.
With hindsight on our side we can all agree that there is a need to take action that will protect some of the unique species of fauna that we have in Australia. Irresponsible management and actions that have been taken in the past have caused the extinction of some of our very distinctive and unique fauna in this country. The one that comes to mind is the Tasmanian Tiger. It was a unique animal in its time. Due to its irresponsible shooting we are now spending thousands of dollars trying to find whether there are any remaining live species. Perhaps better management 100 or 50 years ago would have protected that animal so that we would still have it available to add to the uniqueness of our fauna in this country. Thankfully we have developed in our maturity in this country to the point where we nOw realise the uniqueness of our fauna. We realise that we need to protect our native species so that they can be carried on as a heritage for future generations. This Bill is part of that process. I am delighted that it is going to be uniformly supported by all sides of the House. I trust that it will be given the same treatment when it reaches the other place.
The other matter which has become quite apparent not only in the debate here tonight but also with other media publicity that has been given in recent times, is that trafficking in species of Australian fauna is world wide; it is a very lucrative and also illegal traffic. We need to concentrate our minds on that particular issue. Other honourable members who have spoken in this debate have named some of the species that are being sold illegally in other parts of the world. They have referred to the very lucrative trade and the high prices that are being brought for species, some of which are quite widely available and in fact in some parts of Australia are even in plague proportions.
Mr O'Keefe~ The galah.
Mr BURR~The honourable member interjects and says: 'The galah '. The galahs or the cockatoos are almost in plague proportions in this country and yet in other parts of the world they bring high prices on the illegal market. What concerns me most, and should concern other members of this House, is that that trade is part of a world wide network of organised crime. It is not something that happens in isolation in certain instances; it is part of a world wide organised crime network. We need to recognise that point. What we have in Australia is not simply a culling of some species that we might think are a pest or a nuisance or in plague proportions~it is nice to get

rid of a few of these species~but an organised crime network that is world wide, very extensive and very lucrative. I do not think that we, in Australia, quite apart from the need to protect some of our unique species of fauna, can tolerate such an organised crime network operating in this country. The fact that it exists is beyond dispute, but that is no reason why we should close our eyes to it or pretend that it does not exist.
We do have widespread organised crime operating in Australia that is part of a world wide network. The trade in illicit fauna is just part of the activities. The fact too that that section of organised crime is assisted in this country by people who hold official positions in my view is also beyond dispute. Actions are being taken on this matter at the moment. I congratulate the Government for conducting investigations into such august bodies as the Bureau of Customs and other Customs personnel. With the co-operation of the States we also have established a crimes commission. These are all the embryo stages of trying to identify within our institutional bodies in this country where help is being provided for that world wide network of organised crime. It is a start, but at this stage we are only scratching the surface. I congratulate both the Federal Government and the State governments for at least recognising the problem and starting on a process of cooperation to try to eliminate it for the benefit of
this country. I think that in the case of the illicit trade in fauna we have to look beyond the shores of Australia. The fact that these species can be collected in Australia is one aspect but there must also be an organised network throughout the world that distributes these birds and animals and also collects money in payment for them. If we are properly to control or to eradicate that illegal trade, it is obvious that we need to have the cooperation of other countries around the world. Some of those countries we might term well educated Western countries, but also in some of the less developed countries in the world actions need to be taken. I note that the Australian Government is working in co-operation with various international bodies to try to have regulations brought in on a world-wide basis that will provide some form of control. I urge the Government to continue its efforts at that international level.
I notice also that this Bill provides some quite severe penalties. I think that the penalties that the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) has outlined are appropriate to the nature of the organised crime that we are facing and also to the volume of money that obviously flows through this illegal trade. The honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) mentioned

Wildlife Protection Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 515

in his contribution that this could be measured as about $40m per year. We are talking about a lot of money so the deterrents must be appropriate to the profits that can be made. The Bill provides for a maximum penalty for an individual of $100,000 or five years imprisonment and in the case of organisations a maximum fine of $200,000. I would not consider that those penalties are punitive; I would consider that they are appropriate to the trade that is operating and the profits that are being made. I also note-and I think the Government has been quite responsible in this respectthat we are not prohibiting by this legislation the export of all flora and fauna. There will be permissible exports of our species for bona fide zoological and scientific purposes. I think that is quite appropriate. We want people in other parts of the world to be able to observe and to study our unique flora and fauna. The Bill provides appropriate measures by which this can be done.
The other point that I make before I close my contribution to the debate is this: I note that the Minister in his second reading speech mentioned that the Bill also takes account of certain areas of the Great Barrier Reef. The Minister noted in his second reading speech that three sections of the Great Barrier Reef Marine National Park have now been declared and, in those declared areas, protection can be provided for the marine species. That is fine, but what about the rest of the Great Barrier Reef'? The Great Barrier Reef is unique and the species which live in the waters of the Great Barrier Reef are also unique. I do not think that we can possibly select certain areas such as the Capricornia or the Cairns sections of the Great Barrier Reef and say that this section of the reef and the species that live on the reef there are unique and must be protected and not provide similar protection for the other sections of the Reef and the species that live in those areas.
I know that work is being done by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority and by the Commonwealth and Queensland governments to have other sections of the reef declared marine national parks as soon as possible. I suggest to the Government that the entire length of the Great Barrier Reef be declared a protected area while the detailed work can be undertaken in order to declare marine national parks in the remaining areas. Declaring protected areas will give some protection to the reef and to the species in those undeclared areas. I congratulate the Government for introducing this Bill. It has my wholehearted support. I am delighted that it will not be contested in this place as it will be supported by both the Opposition and the Government.

Mr COHEN (Robertson) (9.55)-1 also welcome the Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill and I commend the \Government for introducing it. It is good to see that there is bipartisanship in regard to this legislation. We will move an amendment later, but the general thrust of the Bill has our complete support. I have looked forward to the day when a Bill of this. nature was introduced into the House. I was very fortunate to serve my party as shadow Minister for the environment for three years. It gave me the opportunity to learn a great deal more about the problems of endangered species both here and overseas. I am very grateful for the period that I served as shadow Minister because it opened up a whole new world to me. I was in favour of conservation but I did not do the specific reading and study one ought to do and that one just does not bother to do until one has the responsibility of looking after legislation in this area. That responsibility took me to many parts of Australia and to parts of the world where I had the opportunity to visit wildlife game parks and to read about and study the problems of conservation throughout the world.
Tonight most of the debate has been about the preservation of Australian flora and fauna. Of course I support that concept totally but I wish to deal specifically with some of the problems of species outside Australia in relation to the general world wildlife scene. Before I do that, I mention the previous speaker. I agree with him completely; if we had had conservation measures years ago, the Tasmanian tiger would have survived. Of course, had it not been for President Hoover who lived out here for some years in the latter part of the last century and who developed an affection for the Australian koala, it is likely that there would probably be no koalas in Australia. It was President Hoover in the 1930s who banned the import of koala fur by the United States and thus ended the devastation of Australian koalas.
However, I wish to talk about species from outside Australia because we have a very important role to play in not only preserving our own wildlife but also preserving the wildlife of the rest of the world. I was fortunate-some would say 'fortunate' and some would say 'unfortunate'-to return recently from a visit as a member of the Australian Parliamentary Delegation to Africa. Quite frankly, as most people know we were lucky to get back. An excellent group of people went, including the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher) whom I notice is in the House tonight. But I was surprised and somewhat shocked to find on my trip from Zimbabwe to

516 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Wildlife Protection Bill

Zambia in the journal of Air Zimbabwe, which was in the back of the airline seat, an advertisement headed 'Hunters Safaris'. The advertisement announced a 21-day tour of Zimbabwe at $550 a day, approved by the Zimbabwe Tourist Board, to shoot certain animals. I shall read the list of animals in that advertisement. They were: One leopard, one buffalo, one hippopotamus, one eland, one giraffe, one sable antelope, one crocodile, one water-buck, one zebra, one wildebeestthat is a gnu-two kudu, one reebok, one bushbuck, one tseebe, two cyvet cats, one wild pig, two warthogs, one impala, one serval, one honey badger, one duiker, one steenbok, one grysbok, one gennet, one jackal, one baboon, and one elephant.
Those who have taken the time to study the Schedule provided by the Government will have noted that a number of these species are listed on Schedules I and 2 of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species. Among the animals listed in Schedule I as endangered and not permitted to be imported into Australia are the leopard, the sable antelope and the crocodile. Schedule 2 lists certain species of zebra, the baboon and the elephant. I am appalled to think that a newly-emerging country such as Zimbabwe, which has done so many excellent things since it has been independent, is allowing people to slaughter its wildlife in this way, particularly those endangered species.
There are reasons for killing animals. If a person has to kill for food to live it is justifiable. If it is for self-defence it is equally justifiable. In many countries, including Australia, it is justifiable to cull animals so that the species does not endanger itself and other species and to keep the number of animals within manageable figures. However, I find it quite fascinating that some people kill for sport. I think that they are sick beyond belief. It leaves me completely bewildered that anybody would want to shoot animals just for fun.
I went with the honourable member for Hume to one of the wildlife parks overseas. We drove around in a Kombi van and were able to get within six or eight feet of lions, cheetahs, elephants and a whole range of other animals. I was able to get as close as humanly possible to photograph them. If I had had a gun I would have had no trouble in blowing out their brains, but what would have been the skill, the pleasure or the sport in doing that? I have some correspondence from the Safari Club International defending the right of sportsmen to blow beautiful animals to pieces. I would like to see us abolish all forms of hunting, unless it is for the reasons I have given. I

have absolutely no sympathy for those who kill for sport.
Australia's standing in Africa is extremely high. It probably comes as no surprise to people to hear that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is more popular in Africa than he is here. For a whole range of reasons, we have a high standing in Africa and I think that we can use our influence with the presidents and governments of countries such as Zambia and Zimbabwe which allow these neurotic people to slaughter their wildlife. In recent years a lot has been written about this matter. It goes to show that the preservation of wildlife is worth more to a country in the long term than the short term benefits from the sick trophy hunters of the world. Many countriesKenya, for instance-have forbidden all forms of shooting for that purpose. As I have said, I think one can get an enormous thrill from getting close to these magnificent animals with a camera and photographing them. If I could, I would be delighted to incorporate in Hansard some of the photographs of animals which I showed to officers of the Minister's Department today. I am sure that many people in Australia would agree with me on that. Let us hope that this Bill succeeds in stopping imports of certain specimens into this country. The absurd argument that people often put up is that they should be able to bring in specimens-the ivory and the skirts-because, after all, the animal is dead. The logic of that argument escapes me. What will happen if one keeps buying the specimens is that people will continue to kill animals to provide those specimens. We in Australia have as much responsibility to preserve the wildlife of the rest of the world as we have to preserve our own wildlife.
I will now deal with something that is related to my electorate of Robertson on the Central Coast of New South Wales. I have a small problem in that the correspondence I want to quote from is rather lengthy and I do not want to take up too much of the time of the House on it. Perhaps I should try to summarise it. The Central Coast has an excellent man-made attraction known as Eric Worrell's Australian Reptile Park. It is one of the three or four excellent attractions on the Central Coast which help to bring hundreds of thousands of visitors to the area. Another attraction is Old Sydney Town. Mr Eric Worrell, a well known naturalist, set up this park some 20-odd years ago to do two things: Firstly, to provide a high quality reptile zoo for recreation and education purposes for the local community and the tourist trade and, secondly, to provide raw venoms to various scientific institutions within Australia and throughout the rest of the world. He has succeeded. It has

Wildlife Protection Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 517

been a long, hard battle. I am not saying that Mr Worrell did this purely out of altruism. He had a business. But the benefits to our community have been considerable. Large numbers of people come to the Central Coast to see the reptile park. It is famous throughout Australia. Thousands of school children visit it and university students study there. He has one of the largest, if not the largest, collections of snakes in Australia.
In recent years he has had considerable trouble in importing certain species. For reasons which I have found difficult to ascertain, he has been constantly stopped by Government departmentsquarantine authorities primarily-from bringing them in. I think the Minister is off the hook here. In December of last year I wrote a very lengthy letter-four pages-to the then Minister for Health, who is in charge of quarantine, setting out the whole history of Mr Worrell's background, the problems he was having with the Department and the barriers that existed regarding importing certain types of snakes for breeding purposes and ultimately for their venom. On 19 January I received a letter of acknowledgement from the Acting Minister for Health, Senator Peter Baume. On 22 January I forwarded further correspondence to the Minister with some further evidence backing up the case that I put. The period from 14 December to 18 August is, I think, a more than reasonable period to receive some sort of answer other than an acknowledgment. It is unfair, both to me and to Mr Worrell, that I have not had a proper reply from the Minister. It was suggested, off the record, that the reason Mr Worrell was not allowed to import these snakes was that the venom could now be obtained in a frozen form imported from overseas. I will quote in full a letter from Dr Struan Sutherland, a famous Australian. He states:
Dear Mr Cohen,
Mr Eric Worrell has asked me to write to you in regard to the supply of exotic snake venoms for research purposes. For many years Mr Worrell has played a key role in the development of antivenoms and an essential part of this has been the provision of venoms of the very highest quality.
Several years ago he responded to our request for venom from both the Indian Cobra and the American Rattle snake. Using these venoms obtained from snakes held by Mr. Worrell, work was undertaken which has significantly altered the recommended first aid for snakebite both in America and India. In the lattter country over 10,000 people die per year from Indian Cobra bites, and hence the use of this new type of first aid is of considerable significance.
I enclose two recent publications which describe the work undertaken using Mr Worrell's venom. Other venoms which have been obtained from Mr Worrell include the King Cobra venom and currently he is providing Malaysian Pit Viper venom for anti-venom production.

When we obtain venom from Mr Worrell, we can be certain not only of the purity and quality of the venom but we know it has come from correctly identified snakes.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if I can provide any further information.
Yours sincerely,
Struan Sutherland
Dr Sutherland is a very famous Australian. He is probably the foremost expert in this field in Australia and he is involved in some sort of controversy with the Commonwealth Serum Laboratory. The point that the Department appeared to want to make was that if Mr Worrell got orders for venom then he could import the snakes. This is a bit of a catch-22 situation. He does not get orders until they know he has the snakes here. This venom is not wanted often but it is wanted by scientists in a whole range of disciplines who use snake venom. Interestingly enough some of it is used for heart research. I have a list of dozens of requests of that nature from people who want only the quality venom that Mr Worrell can provide. I only hope that this new legislation will clear up the uncertainty that has prevailed with regard to the Australian Reptile Park over many years.
I believe Mr Worrell does a wonderful job for science and for the Australian community. Incidentally, for those honourable members who may not be aware, it was Mr Worrell who provided the venom for funnel web spider research that enabled Dr Sutherland to finally make the breakthrough that produced a funnel web antivenine. That is one of the many contributions that Eric Worrell has made. It is important not only to science but also of course, to our own community. Finally I hope this matter can be cleared up. I congratulate the Government once again on this legislation. I hope that it achieves all the things that it sets out to do.
Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) (9.13)-1 am sure that the motives which the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) has in introducing the Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill and which honourable members have in supporting it are of the highest order and are most laudable in their desire to protect Australian native animals, birds and flora. I am sure that we are all proud of our unique fauna and flora which we all know from our various travels throughout this very large continent. I am sure too that one of the worst things that we have done for Australian native fauna and flora is to introduce the rabbit, the fox, the cat and the pig. The depredations they have made on the habitat and the lives of our fauna are incalculable.

518 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

WildlzJe Protection Bill

That situation is something we can only regret and which, of course, this Bill does nothing to redress.
I think this Bill is wrong-headed and misdirected. I think it will perpetuate the very thing it is trying to diminish both inside and outside this country. There are many contradictions in the Bill and many contradictions among those honourable members who suppport it. The honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen), for instance, who just resumed his seat is decrying the fact that a constituent of his is unable to import reptiles. If this Bill were promoted by governments in other parts of the world from which he would want to import these reptiles, then he would be prohibited from doing so. There is a contradiction in the support that the honourable member for Robertson gives this Bill. He is supporting the very types of restrictions which he then decries as they affect his constituent. I do not say that in any personal, antagonistic way. I only draw that inconsistency to the honourable member's attention in support of my contention that this Bill is very wrongly directed. In supporting the general laudable motives I have mentioned, I point out that of course the Minister outlined this matter in a very high-minded way when he introduced the Bill. He said:
The purpose of this Bill is to strengthen arrangements for the protection of Australia's animals and plants, and world wildlife generally, by improving the effectiveness of our import and export controls.
The uniqueness of Australia's flora and fauna places a special responsibility on all of us-
I am sure it is a responsibility we all accept. Obviously it is a responsibility we would accept in different ways. The Minister goes on to make comment that, of course, tends to negate his own argument because he is continuing the present system. It is a system which is described in his own statement as follows:
Despite the efforts ot nations upholding the provisions of
international conventions, there is a flourishing illicit trade in wildlife.
It is this system which we are perpetuating which has brought about this flourishing trade in wildlife. I see little sense in simply increasing the penalties and continuing the same system. The increase in penalties will do nothing to stop this trade. It will simply make it more expert and bigger business and more in the control of the criminal element in this community. One can ask why this wildlife is scarce. It is scarce on the world market because of this Bill. The Bill is very much a prohibitive Bill. It has been loosely said that the Minister can issue permits at his discretion for the export of Australian fauna. If one looks at the restrictions it will be found that they are very wide and all embracing. It is not right simply in defence

of this Bill to say that the Minister has the discretion. I think that on very few occasions indeed will the Minister use the special permit provisions which are so strewn with impediments as far as their use is concerned. For instance clause 23 of the Bill states:
. . . may make an application to the Minister for the grant of-
(a) a permit to export a specimen . . . prohibited by section 21.
We go on and find in further clauses that other sections apply. For instance clause 28 states:
(c) where the specimen is a live native Australian animal, that the proposed export-
(i) would be an interzoological gardens transfer; or (ii) is for the purposes of scientific research;
That provision relates to Schedule 1. Clause 29 under Schedule 2 provides:
(i) the proposed exporter and the proposed recipient are approved institutions in relation to a class of specimens that includes that live animal; or
(ii) in the case of a live native Australian animal, the proposed export would be an export of a household pet in accordance with section 16.
Clause 16 is a laugh. I do not know how many honourable members have read it. It states:
Export of household pets
16. The export of a live native Australian animal from Australia or from an external Territory is an export of a household pet in accordance with this section if-
(a) the animal is an animal of a species specified in Schedule 7.
Let us look at Schedule 7. This demonstrates how wide the description of a household pet is. It includes a sulphur-crested cockatoo, a galah and a budgerigar. That is very wide. We can export dead kangaroos but we cannot export a live one if it is a pet. We can export three categories of bird, but not easily. A person must have owned and kept the bird for three years. I wonder whether these birds live for three years. The owner must have been a resident for four years immediately preceding the export and he must be leaving Australia for good. He cannot look at coming back. So he could not take the bird for a year or two. He would have to look at permanently getting out of the country and taking the three categories of bird with him. Of course, it is only possible to take one category because clause 16 (e) in relation to the export of these categories states:
It is not proposed to export any animal of that species that has been kept as a household pet by the exporter or the members of the household of the exporter other than that animal or that animal and one other animal of that species.
I suppose under this provision one would be allowed to take two, for whatever reason that may be. But what a nonsense bureaucracy is becoming

Wildlife Protection Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 519

when we are going to vote in this House on the restrictions placed on people taking a pet with them overseas. We are restricting them to three common types of birds which are destroyed in their millions around Australia yearly. I do not think that is helping any vision of a co-operative system of government in any way as it affects the Australian community. I mentioned the matter of the zoological requirement in relation to the problem of the honourable member for Robertson. I find this to be a very restrictive intention in clause 12. The explanatory notes which the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment has provided state:
The relevant criteria will be in accordance with Commonwealth policy and requirements as exist at present.
The criteria for approval under the regulations will include that-
(a) the zoo is owned or controlled by a government or learned zoological society;
(b) breeding or public exhibition is the major function; (c) the zoo is primarily non-commercial and non-profit
making; and (d) the zoo does not engage in commercial trade in fauna
other than captive bred animals.
The export under this so-called permit system is to be restricted to government-owned zoos. I repeat that the explanatory notes state:
. . . controlled by a government or learned zoological society;
It is not quite as severe as that but it is very close to it; it is a restriction to officially approved zoos. Any thought that private zoos can have our fauna under a permit system is gone. Why is that? Why is it that private zoos, which can be inspected and approved by our Customs officers overseas, are to be denied this right? They will be denied it because we have, as previous speakers have said, a non-discriminatory approach to pest and rare birds alike. I believe these lists have been-I will not say carelessly drawn up; I suppose a great deal of care has been put into them-rather foolishly drawn up. In the schedules we find native birds, rare birds and pest birds mixed with overseas birds. We have mixed the import and export categories. Of course, one has to be a naturalist to be able to read the schedules sensibly. It is a nonsense for most of us in this House to interpret species by species the meaning of these schedules. I think it is a discredit to those who drew up the Bill that they should mix the categories in that fashion. There ought to be a separate schedule list to separate those various categories simply so that the public can read this Bill and understand it. We have the assistance of draftsmen, counsel and so on. It is a disservice to members of the public whom we are trying to protect that we should provide a very complex schedule for them to study. I

believe that not only have we been nondiscriminatory but also we have used emotional approaches, citing the extinction of previously existing species or rare birds and mixing with them the pest varieties which exist in this community.
We have, of course, annual duck slaughters in Australia. People can get together and have a good binge a few hours before the bell rings and then slaughter ducks in their hundreds and thousands throught Australia. That is accepted, but we cannot export them. We cannot ask a duck whether he would like to be exported rather than shot but that is the comparison we make. That is the nonsense we accept. I have heard it said by an authority that we have had in South Australia for some years the slaughter, quite legally, of a quarter of a million kangaroos. We can export them dead for pet food or game meat-I think they go to Germany-but we cannot export them live.
Mr West-It is where they finish up that we are worried about.
Mr STEELE HALL-I would have thought that the honourable member who led for the Opposition would have taken some notice of his colleague, the honourable member for Kalgoorlie (Mr Campbell). The honourable member for Kalgoorlie made one of the most sensible speeches I have heard on this Bill in this House.
Mr West-It is a very simplistic argument you are putting. We are worried about where they finish up.
Mr STEELE HALL-If it is simplistic the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) is rejecting the advice that some of his colleagues would give him. In September of 1976 the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation reported to this House. Some of the members of the Committee are present colleagues of the honourable member for Cunningham.
Mr Fisher-That is right.
Mr STEELE HALL-I think the honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher), who spoke with a great deal of feeling and very sensibly on this issue, was one of those members. The members were the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges), Mr Baillieu, the honourable member for Maribyrnong (Dr Cass) , who is a colleague of the member for Cunningham, the honourable member for Mallee, the honourable member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins), Mr Simon, who is not a member now, the honourable member for Sturt (Mr Wilson)-the Minister who brought in the

520 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Wildlife Protection Bill

Bill-and the member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young), who is quite a notable colleague of the member for Cunningham. Further members of the Committee in the twenty-ninth Parliament were the honourable member for Bendigo (Mr Bourchier), the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry), the honourable member for Deakin (Mr Jarman), the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), Mr Lamb, the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) and the honourable member for Cowper (Mr Ian Robinson).
The honourable member for Cunningham is not in a totally unanimous position. Certainly not tonight is he in a unanimous position. His colleagues sitting behind him simply do not agree with him, nor do they agree with the inconsistencies of the honourable member for Robertson. The Committee made a recommendation. The Committee made a greater study of this matter than the honourable members sitting opposite tonight who speak so lightly of a punitive situation which will force more cruelty on to the wildlife and the fauna of Australia. They will stand quietly. This Bill will be responsible for a far greater emphasis on export trapping and the illegal export of our fauna. Penalties will not stop this trade. There are penalties in the world such as capital punishment which do not stop the drug trade. There are people in Australia who will kill for crime's sake. These penalties will not inhibit those types of people from continuing and expanding a trade which cannot be held by punitive action when there are 10,000 kilometres of coast across the northern part of Australia. If honourable members in this place think that by upping the penalties and putting two or three more boats in the water they can stop the trade they are very innocent of the geographical factors or the way human nature works. The colleagues of the honourable member for Cunningham agreed on this report. It states:
(i) the export policy be relaxed to allow government controlled export to individuals and institutions of all common aviary bred birds uncommon aviary bred birds which are ringed or banded and registered with a State fauna authority wild trapped common and pest species of birds provided that
(a) such birds are trapped under the control of a State fauna authority; and
(b) harvesting is based on sound conservation principles;
(ii) (a) the export policy be relaxed to allow government controlled export of mammals and reptiles to acceptable overseas recipients; and
(b) the category of acceptable overseas recipients be considerably widened to include approved private zoos and parks, whether run for profit or not

More members from the Opposition have put their names to this report than have spoken against it tonight. I think that is significant.
Mr West-I take it you are voting against the Bill?
Mr STEELE HALL-lam regretting that the Bill will pass in all its innocence because it does not address the problem at all. The problem will be met only by destroying the market and the market will be destroyed by a regular and enlarged supply of birds which are in pest proportions in Australia but which are so valuable overseas. This Bill creates the market. That point was clearly made by this Committee which reported after it, I believe, ably examined the subject. We are creating the market by passing this Bill. We are creating a market which creates cruelty in very large proportions in the export of these birds. We stand responsible for simply failing to attack the root cause of the problem. Any economist, any realist and anyone involved in the trade can tell us that the problem is that there is not the supply to meet the demand. The rewards, therefore, for meeting that demand are sufficient to create the illegal trade based on cruelty and disregard for the future of our fauna.
This Bill will perpetuate and increase that circumstance. We stand responsible for simply not examining the cause of it. I can only express a hope that not too distant in the future we will look back to the passage of this Bill and that we will decide to be sensible and to recognise the pests that we have and the fact that it is inconsistent to slaughter them in their millions here and yet fail to allow them to be exported under sensible controls which would set up safeguards to prevent cruelty and to make a sensible trade out of animals which are now, as 1 have said, slaughtered in their millions. 1 could not vote against this Bill. What would be the use when innocents abroad, such as the honourable member for Cunningham, rush in to support it and when the honourable member for Robertson, with all his inconsistencies, can regret the application of that type of clause in the Bill but still support it? 1sit here with regret as obviously the Bill passes.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (9.31)-1, along with colleagues on this side of the House, support this rather belated Bill-the Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill. 1 really believe that the way in which this Government has dragged its feet in coming to grips with the problem of the illicit trade in wildlife which has been growing in monstrous proportions in and out of this country is to be deeply regretted. The speech of the honourable member for Boothby

Wildlife Protection Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 521

(Mr Steele Hall) which I have just heard really reflects the strange conflict that can exist in the minds of some of the Government members. I am
not surprised that it has taken so long for the Bill to be introduced. I would like to point out that it is the Government that is introducing this Bill and not the Opposition, although the Opposition wishes to make an amendment to the Bill to expand its provisions. It is mainly along those lines
that I wish to speak.
This Bill, of course, now spells out exactly what can and cannot be exported. This is a point which I think has been overlooked in the speech that was just made. One may now apply for a permit and know precisely where one stands; this has to be a step forward. Rather than dwelling on the tardiness of this Government I must say, however, that the task before the Parliament now is to ensure that this Bill encompasses the sorts of provisions that most Australians would like to see. I think there can be little doubt that we are all concerned that possibly our most valuable heritagethe Australian wildlife-is being pilfered and plundered at an alarming rate. Not only does the trade in wildlife endanger the very existence of some of our most valuable species, but also the suffering that these animals must endure-those that actually live through it all-should not be allowed to continue in a humane society such as ours.
Insomuch as the Bill represents a tightening up of export and import procedures and insomuch as it substantially increases penalties associated with the control of the fauna trade the Bill is to be commended. But tonight I want to argue that the amendment of Schedule 3 proposed by the Opposition be carried by all honourable members. I argue that to do otherwise would be to abrogate our responsibility as representatives of the people of Australia. For it is without doubt that the Australian people spoke as one in the cry of outrage when exposed to publicity earlier this year about the annual slaughter of the baby Canadian harp seals. I think it is our duty to respond to that outcry and to move to include this species amongst those already named in this legislation. The inclusion of Schedule 3 of this Bill so that importation of harp seal products will be disallowed along with whale and dolphin products is not only the moral duty of all honourable members but also their democratic duty.
In this context I can speak from my own experience as member for the Lilley electorate. Although a few of the print media reports of the inane slaughter had filtered through to the Australian consciousness the catalyst which sparked off the immense reaction from Brisbane people to

the baby seal carnage was a television documentary showing its stark reality screened one week night. I think it was really enlightening to see how people can react once they see what is the end result of actions by governments or actions taken in Houses such as this. In fact, I would like to see such a process carried through to educate all people. I feel that there would be much more outcry against some of the legislation coming from
this House were people able to see starkly in their living rooms the end results-as happened on this
occasion.
For weeks after that program my office was deluged with calls from people asking what could be done to stop the carnage. In some instances I even received telephone calls from primary school children. Needless to say, there were numerous letters on the subject also. Yet it was the reaction of the children which set the ball rolling. Children
talked amongst themselves and their teachers at school and sent letters. Giant, colourful petitions poured in from school classes throughout my electorate. I was pleased to receive them not only because those children saw the baby harp seal as a little furry animal and therefore were able to respond in this instance but also because it awakened their conscience. In this nation where, if we die of anything, it will be apathy, it was marvel-
lous to see young people responding and wanting something done. I would like to see us take up that challenge and bring in what is really a very simple but very necessary amendment which the Australian Labor Party is putting forward; it could hardly be termed as political. It would actually be voted through this evening if Government members were willing to listen to what must have happened in their electorates.
I am sure that it was just as disturbing to most parents as to the kids to learn that the Federal Government was not going to take any specific action to put pressure on the Canadian Government, something that I am sure most people felt would have been obligatory in the circumstances. I know for a fact that the reaction in other federal electorates in Brisbane was similar and I am aware of considerable nation-wide response. Surely, if other members in this House received even half the pleas that I received in these few weeks their obligation to their electorates on this occasion would be clear. By opting tonight to speak in favour of this amendment I am hopeful in some way of giving credence to the wishes of not only the majority of my constituents but also the Australian electorate as a whole. After all, they did put us here; they put us here for a purpose. The least Government members could do to acknowledge the reason for their presence in the

522 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Wildlife Protection Bill

chamber tonight would be to vote for the amendment and thus show to their constituents that their letters and petitions did not fall on barren soil and that Government members were, in fact, big men in mind.
I note with concern that the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) issued a Press statement today stating that Australia would participate as an observer at the International Council for the Exploration of the Seas Conference on the seal hunt. But the Government will not move otherwise. I hope that back benchers and other members in the Government will turn around this Government decision because it would be a retrogressive step, as far as I am concerned, for the Parliament just to fall into party lines on such an issue, one which is hardly going to divide us but one which could deliver something which is required by the Australian electorate.
Schedule 3 of the Bill as it stands applies to whales, dolphins and porpoises only. Whilst not many Australians can claim to have seen whales in their natural environment many of us have seen the clever antics of dolphins-they are a very intelligent species. Few people would deny, however, that these animals seem to have a special aura of their own which sets them apart in the animal kingdom. As well, several species of whales have been voraciously killed for the products that they yield to man and they border on extinction.
For these reasons in particular this Bill, in banning products from these animals, would be an humane document. To my mind, we are taking only a very small step along the path which may well be an important yardstick in our standing as a truly progressive nation. For our entire history we as human beings have been indistinguishable from the rest of the animal kingdom in our species' narcissism-as seen in this chamber. Humans have carved a swathe through both the landscape and the flora and fauna of our planet in the pursuit of human comfort. In many cases, fellow human beings have been sacrificed also in the name of progress. In the same way, lions have ravaged other animal species and so on down the food chain.
The point I wish to make is that we have always set areas apart from our fellow travellers on this planet and sought to control nature to suit our own needs, often to our detriment. It is only recently that a wider consciousness has evolved which subscribes to standards of freedom and justice based on something more than human mortality. It is only recently that man and woman as a species have recognised the interdependence of

species and glimpsed the dignity of the many animal species with which we share this planet. At its most esoteric, this consciouness has been manifested in the animal liberation movement. I am convinced that one day this movement will be seen as part of the fight to accord some notion of respect to animal life. When we respect animal life we respect ourselves.
For the moment, however, man and woman are taking the first few steps and beginning to recognise facts that should always have been obvious, such as the fact that animals experience pain. Our consciences let us take this only so far. Whilst certain large animals can create an unsightly disturbance while being killed, most of us avoid situations in which we are confronted with this fact. It seems now of that we are finally willing to grant dispensation to one or two favoured animal species. The animals we have chosen such as the whale and the dolphin have been largely selected using the ultimate of criteria-their apparent intelligence and passivity. In other words, they alone in the animal kingdom possess those qualities which we as egotistical humans would like to think separate them from other animal species.
Of course, the more sensible approach, if we are to venture on the path of sparing animals from wholesale slaughter for reasons other than that of species survival, is to choose the criterion of pain. They, with us, all share that criterion. In this case the entire animal kingdom would probably have to be counselled and thus far, of course, this is totally unacceptable. Therefore, we must be content for the time being to accept that, whilst animals which experience pain will continue to be bred to be slaughtered or be used in sometime mysterious scientific experiments, at least some will be spared this fate.
I have no doubt that much of the sympathy for the baby harp seal stems from its appearance and, not least, from the simple fact that it is, after all, a baby at the time of being slaughtered. It cannot claim to have the brain of the dolphin or the whale although it certainly shares the characteristics of passivity. There appears to be little doubt, however, that it is as endangered a species as the whale. On this latter ground alone it warrants protection. Yet clearly Australians have always said that the sight of a baby seal, with its innocent eyes, being clubbed to death is unacceptable. With this statement they have taken the first step towards rebelling against the apparent pain inflicted on animals by man. While the Canadian Government, in troglodyte fashion, continues ignoring the pleas of the world we as representatives of the Australian people have the unique opportunity to protest officially against the slaughter

Wildlife Protection Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 523

by voting in favour of this amendment. It can only add to the respect which we respectively earn amongst our constituents and amongst each other. I believe that this amendment, if carried, will ultimately mark this piece of legislation as a milestone in defining our relations to the animal world.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (9.44)-1 thank all honourable members for their constructive suggestions and their contributions to the debate. By and large there is total support for the legislation. I will comment on one or two of the speeches because of the queries raised in them. The honourable member for Kalgoorlie (Mr Campbell) and the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) raised the question of live exports. The reasons for that are simply concern and fact. We believe that Australia should continue to provide international leadership in nature conservation such as it did in relation to the ban on whaling. We believe that any increased export of live fauna would run counter to the world wide trend to reduce trade in wildlife and that it could greatly harm Australia's credibility in the area of responsible conservation. Exports would run counter to the spirit of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora to which Australia is a signatory. To be effective the proposed relaxation of export policy would require the introduction of controls and surveillance with a consequent increase in government bureaucracy and capital expenditure at both Commonwealth and State levels. Export of common Australian bird species would not reduce the demand for rare bird species as collectors' items. In fact, export of common or pest species would heighten overseas interest in Australia's rare specimens of wildlife. However, there would also be considerable adverse local and overseas reaction to increased exportation of wild fauna, particularly on animal welfare grounds in relation to the concept of trapping Australia's unique wild fauna for the purposes of export and eventual confinement in cages for the rest of their lives. Quite obviously, there could be objections from other countries, given the possibility of birds escaping and becoming pests. I think one of the speakers indicated that we would be a lot better off in Australia if we did not import such things as cats, pigs and foxes, some of which subsequently escape. More importantly, statistics show that more than 90 per cent of wild birds legally trapped die before reaching their overseas destination. I think it is deplorable on animal welfare grounds for people even to indicate that we

should be exporting live animals to a greater extent.
Another point is that Australia is free of virulent diseases such as Newcastle disease and consequently Australian birds have absolutely no immunity. The placement of Australian birds in overseas quarantine centres where these diseases are prevalent would result in extremely high mortality rates. Quite obviously, these matters are of great concern. We are merely continuing the policy of successive governments for many years. It appears to me that we should, if we really believe in the preservation of our native fauna and flora, continue the policy of opposition to the export of live animals. Another point raised was that animals could not be exported on a private basis. That is not true. If honourable members closely read the Bill, they will see in clause 44 that the Minister has discretionary powers on a case by case basis. So, if all the conditions are lived up to, if adequate securities are given and if the Minister of the time can be convinced that the export of a live animal is in the interests of all people in both the giving country and the receiving country, with adequate guarantees that there will be no commercial exploitation, he can on a case by case basis give that permission. In conclusion, I thank the speakers not only for their very worthwhile contributions but also for the spirit in which they entered the debate.
Mr CROSS (Brisbane) (9.49)-1 do not intend to take up the time of the House for very long with what I propose to say. I introduce a new matter which relates very much to what the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) just said. He said that the Minister would have, on the information available to him, the capacity and the opportunity to change the lists of species that might be imported or exported. The Opposition welcomes this Bill because it provides for the first time in one piece of legislation comprehensive lists of species ineligible for export or import. The honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) correctly made some criticisms of the fact that some of the animals and species on the list are from time to time commonly regarded as pests. That, of course, is one of the problems because much depends on the circumstances at the time-rainfall, climatic conditions and the like. These lists are drawn up against a background of considerable lack of modern knowledge on the abundance or rarity of hundreds of species of Australian mammals and other animals. I hope that, if this Bill is an earnest of the Government's new interest in Australian fauna, it will also extend to flora. It should be part of a program of increased resources made available for

524 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Wildlife Protection Bill

the national biological survey and for the acquisition of lands for national parks. I point out the paucity of information available to the Minister or any other Minister to enable him to make these decisions.
Australian flora and fauna in many cases have survived from earlier periods and in more. recent times have been the victims of changes in climate. Many species are extremely vulnerable to climatic change and to man's activities in altering the environment, which has been the principal reason for the increased pace of change since the British settlement of this country in 1788. The introduction of predators, as has been mentioned, has been a big factor in that. The need for legislation of this kind is made even greater by the changes that have taken place in our lifetime. In the days when people settled the part of Australia that the Minister comes from, the pace of change in the environment was very much slower than it is today. We know that in recent times changes have been made to the landscape by bauxite mining, by open-cut mining for coal and by the clearing of rainforest and brigalow. We know the mistakes that have been made. There has recently been discussion in Queensland about the brigalow scheme, which was financed by this Government and carried out over a period going back to 20 years ago, and about the fact that that development took place without any real care for the survival of many species of Australian plants and animals. I hope that the Government, in its policies and in other legislation that it introduces, will take those things into account.
Most of the attention in the export of animals is given to parrots and reptiles, many of which are fairly small and quite rare. The parrots are very beautiful and are in great demand overseas. Species are still being found. A survey partly financed by this Government and carried out by the Queensland Museum in conjunction with the Australian Museum into rainforests in north Queensland and in central and south-eastern Queensland has in fairly recent years discovered new species of animals. It will, therefore, be necessary for the latest information to be made available to the Minister so that he can keep his appendices up to date.
Finally, there is a need for a substantial educative program. Because these lists are very comprehensive, people may break the law without knowing it. If the legislation is to be effective, not only should it be seen in a punitive sense but also the restrictions and obligations that the legislation imposes should be made known to the people of Australia. Not only should this take place in airports where we are cautioned about taking

prescribed articles such as explosives and dangerous substances on to aircraft, but also it should be part of a program of education in schools. The success or otherwise of the program will depend upon surveillance at our airports and ports and on coastal surveillance in the north of this continent, because much of this law will be unenforceable unless there is proper coastal surveillance. I support the Bill.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
In Committee The Bill. Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (9.55)-by leave-I move:
(I) Clause 4, page 5, after the definition of "premises" insert the following definitions:
"'prescribed scientific organization' means a scientific organization included in a class of scientific organizations declared by the regulations to be a prescribed class of scientific organizations for the purposes of this Act;
" 'prescribed scientific research' means scientific research engaged in by a prescribed scientific organization; ".
(2) Clause 4, page 6, lines 27 and 28, omit the definition of "scientific research".
(3) Clause 8, page 9, line 23, omit "authorized by that Act or law to do so,", substitute "exercising powers under that Act or law".
(4) Clause 10, page 10, line 6, insert "published in the Gazette" after "hand".
(5) Clause 28, page 17, line 27, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research".
(6) Clause 28, page 17, line 32, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research".
(7) Clause 28, page 17, line 36, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research".
(8) Clause 29, page 18, line 20, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research".
(9) Clause 29, page 18, line 27, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research".
(10) Clause 29, page 18, line 35, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research".
(II) Clause 30, page 19, line 5, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research".
(12) Clause 30, page 19, line 7, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research".
(13) Clause 31, page 19, line 16, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research".
(14) Clause 31, page 19, line 28, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research".
(15) Clause 31, page 19, line 35, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research ".

Wildlife Protection Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 525

(16) Clause 36, page 22, line 12, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research ".
(17) Clause 36, page 22, line 17, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research".
(18) Clause 37, page 22, line 35, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research ".
(19) Clause 37, page 22, line 42, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research ".
(20) Clause 38, page 23, line 14, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research".
(21) Clause 38, page 23, line 18, insert "prescribed" before "scientific research ".
(22) Clause 43, page 29, line I, insert "except in the case of an authority to import a specimen not referred to in paragraph 22 (a)," before "that".
(23) Clause 69, page 47,Iines 9 to 42, and page 48,Iines I to 8, omit the clause, substitute the following clauses:
Seizure and forfeiture of specimens
"69. (I) Where a court convicts a person of an offence against this Act or the regulations, the court may order the forfeiture to the Commonwealth of any specimen (including a specimen that has been seized under sub-section (2» used or otherwise involved in the commission of the offence.
"(2) An inspector may seize any specimen that he believes on reasonable grounds has been used or otherwise involved in the commission of an offence against this Act or the regulations and may retain the specimen until the expiration of a period of 60 days after the seizure, or, if-
(a) proceedings for an offence against this Act or the regulations in the commission of which the specimen may have been used or otherwise involved are instituted within that period; or
(b) an action referred to in sub-section (5) is brought in relation to the specimen,
until those proceedings, that action, or those proceedings and that action, as the case requires, is or are terminated.
"(3) Subject to sub-section (4), where a specimen is seized by an inspector under sub-section (2), he shall, as soon as is practicable, serve on the owner of the specimen or the person who had possession, custody or control of the specimen immediately before it was seized a notice in writing-
(a) identifying the specimen;
(b) stating that it has been seized under sub-section 69 (2) and specifying the reason for the seizure; and
(c) setting out the terms of sub-section (5).
"(4) An inspector is not required to serve a notice under sub-section (3) in relation to a specimen if-
(a) after making such inquiries as he thinks appropriate, he does not, within 20 days after the specimen was seized, have sufficient information to enable him to serve the notice; or
(b) the Minister is required to serve a notice under subsection 69A (2).
"(5) Where a specimen is seized under sub-section (2), the owner of the specimen may, within 30 days after the seizure, or, where a notice is served under sub-section (3) in relation to the specimen, within 30 days after the service, bring an action against the Commonwealth in a court of competent jurisdiction for the delivery of the specimen to him on the

ground that the specimen was not used or otherwise involved in the commission of an offence against this Act or the Regulations, and-
(a) where the owner of the specimen does so-
(i) if the court finds that the specimen was used or otherwise involved in the commission of the offence-the court shall or<ler the specimen to be forfeited to the Commonwealth; or
(ii) if the action is discontinued by the owner otherwise than by reason that the specimen has been delivered to him, forfeited to the Commonwealth or disposed of under subsection 69A (I )-the specimen is forfeited to the Commonwealth; or
(b) where the owner of the specimen does not do so and, within the period of 60 days after the seizure, none of the following events occurs:
(i) proceedings are instituted for an offence against this Act or the regulations in the commission of which the specimen is alleged to have been used or otherwise involved;
(ii) the specimen is delivered to the owner;
(iii) the specimen is disposed of under sub-section 69A (I),
the specimen is forfeited to the Commonwealth.
"(6) In any action in a court brought under sub-section (5), the court may find that a person committed an offence if, and only if-
(a) in the case of a person who has been tried for the offence-the person has been convicted of the offence; or
(b) in any other case-the court is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the person committed the offence.
"(7) A specimen forfeited to the Commonwealth by virtue of this section becomes the property of the Commonwealth and, subject to sub-section (8), shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with the directions of the Minister.
"(8) A specimen shall not be dealt with under this section in any way that would result in the specimen becoming an object of trade.
"(9) Where a person has been convicted of an offence in which a specimen that has been seized under sub-section (2) was used, any costs in relation to the custody of the specimen (including any costs of transporting or disposing of the specimen and, in the case of a specimen that is a live animal or a live plant, any costs of maintaining the animal or plant) are a debt due by the person to the Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth may recover the amount of the costs by action in a court of competent jurisdiction.
"(10) For the purposes of this section, where a live animal or a live plant has been used or otherwise involved in the commission of an offence against this Act or the regulations, any progeny of that animal or plant in the possession of the person who 'committed the offence shall be taken to be a specimen that was used or otherwise involved in the commission of that offence.
"( II) Where an inspector is authorized under this section to retain a specimen he may do so by causing the specimen to be taken to, and kept at, a place approved by the Designated Authority for the purpose of keeping specimens seized under this section.
"(12) For the purposes of this section, proceedings or an action shall not be taken to have been terminated unless and

526 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Wildlife Protection Bill

until any appeal to a court in relation to the proceedings or action has been terminated.
..( 13) In this section, 'specimen' includes an article to which sub-section 4 (2) applies.

Disposal of certain live animals and plants seized

"69A. (I) Where-

"

(a) any specimen, being a live animal or live plant, is

seized under sub-section 69 (2); and

(b) the Minister considers on reasonable grounds that it
is not appropriate that that specimen be retained in accordance with that sub-section but that it is appro-
priate that that specimen be returned to its natural habitat, destroyed or otherwise dealt with,

the Minister may cause the specimen to be dealt with in the manner that he considers appropriate.

"(2) Subject to sub-section (3), where a specimen is dealt with in accordance with sub-section (I), the Minister shall, as soon as is practicable, serve on the owner of the specimen or the person who had possession, custody or control of the specimen immediately before it was seized a notice in writing--
(a) identifying the specimen;
(b) unless a notice in relation to the seizure has been served under sub-section 69 (3)-stating that the specimen has been seized under sub-section 69 (2) and specifying the reason for the seizure;
(c) stating that the specimen has been dealt with under sub-section 69A (I) and specifying the manner in which it has been so dealt with and the reason for doing so; and
(d) setting out the terms of sub-section (4).

"(3) The Minister is not required to serve a notice under
sub-section (2) in relation to a specimen if, after making such inquiries as he thinks appropriate, he does not, within 20 days after dealing with the specimen, have sufficient information to enable him to serve the notice.

"(4) Where a specimen is dealt with in accordance with sub-section (I), the owner of the specimen may bring an action against the Commonwealth in a court of competent
jurisdiction for the recovery of the market value of the specimen at the time it was so dealt with on the ground that the specimen was not used or otherwise involved in the commission of an offence against this Act or the regulations.

"(5) In any action in a court brought under sub-section (4), the court may find that a person committed an offence if, and only if-
(a) in the case of a person who has been tried for the offence-the person has been convicted of the offence; or
(b) in any other case-the court is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the person committed the offence.

Seizure and forfeiture of goods involved in offences
"69s. (I) Where a court convicts a person of an offence against this Act or the regulations, the court may order the forfeiture to the Commonwealth of any goods used or otherwise involved in the commission of the offence.

"(2) An inspector may seize any goods that he believes on reasonable grounds have been used or otherwise involved in the commission of an offence against this Act or the regulations and may retain the goods until the expiration of a period of 60 days after the seizure, or, if proceedings for an offence against this Act or the regulations in the commission of which the goods may have been used or otherwise involved are instituted within that period, until the proceedings (including any appeal to a court in relation to those proceedings) are terminated.
"(3) The Minister may authorize goods seized under subsection (2) or anything in, on or attached to such goods to be released to their owner, or to the person from whose possession they were seized, either unconditionally or on such conditions as he thinks fit, including conditions as to the giving of security for payment of their value if they are forfeited.
"(4) An inspector may seize any matter or thing that he believes on reasonable grounds wiJJ afford evidence of the commission of an offence against this Act or the regulations and may retain it until the expiration of a period of 60 days after the seizure, or, if proceedings for an offence against this Act or the regulations of the commission of which it may afford evidence are instituted within that period, until the proceedings (including any appeal to a court in relation to those proceedings) are terminated.
"(5) Goods forfeited to the Commonwealth by virtue of this section become the property of the Commonwealth and shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with the directions of the Minister.
"(6) In this section, 'goods' includes vehicles, vessels, aircraft and platforms but does not include any specimen or any article to which sub-section 4 (2) applies.".
(24) Clause 78, page 52, before paragraph (1) (a), insert the following paragraph:
"(aa) a declaration by the Minister under sub-section 10 (1 );".
(25) Clause 78, page 53, after paragraph (e), insert the following paragraph:
"(ea) a determination by the Minister for the purposes of paragraph 24 (5) (b) of the period for which a permit is to remain in force;".
(26) Clause 78, page 53, after paragraph (j), insert the following paragraphs:
"(ja) a determination by the Minister for the purposes of paragraph 42 (6) (c) of the period for which an authority under section 42 is to remain in force;
"(jb) a determination by the Minister for the purposes of paragraph 43 (9) (b) of the period for which an authority under section 43 is to remain in force, being a period of less than 12 months;
"(jc) a determination by the Minister for the purposes of paragraph 44 (3) (c) of the period for which an authority under section 44 is to remain in force;".
(27) Schedule 2, Part I, page 66, omit "genus Cyatheaceae", substitute "family Cyatheaceae".
(28) Schedule 2, Part I, page 66, omit "genus Dicksoniaceae", substitute "family Dicksoniaceae".

(29) Schedule 2, Part II, Division 3, page 67, omit-

"GALLIFORMES

Megapodiidae

substitute-

Megapodius freycinet abbotti

fowl, Abbott's scrub, Abbott's megapode ",

Wildlife Protection Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 527

GALLIFORMES

Pandionidae (Species of Pandionidae)

Sagittariidae (Species of Sagittariidae)

Megapodiidae

Megapodius freycinet abbotti

fowl, Abbott's scrub, Abbott's megapode".

(30) Schedule 2, Part II, Division 5, page 69, column headed "Genus, species or sub-species", insert "or Part III" after "Part II" (third occurring).
(31) Schedule 2, Part II, Division 5, page 69, column headed "Genus, species or sub-species", omit"(Sub-species of species of Moschus a sub-species of which is specified in Part II of Schedule I, other than sub-species so specified) ".
(32) Schedule 2, Part III, Division 5, page 69, column headed "Genus, species or sub-species", insert "or Part III" after "Part II" (fourth last occurring).
(33) Schedule 2, Part III, page 73, omit"Population of animals of the species Canis lupus outside Bhutan, India, Nepal and Pakistan", substitute"Population of animals of the species Moschus moschiferus in areas outside the Himalayas "Population of animals of the species Canis lupus outside Bhutan, India, Nepal and Pakistan "Population of animals of the species Felis caracal in areas outside Asia

"Population of animals of the species Felis rubiginosa in areas outside India".
(34) Schedule 6, Part II, Division I, page 80, columns headed "Family" and "Genus, species or sub-species", omit-
"Branchiostegidae Malacanthus latovittatus".

(35) Schedule 6, Part II, Division I, page 80, columns headed "Family" and "Genus, species and sub-species", omit-

"Serranidae

Suttonia lineata".

(36) Schedule 6, Part II, Division 2, page 80, column headed "Genus, species or sub-species", omit "Acanthurus xanthorum", substitute "Zebrasona xanthurum".

(37) Schedule 6, Part II, Division 2, page 81, columns headed "Family" and "Genus, species or sub-species", omit-

"Bothidae

Bothus mancus",

substitute-

"Bothidae

Bothus mancus

"Branchiostegidae Malacanthus latovittatus".

(38) Schedule 6, Part I I, Division 2, page 82, omit all the words from and including-

"Ephippidae

Drepane punctata

to and including-

substitute- "Ephippidae Heterodontidae Holocentridae
Grammatidae Grammistidae

"Grammistes sexlineatus
Drepane punctata Platax batavianus Platax orbicularis Heterodontus japonicus Adioryx diadema Adioryx lacteoguttatus Adioryx microstomus Adioryx ruber Adioryx spinifer Adioryx tiere Adioryx xantherythrus Flammeo opercularis Flammeo sammara Holocentrus rufus Myripristis jacobus Myripristis kuntee Myripristis murdjan Myripristis pralinius Myripristis violaceus Plectrypops lima Gramma loreto Grammistes sexlineatus

(39) Schedule 6, Part II, Division 2, page 83, omit all the words from and including-

"Platax pinnatus

batfish"

to and including- " Coris variegata

wrasse, variegated",

substituteGobiidae (Oxudercidae)

"Platax pinnatus
Platax teira Spilotichthys pictus Amblygobius phalaena

batfish, spotted"
soapfish",
batfish, spotted bat fish bat fish shark, Port Jackson squirrelfish squirrelfish squirrel fish squirrel fish squirrel fish squirrel fish squirrel fish squirrelfish squirrel fish squirrel fish soldierfish soldierfish soldierfish soldierfish soldierfish squirrelfish basslet soapfish".
bat fish batfish sweetlips goby

528 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Wildlife Protection Bill

Kuhliidae Kyphosidae (Scoridae)
Labridae

Eleotriodes sexguttatus Eleotriodes strigatus Gobiodon citrinus Gobiodon histrio Lythrypnus daW Nemateleotris magnifica Oxyuriehthys Ptereleotris microlepsis Ptereleotris tricolor Vanderhorstia ornatissima Zonogobious semidoliatus Kuhlia taentura Microeanthus strigatus Anampses eaeruleopunetatus Anampses ehrysoeephalus Anampses euvier Anampses twistii Bodianus axillaris Bodianus bilunulatus Bodianus diana Bodianus mesothorax Cheilinus undulatus Cheilio inermis Cirrhilabrus temminekii Coris aygula Coris baWeui Coris jlavovittata Coris gaimard Coris variegata Epibulus insidiator Gomphosus varius Haliehoeres bioeellatus Haliehoeres eentriquadrus Haliehoeres margaritaeeus Haliehoeres nebulosus Haliehoeres notopsis

gudgeon, blue-cheeked gudgeon, golden-headed
goby,lemon goby, coral goby, catalina
gudgeon, fire goby
gudgeon, blue
scissortail goby goby, regal
perch, f1agtail
stripey wrasse, chisel-tooth
wrasse, chisel-tooth
wrasse, chisel-tooth wrasse, chisel-tooth
pigfish pigfish pigfish
pigfish
wrasse, maori rainbowfish
rainbowfish, threadfin
labrid, clown malamalama
hilu wrasse, clown wrasse, variegated
telescope fish wrasse, club-nosed wrasse, two-spot
wrasse, four-spot wrasse, pearl-spot
wrasse, clouded wrasse, two-eyed".

(40) Schedule 6, Part II, Division 2, page 84, omit-

"Pempherididae

Pempheris oualensis

substitute-

"Oxudercidae "Pempherididae
"Pholidichthyidae

Perciphthalmus papillo Pempheris oualensis Pholidiehthys leueotaenia

sweeper",
mudskipper sweeper worm, convict H.

(41) Schedule 6, Part II, Division 2, page 85, columns headed "Genus, species and sub-species" and "Common name", omit-

"Daseyllus

dascyllus"

(42) Schedule 6, Part II, Division 2, page 85, omit-

"Scaridae

Bolbometopon (Searus) bieolor

substitute-

"Pseudogrammatidae

Suttonia lineata

"Scaridae

Bolbometopon (Searus) bieolor

parrotfish" parrotfish".

As indicated on 6 May 1982 in the second reading speech on the Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill, the purpose of the Bill
is to strengthen arrangements for the protection of Australia's animals and plants and wildlife gen-
erally by improving the effectiveness of our import and export controls. In order to ensure that this purpose is realised to the fullest extent possible, the Government proposes a number of amendments to the Bill. The proposed amendments are designed to overcome a number of minor problems which become evident after introduction of the Bill and to implement certain

suggestions of the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills.
In summary, the proposed amendments insert into the Bill two new definitions relating to scientific research to ensure its effective operation; empower the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to review decisions of the Minister with respect to management programs and the duration of permits; improve the seizure provisions and provide for forfeiture or disposal of specimens used in the commission of an offence; and correct a number of technical and typographical errors in the Schedules to the Bill.

Wildlife Protection Bill

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 529

Amendments agreed to.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (9.57)-1 move:
Schedule 3, page 74, omit Part II, substitute the following Part:
"PART II-ANIMALS

Order

Family

Gen us, species or sub-species

Common name

CETACEA PINNIPEDIA

Phocidae

all species

whales,

dolphins

and

porpoises

Cystophora cristata hooded seal

Pagophilus

harp seal".

groenlandicus

I will inform the chamber very quickly why I have moved this amendment. This matter has recently received publicity throught the world. No doubt honourable members will be familiar with this outrage that is perpetrated in Canada at this time. The original population of harp seals, albeit several hundred years ago, was approximately 10 million. It is now between one million and 1.5 million. From that very small depleted population the current annual quota is 186,000. Many organisations throughout the world have called upon the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species to list these species on Appendix II and, of course, if they were so listed, they would be on Schedules I, 2 or 3-if the Government saw fit to add them to Schedule 3-of this Bill. They are not; they should be. I remind the House of the cruel and chilling sight of the clubbing to death of thousands of baby seals as witnessed on the television sets of the nation some months ago. At that time on behalf of the Federal Opposition I called upon the Government to demand from the Canadian Government that it cease this barbarous practice and also that Australia prevents the import of products from harp and hooded seals. Unfortunately, the Government did not see fit to accept that demand but it is now belatedly possible for it to do so.
Consideration interrupted.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! It being 10 p.m., I shall report progress.
Progress reported.

ADJOURNMENT Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr MeVeigh-I require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.

WILDLIFE PROTECTION (REGULATION OF EXPORTS AND
IMPORTS) BILL 1982
In Committee
Consideration resumed.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (IO.I)-The hooded seals are an even more endangered species than the harp seals. It is difficult to work out from current evidence and data just what the current population of hooded seals is, but I am reliably informed that during the 1950s the population was approximately 500,000 only and all of the indications are that it is now only 200,000 or 300,000. From this the Canadian Government has authorised quotas of 45,000 a year, so they are even more endangered than the harp seal. I am afraid that I have an advance indication that the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) and the Government will say no to this amendment. I am very sorry that they are going to do that. The Opposition is offering full support to the Bill and I know that they may believe that there are some grounds for supporting what I am saying. I think that if they do not accept the amendment it will be because they are really afraid of the trade reaction from the Canadian Government. I think that that is very sad. They should not be afraid. I know that the Minister has put out today a Press release after receiving advance notice of the amendment that we have moved tonight.
Mr MeVeigh-Not true.
Mr WEST-If that is not true--
Mr MeVeigh-1 told you that it was not true, now be fair.
Mr WEST-I retract that, but I believe the Press release has gone out today because it has been pointed out that it is so obvious that the harp and hooded seals have not been added along with the cetacean creatures-whales and dolphins-to Schedule 3. The Press release is to the effect that Australia will participate as an observer at the International Council for the Exploration of the Seas Conference and that the Government will take a position later. Quite frankly, I do not think that is good enough in light of the figures I have given the Minister. I think that the Minister's decision to put out a Press statement stating that Australia will attend, as an observer, the International Council for the Exploration of the Seas and that the Government will then make up its mind is really a belated attempt to head off all the criticism that has been coming in from hundreds and thousands of people all around Australia who

530 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Wildlife Protection Bill

have signed the petitions that have been forwarded to the Government in their thousands. I conclude by urging the House to support the amendment. I urge the Government not to delay. These species are in danger. The Minister and the Government have indicated by introducing this Bill that they wish to protect endangered species and to support CITES, and I suggest that they support this amendment.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (10.5)-1 seek leave of the House to have incorporated in Hansard the news release to which the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) referred.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS AND ENVIRONMENT ON
GOVERNMENT ACTION CONCERNING THE CANADIAN HARP AND HOODED SEALS
The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, the Hon. D. T. McVeigh, MP, said today that the Government has carefully considered possible action by Australia in relation to the concern of many Australians about the annual hunt in Canada of Harp and Hooded Seals.
The Government has received many representations and petitions seeking action because of the perceived threat to seal populations and the apparently inhumane aspects of the killing and skinning techniques. Similar concern has been expressed in other countries. Seal products are not imported into Australia in any significant quantities.
Mr McVeigh indicated that Australia had already taken the opportunity on several recent occasions to raise this issue with Canada at Ministerial level.
The Minister noted that there was disagreement about important scientific aspects of the seal population assessment and that Canada and the European Commission had agreed that a special study be carried out by the International Council for the Exploration of the Seas (ICES) on the effect of the hunt on the survival of the two seal species. ICES is expected to present its findings later this year. The Government has decided that Australia will seek to participate as an observer at the ICES meeting at which that report will be presented. Meanwhile consultations will continue with the European Commission and Canadian authorities.
Mr McVeigh said the Government will reconsider whether further action by Australia is appropriate following conclusion of the ICES report and any immediate follow up action by the European Commission and Canada later this year.
18 August 1982
For fucther information:
Mr Bill Passick (062) 73 1969
Mr McVEIGH-I give the honourable member for Cunningham the assurance that after the Copenhagen conference comes to a decision on the matter I will re-examine it. If the facts are as the honourable member has stated and as many people believe they are, I will consult with him

and take immediate action, which I have the power to do under clause 9 of the Bill, by publishing in the Commonwealth Gazette the alteration to the Schedule that he has requested. I appreciate the stand that he has taken on the matter, but the Government has looked at the matter quite lengthily. We believe that the proper time for us to make the appropriate amendment if necessary will be after eight weeks when the full facts will be made known following a thorough investigation of the proposition. I conclude on the note that I will be happy to discuss the matter in depth with the honourable member. I will make all the information available to him, but the Government cannot accept the amendment at this stage.
Amendment negatived.
Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill reported with amendments; report -by leave-adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr McVeigh)-by leaveread a third time.
ADJOURNMENT
Unemployment-Royal Australian Navy Personnel: Budget Decisions
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (10.8)-1 wish to bring to the attention of the House the disastrous unemployment situation confronting this nation. I intend to refer in detail to the situation in my electorate. I have studied the situation very closely and I believe that a microapproach has much to contribute to understanding the problem. In recent years the macroapproach has entirely dominated debate. This is partly because the Government has banned the publication of Commonwealth Employment Service figures which provided a regular indicator of regional changes in unemployment levels. However, another reason is that unemployment has been seen as a transitory problem that changes in policy or an upswing in the economy would eventually improve. The solutions were all macro, so no microanalysis was necessary.
I believe that a change has taken place in the expectations of all sectors of society as to how the problems of mass unemployment are to be approached. This necessitates a new, more detailed analysis of the problem. To get these unemployment percentage figures I used the Department of Social Security figures on numbers of people in receipt of unemployment benefit by postcode and applied them to the total population by postcode,

Adjournment

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 531

from the 1981 census, as multiplied by the State average percentage in the work force. Admittedly there is room for some error in this formula. The main problem is that only unemployed people in receipt of benefit are counted, so all figures are underestimates. However, the figures are quite accurate enough for regional comparison. Using this technique I discovered that in June the Victoria Park subdivision had an unemployment rate of 13 per cent; Riverdale, 12 per cent; East Victoria Park, II per cent; Bassendean/Ashfield 9 per cent; and Belmont, 8 per cent. These are working class suburbs. They also have above average numbers of people on pensions and other benefits. South Perth and Kensington, largely middle class suburbs but with many blocks of fiats, have a rate of 8 per cent. As these figures were all well above what was alleged to be the State average I thought there may be some miscalculation on my part, so for comparison I studied the suburbs of Mount Pleasant and Applecross as part of an area of wealthy middle class homes on quarter-acre blocks. In this area the unemployment rate was 3 per cent, which leads me to suspect that in fact my method of calculating the other figures was valid and points to a very serious regional unemployment problem in my electorate.
Trade unions have notified me oflay-offs in factories employing people from the working class areas I have mentioned. Despite the hopes pinned on the North West Shelf the steel industry has been laying off workers over the last six to 12 months. A major employer, for example, in the agricultural machinery field, Chamberlain John Deere Pty Ltd laid off 40 foundry workers in May. It is quite clear that male breadwinners as well as school leavers are becoming unemployed in increasing numbers. It is plain that this Government is not prepared to do anything about this situation. Government estimates blandly announce that the number of people to be unemployed next year will be approaching 50 per cent higher than it is now. Yet there is no plan for dealing with this massive tragedy except more training schemes and more work experience for unemployed youth. Government counts the cost of job creation but not the terrible social and personal costs of mass unemployment. A close look at the nature and location of unemployed people shows that job creation schemes are desperately needed in certain areas for certain people with definable levels and types of skills. In my electorate it so happens that the greatest need for job creation is in the suburbs that are most in need of improved public facilities.
The Belmont City Council made excellent use of Regional Employment Development Scheme

funds during the term of the Whitlam Government. The facilities built at that time included a water playground and a cycleways network. Both are now major attractions to people moving into the area. They were not a waste of money; they were very useful, long term improvements and they were labour intensive in construction but low cost in maintenance. Similar socially useful, labour intensive schemes could be devised in the Victoria Park area. A close analysis of the social needs of areas with high unemployment can have a major impact on the personal tragedy of unemployment and improve the living environment of thousands of people.
The point that I wanted to make tonight was a plea to get back to looking at Commonwealth Employment Service figures as a basis for calculating the levels of unemployment in particular areas. Where unemployment among breadwinners is concerned it is important to get to grips with those figures to know what sort of problem we are dealing with. I hope that honourable members will take notice of the method of calculation that I have used in that regard so that if the Government is not prepared to do it at least they have a means to do it. Once they have established those figures they will have a means to place pressure on the Government to devise the types of regional schemes which are now very necessary and which are not entailed in any Government legislation which has come before this House to date.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (1O.14)-Scare stories being publicly spread by the Australian Labor Party in my electorate that up to 500 naval personnel in Nowra could be sacked following yesterday's Budget are both false and dishonest. These Labor Party public allegations are similar to those scare stories that were spread by the Labor Party before the last Federal election. There will be no sackings of Service personnel whatsoever. In fact, HMAS Albatross at Nowra is still accepting re-engagement offers from retiring servicemen on a 12-month basis while awaiting the Government's decision on a new aircraft carrier. However, there will be some short term rundown in numbers at HMAS Albatross. This will be as a result of no replacements of retiring personnel being made while we await the Government's decision later this year on which aircraft carrier to acquire, what aircraft to purchase and what to do with the present aircraft.
I had already announced this situation, after the British Government failed to proceed with the

532 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Adjournment

sale of HMS Invincible. The Nowra fixed wing element was rationalised following the decommissioning of HMAS Melbourne. The number of personnel involved in this natural attrition with no recruitment would total a maximum of about 180 this year. In the event of the early commissioning of an aircraft carrier there would be a reversal of this rundown of fixed wing personnel and a further increase in the large numbers of personnel involved in the expanding rotary wing element of HMAS Albatross.
The Budget figures, confirmed by the Navy office today, on which the false allegations are based, outline the small reductions in Navy personnel numbers expected this year as a result of the decommissioning of HMAS Melbourne's 300 personnel-and the resultant reduction of the Navy's fixed wing activities-I 80. Only about 50 of the Melbourne's complement are in the Fleet Air Arm, along with about 130 from the fixed wing element. Apart from retirements these personnel have mainly been placed in alternative Service roles.
It is incredible that a Labor candidate would deliberately set out to cause this kind of morale problem by spreading such falsehoods for political purposes. This is typical of the Labor Party's approach to the whole problem of the Fleet Air Arm and the replacement of an aircraft carrier, in Nowra, and the general question of defence in Australia. The Labor Party has publicly stated and restated that it would sell any aircraft carrier that this Government acquired, that it is totally opposed to the acquisition of an aircraft carrier and will get rid of the fixed wing element from the Navy's Fleet Air Arm in Nowra. The statement the Labor candidate in my area is now making is being spread around and is causing distress and concern to the people involved. It is disgraceful. Its hypocrisy can be seen when compared with the stated public position of the Leader of the Australian Labor Party in this House and his spokesman on defence. Their total opposition to the survival of the Fleet Air Arm is on record. The pattern of deliberate deception that is involved with candidates in my area relating to the Fleet Air Arm is on record. It is incredible that the Labor Party would so falsely play politics with the lives, future and morale of our defence forces.
I was very concerned when I heard from Nowra today that there was great distress among serving members of the Navy at HMAS Albatross. These false reports were spread around by the local media. Naturally they believed that no one would recklessly make such disgraceful statements and took them at their face value. It is evident that the Labor Party's record on defence is dishonourable

and that the activities of its endor~d candidates are dishonest. Its concern for these people who are in fact serving this nation in the defence forces is non-existent. I suggest to the Australian Labor Party that if it has any interest in our defence forces it should change its tune and start telling the truth.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (1O.18)-ln the short time which is at my disposal tonight I wish to record my protest in relation to the Independent Committee of Inquiry into Commonwealth Laboratory Services and Facilities. Both the terms of reference and the aim of this inquiry have caused considerable unease to a number of people in my electorate and, no doubt, many people in other electorates who are at present benefiting from the assistance provided by the National Acoustic Laboratories for children suffering hearing impairments. Their particular fear is that the Committee will recommend that members of the public using the facilities of the National Acoustic Laboratories will be required to pay for the provision of facilities as has happened in so many other health and welfare areas. Their concern is reinforced when the membership of the Committee is examined.
The composition of the five member committee, which is chaired by the Deputy Vicechancellor of the Australian National University, does not inspire confidence in relation to its findings. The Committee comprises two company directors, two scientists and one academic. To put it mildly, this is a rather conservative membership. Bearing in mind many of the facilities which the Commonwealth laboratories have provided to the general public one would have expected that the Committee would contain at least one member who could represent general consumers. However, the worst aspect of the inquiry is the terms of reference which are very clearly designed to reduce the cost to government of the services at present provided by the Commonwealth laboratories.
Any doubt about the reason for the inquiry is dispelled by the specific statement in the terms of reference that account must be taken of the Commonwealth's immediate aims to streamline and fine down Commonwealth operations. If one looks also at the specific terms of reference it is quite clear that the aims are exactly the same as those of the infamous razor gang brief, that is, the rationalisation of Government funded institutions in order to hand over their functions to private enterprise. It is a philosophical commitment of the Government which bears no relationship to cost-effectiveness, efficiency or convenience to the public. The National Acoustic Laboratories, for

Adjournment

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 533

example, provides a uniform, comprehensive service which is unique. The lack of such facilities in many overseas countries bears witness to this. There is no doubt that the initial result of the inquiry has been to cause great concern, not only to members of the public who benefit from the facili-
ties provided by the Acoustic Laboratories but also to those people who work in the laboratories and are rightly proud of the quality of the services they provide. It is obvious that when the inquiry is completed the Government will take active steps to ensure that many of the products of Commonwealth laboratories are transferred to private enterprise.
It is appalling that the mindless commitment of the Government to the superiority of the private enterprise system means the sacrifice of some of the most efficient and publicly acclaimed government institutions at the altar of so-called entrepreneurship and the maximisation of profits. Past experience has shown, as has been proved by the practical effect of the razor gang recommendations, that the cost to the Australian public of transfers from public enterprise to private enterprise has risen and the quality of the services provided has decreased. Whether we examine the sectors of education, health or transport the so called rationalisation of facilities has meant that
the Australian public is required to pay more for the services provided. The proposed aims of the inquiry to streamline and fine down Commonwealth operations should be recognised for what it is-an intention that, regardless of the efficiency of the Commonwealth laboratories or the need by the community to receive the services, the services and facilities will from 1984 onwards be provided by private enterprise on the basis of the user pays principle.
I realise that my speech tonight will not persuade the Government to change its mind with regard to its most iniquitous inquiry. However, I hope I have drawn attention to the fact that members of the public and members on this side of the House appreciate that the real aim of this inquiry is to support the outdated philosophical outlook of the Federal Government at the expense of the disadvantaged members of our community.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (10.22)-Mr Deputy Speaker, unlike the previous speaker, the honourable member for La Trobe (Mr Milton), I will try to speak at a rate at which you will be able to understand me. I have pleasure in speaking tonight after hearing another speaker talking about the micro policy as it applied to the unemployed. I thought it would be ideal to draw the House's attention to my approach in assisting our young

unemployed people. At the time. I took the action about which I want to tell the House tonight the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) was in Western Australia taking up plenty of time on the radio telling people how he would employ the unemployed. He still seems to have a commitment to the Regional Employment Development Scheme, although he had nothing to do with it directly, as I did. He was not prepared to take some of the advice that I gave him in this House as to the huge deficiencies of that program. He thinks that young people will be employed if we introduce a $150m construction scheme such as, to quote him, the Snowy scheme of many years ago. Honourable members can imagine how much work that would make for the thousands of young unskilled unemployed. Such a scheme would be quite good for him and for some of his party colleagues because the day the $150m scheme was announced they would argue about site allowances, but I sincerely doubt, in this day and age of high technology and big capital equipment, that such a project would assist. Consequently, he thought he would have a youth corps. I am not exactly sure how he will make that work, but while he was doing that I was out presenting the Tuckey perpetual ladder.
The Tuckey perpetual ladder was presented to a young lady called Leanne Dickson, who lives in Esperance and who was attending a Community Youth Support Scheme group. I made a speech to that CYSS group pointing out that there were great opportunities for employment of the young if they rethought their positions and took some individual initiatives for which Australia was known throughout the world. I pointed out that I felt that within Australia many jobs exploited employed people who would be very happy to pay for certain services. As an example-a simple one, taking the micro point-I gave the washing of household windows. I said to the project officer at Esperance that if he could find a young person from his CYSS group who would attempt to see whether he or she could make a go of it I would provide the ladder. I was quite happy to invest the necessary $50. In fact he rang me and said that he had managed to get someone to take up the offer. I have since provided that ladder to the young lady. She is now making quite an adequate living on her own. Of course, she is no longer a burden to the taxpayer, to say nothing of the fact that her personal pride in being employed is a wonderful thing for her. The other amazing thing is that even though she is a young person who is still not earning a great amount of money she has been able to display some charity. When she works for any person on a pension she carries out the work of washing windows and so on at half price. I believe

534 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Adjournment

the effort was pretty good. The reason I called it the perpetual ladder was that I suggested that when she got herself on her feet she would give it to someone else in order for them to start. In fact, the total capital she required once she got the ladder-
Mr Beazley-That is not the private enterprise spirit.
Mr TUCKEY-Do not decry it, my friend, because there is employment. I put it to the honourable member that if a young clean-cut girl knocked at his wife's door tomorrow with an aluminium ladder and bucket in hand and offered to do the job at a reasonable price his wife could not grab her quickly enough. In fact there are 400,000 houses in Western Australia. If all their windows were washed once every three months 1,000 kids could get in front of the dole permanently. If the honourable member thinks that that is the answer to the unemployment problem of Australia he is quite wrong. Nevertheless, it is a dashed sight more smart than the $150m scheme to employ the young unemployed referred to by the honourable member for Wills. It is a lot of rubbish. It would be a lot more sensible if all honourable members did something like I have mentioned to help out young people. Furthermore-
Mr Beazley-It would buy an awful lot of ladders.
Mr TUCKEY-Just tell them to go around vacuuming swimming pools. It all works and it is not funny.
Mr MORRISON (St George) (10.27)-1 was very disturbed a few moments ago to hear some very wild assertions by the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume). Unfortunately, the honourable gentleman, having made his wild assertions, has left the chamber. But I think it is one of these cases in which nothing quite so concentrates the minds of members of the Liberal Party on defenceI am delighted to see the honourable member coming back-as an upcoming election. The honourable gentleman from Macarthur is once again seeking to defend the indefensible. Just recently-in fact two weeks ago-I had the privilege of visiting the Fleet Air Arm base at Nowra. I must say that the morale of that eminent section of the Australian defence forces is very low. It is low because of the policies of the Liberal Party Government.
Mr Robert Brown-And the member.
Mr MORRISON-And I am afraid the member has not done a great deal about it. I want to take up one point. The honourable gentleman maintained that fictitious figures were being

bruited around his electorate. I can only quote a document which has been presentedI got a copy of it today-by the Department of Defence about the rundown in the Royal Australian Navy through the decommissioning of the HMAS Melbourne.
Mr Baume-I quoted them accurately.
Mr MORRISON-I will quote it again so that the facts are on the record. I am sure this is the very basis of the statement made by the Australian Labor Party candidate in the area. The statement is based on fact. It reads:
Navy's approved manpower terminal strength has been reduced as a result of the decommissioning of the HMS Melbourne (minus 300) and reduction of flying hours for Skyhawk, Macchi and Tracker aircraft (minus 180).
That is all that the Labor Party candidateI am sure that he will be the new member for Macarthur-wa~ pointing out. I think it is the responsibility of the Labor Party candidate to point out the great weaknesses that have become evident through Liberal Party policy, and particularly in connection with the Fleet Air Arm. There is one statement which the honourable member for Macarthur raised to which I completely object. He said the Labor Party has made no propositions about the future of the Fleet Air Arm. The honourable gentlemen happened to be in the chamber on 25 March 1982. I shall refer to the Hansard of that date at page 1943. I said that I was sure that the honourable member for Macarthur would support the proposition that I put previously, and which I put again, that the Tracker aircraft would not be used for the Navy because, even if there were an aircraft carrier, a Tracker aircraft would not be able to operate on it. I said that they should be used for coastal surveillance. I went on to say--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 10.30 p.m.
NOTICES
The following dotices were given:
Mr Newman to present a Bill for an Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Mr Hodgman to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Mr Hodgman to present a Bill for an Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.

Notices

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 535

Mr Hodgman to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Mr McVeigh to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Northern Territory (SelfGovernment) Act 1978.
Mr Fife to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Mr Hunt to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be

referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: Construction of an engineering training centre at Pasadena, S.A., for Telecom Australia.
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 18 August 1982, pursuant to statute:
Commonwealth Teaching Service Act-Determination1982-No.4.
Public Service Act-Public Service Board Determination-1982/1O.

536 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Social Welfare Beneficiaries: Pharmaceuticals
MrCarIton-On 22 April 1982 (Hansard, page 1738) Dr Blewett asked Mr Fife, then representing the Minister for Health, a question without notice concerning the provision of pharmaceuticals to social security beneficiaries.
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme the only Social Security pensioners or beneficiaries who receive pharmaceutical benefits free of charge are those who are in receipt of age pension, invalid pension, widow's pension, supporting parent's benefit, sheltered employment allowance or sickness benefit under the Social Services Act 1947 and who qualify after being subjected to a special income test under that Act. Their dependants are also eligible to receive pharmaceutical benefits free of charge.
In addition to this some other Social Security beneficiaries, namely unemployment beneficiaries and special beneficiaries who qualify after being sUbjected to a special income test are issued with a Health Care card. Health Care cardholders and their dependants are entitled to free medical treatment and free hospital treatment at public hospitals, which would include the supply of pharmaceuticals at those hospitals.
In this time of Government expenditure restraint it is not possible at this stage to extend the provision of pharmaceutical benefits free of charge outside public hospitals to Health Care cardholders or to other groups in the community.
Nuclear Power Industry
Mr Malcolm Fraser-On 6 May 1982 (Hansard, page 2335) Mr West asked me a question without notice, concerning a report by the National Energy Advisory Committee entitled 'Nuclear Power in Australia: Regulation and Control.'
The following is in answer to the honourable member's question:
The National Energy Advisory Committee advises the Minister for National Development and Energy on matters relating to national energy policy. The Committee comprises representatives from industry, academic institutions, and Commonwealth and State agencies.
The report to which the honourable member referred is the 16th such report in a series on energy matters.

The report notes the decision by the Government announced on 5 June 1981 that far reaching changes to Commonwealth legislation on nuclear matters were required. The Government as announced by the Minister for Trade and Resources and the Minister for National Development ann--Energy had decided to establish a new legal base developing, with the States and the Northern Territory, appropriate State legislation complemented as necessary by Commonwealth legislation to ensure that Australia's national obligations and concerns were fully honoured. A principal Commonwealth responsibility was to ensure the observance of Australia's national obligations under the International NonProliferation Regime.
The report recommends that the Commonwealth State and Northern Territory Governments should develop, with minimal delay, a legal framework, using complementary legislation as appropriate, for licencing and regulating health, safety, and environmental and third-party liability aspects of nuclear power generation.
This work is proc~eding in close consultation with the State and the Northern Territory. The intent of the Government is to see that there is an adequate legislative base to ensure that any nuclear development in Australia in whatever form and wherever it may occur is subject to proper control and that Australia's obligations under its international treaties covering non-proliferation and safeguards are fully met.
Porta Printer Telephones for Profoundly Deaf Persons: Department of HeaIth
(Question No, 3411)
Mr Adermann asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 22 October 1981:
(I) Will the Minister, before the International Year of Disabled Persons ceases, ensure that, at the very least, in each State Office of the Minister's Department, and the central Canberra office, a Porta Printer type telephone receiver to communicate with the profoundly deaf is installed.
(2) Does the Minister understand the impediment facing profoundly deaf persons unable to use a standard telephone receiver, who need urgently to contact the Minister's Department on matters of concern, distress, or difficulty.
(3) Will the Minister ensure by this means that the profoundly deaf are not denied telephonic access to the Department which all other sections of the community enjoy.
Mr CarIton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 3406 on 25 March 1982 (Hansard, page 1494).

The Committee considered questions which it thought would need to be answered if nuclear power stations were to be introduced into Australia in the next 20 years. The report did not consider whether Australia or any of its States should actually embark on nuclear electricity generation. The report examined various aspects of the nuclear energy scene to determine what action would be necessary if nuclear electricity generation were to be adopted in Australia.
The Committee concluded that legislation, regulation, and inspection functions should be identified and responsibility for these assigned before nuclear electricity generation could proceed in Australia.

Hospitals: Foreign Ownership
(Question No. 3443)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 28 October 1981:
(I) Which hospitals are owned in Australia by (a) Hospital Corporation of America, (b) American Medical International, and (c) Hospital Affiliates International.
(2) How many beds has each hospital and how are they categorised, for example, in medical, surgical and psychiatric classifications.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 537

(3) Who were the previous owners of the existing hospitals purchased by each company and what was the purchase price in each case.
(4) Which hospitals have been built and which are in the planning stage.
(S) Have there been any delays in the building of planned hospitals; if so, what was the cause of each delay.
(6) Are any of the existing or planned hospitals in localities where there is an over-supply of hospital beds; if so, which hospitals.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2), (4) and (S)-
(a) Hospital Corporation Australia Pty Ltd..
EXISTING HOSPITALS

Name
Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Ltd, Baulkham Hills, N.S.W.
Dudley Private Hospital, Orange, N.S.W.
Belmont Private Hospital, Brisbane, Qld

Total beds/classification 190 medical/surgical beds
SO medical/surgical beds 107 psychiatric beds

Name

Total beds/classification

----------------------

Linacre Private Hospital, MelS9 acute surgical/medical

bourne, Vic.

beds(l)

Lingard Private Hospital, 109 medical/psychiatric

Newcastle, NSW

beds(2)

Warringal Private Hospital, 78 medical/surgical

Melbourne, Vic.

beds(3)

Wentworth ville Community 86 medical/surgical

Hospital, Sydney, NSW

beds(4)

Sunnybank Private Hospital, 96 medical/surgical beds

Sunnybank, Qld

Central Districts Private 68 medical/surgical

Hospital, Salisbury, SA

beds(S)

(Note: Woodlands Private Hospital, Newcastle was sold in May 1981 to Australians who propose to use the property for non-medical purposes).

(I) Number of beds reduced from 61 because of minor alteration to the interior of the hospital.
(2) Has approval from the State health authorities to increase bed capacity by 26 following the closure of Woodlands Private Hospital which had a bed capacity of 8S.
(3) Number of beds reduced from 80.
(4) Temporarily closed for construction of new facilities scheduled for completion in late 1982.
(S) Completed in May 1980.

NEW HOSPITALS

Name

Total Beds

Stage of Development

Reason for Delays

Belmont Surgical Private Hospital, Brisbane, Qld

94 medical/surgical (an extention to Belmont Private Hospital)

planning

Held in abeyance for 18 months

(Note: Hospital Corporation Australia Pty Ltd has advised the Government that it has withdrawn from the project for the development of Noarlunga District private hospital project at Christies Beach, South Australia because of other priorities. The
construction of Conniston Private Hospital, Wollongong, NSW has also been abandoned).

(b) American Medical International (Aust) Pty Ltd EXISTI NG HOSPITALS

in Newcastle; Nowra Community Hospital and Tweed Heads Private Hospital. The company is also seeking to sell Bundoora and District Private Hospital.)

Name
Peninsula Hospital, Frankston, Vic
The Avenue Hospital, Melbourne, Vic

Total beds/classification 72 medical/surgical beds 122 medical/surgical beds

(c) Hospital Affiliates International Inc (Name now changed to: I.N.A. International Holdings, Ltd)
EXISTING HOSPITALS

Name

Total beds/classification

Bundoora & District Private 70 medical/surgical beds Hospital, Melbourne, Vic.

Note: As a result of a decision by the Insurance Company of North America (INA) to leave the private hospital in-
dustry, Hospital Affiliates International (a wholly owned subsidiary of INA) sold to Australian interests, the Bexley Private Hospital in Sydney; Christo Road Private Hospital

(3) Such information received in the context of foreign investment is considered confidential between the Government and the parties concerned.
(6) The Commonwealth does not have statutory power to prevent the construction of additional private hospital beds in the States or to make directions as to where any such beds ought to be located. These matters are the responsibility of the States. Consequently, my Department has not made assessments on the supply of hospital beds in the localities of the above-mentioned foreign owned hospitals.
The thrust of the Commonwealth's changes to hospital funding arrangements has been to encourage the States to take up their full constitutional responsibility for the control of their total hospital system, encompassing both public and private hospitals. In such circumstances, it is appropriate for a State to determine whether a particular proposal in that State for a private hospital development by an Australian or foreign interest is in the interest of the hospital system of the State. In this context the Commonwealth has expressed its concern to the States that any growth which does take place is consistent with the proper planning of an efficient and effective hospital system in the State, complements the public hospital system

538 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

and does not exacerbate any existing maldistribution of public and private hospital beds.
United States B52 Aircraft
(Question No. 3766)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
(I) Does the Auditor-General's report for 1980-81 list two items of expenditure by his Department of $300,000 for refuelling United States of America B52 aircraft and $500,000 for unidentified purposes.
(2) Were the costs referred to in part (I) recovered from the US Air Force in full and credited to revenue; if not, what specific amount was recovered.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) In the event only $200,000 was spent on the purchase of fuel for US Air Force B52 aircraft and this amount was

recovered to revenue. There was no Australian contribution for fuel used by the US B52s. The amount of $500,000 was not related to US B52 requirements.
Nursing Homes
(Question No. 3780)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
For each (a) State and (b) Territory, what are the (i) current approved fees and (ii) names and locations of those nursing homes where the cheapest ward accommodation exceeds the minimum patient contribution plus the basic nursing home benefit.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The names and locations of approved nursing homes where the cheapest accommodation exceeded, at 16 February 1982, the minimum patient contribution plus nursing home benefits, and their daily fees, are set out below:

DAILY FEES FOR ORDINARY CARE PATIENTS

Name of nursing home and location
Abbeymere. Strathfield Adelene, Wyong Adventist, Blacktown Aeolus. Ryde Airlie, Wahroonga Aloha, Epping Ainsley. Burwood Amaroo Lodge, Charlestown Anna Maria, Ryde Apley House, Bellevue Hill
Arches. The. Waitara Ashbury, Ashfield Ashley House, Chatswood Astrea, Sans Souci Auderbury, Burwood Austin, Croydon Austral House, North Manly
Avoca House, Avoca Beach Ballina, Gordon Bathurst, Kelso Bay. The. Blakehurst
Bayview Village, Bayview Beecroft, Beefcroft Bel-air, Roseville
Bellhaven. Wellington Belvedere, Wahroonga Blakehurst, Blakehurst Bonnie Doon. Randwick Brighton, Kogarah Buckland, Springwood Cabrini. West mead Calare. Orange Camelot. Maroubra Junction
Canowindra, Canowindra Carey Bay, Carey Bay

All Multi-bed

bed

ward

fee

fee

5 bed ward
fee

$

$

$

NEW SOUTH WALES

34.24

34.51

34.51

33.15 38.40

36.52

35.78

36.47 35.61

35.61 36.56

33.67

33.67

33.25
40.33 33.48 34.11

33.15 36.01
35.85 33.80

33.48 34.03
33.80

4 bed ward
fee $
33.65 32.88 34.51 35.17 36.08 35.40
33.59 33.67 35.78 36.52
36.47 37.51
41.38 35.17
32.92
35.93
34.03 36.85

3 bed ward
fee
$

2 bed ward
fee
$

I bed ward
fee
$

32.88 34.51
35.17 34.88 36.08
38.79
33.59 33.67
36.52

33.65 32.88 34.51 36.09 35.17 34.88 36.08 36.08 38.79
35.47 37.18 36.52

37.65 33.64 35.51 37.09 38.17 35.63 37.58 37.13 42.79 -44.29 36.37 39.17 38.58 39.17

39.83
37.07 35.61
37.56
41.38 35.17 36.97
33.15

41.25
37.07 37.41 39.01 37.56 -39.01 46.38 37.17 36.97 -37.97 34.92 34.58
36.01 36.93

44.39 -46.67
37.55 40.61 40.51 39.56 -40.56 51.38 38.67 39.97 -44.71 38.92 36.58
37.01 38.93

34.59 37.85 34.40

36.03 -37.03
37.85 34.70

38.03 38.69 34.95

Answers to Questions
Name of nursing home and location
Castle Hill, Castle Hill Castle Leap, Marrickville Cherrywood, Turramurra Clermont, Ryde Coniston, Coniston Corina, Randwick Cronulla, North Cronulla Curie, North Parramatta Currawong, Ashfield
Daintrey House, Randwick
Dorata, Enfield Dubbo, Dubbo Dulce Doman, Neutral Bay
Durham Lodge, Bondi Eastwood, Eastwood
Elizabeth Balvers, Mittagong Elizabeth Lodge, Willoughby EI Jayda, Arncliffe Ellsmore, Waverley Endeavour, Springwood Fairhaven, Willoughby Fairlawn, Concord Fairlea, Penshurst Forest View, Chatswood
Gayles, Mosman Gladstone House, Burwood Glenwood, Greenwich Gosford, Gosford Goulburn, Goulburn Granville, Granville Greenwood, Normanhurst Gymea Bay, Gymea Bay Harley, Cremorne Hillcrest, Oatley
Hillmont, Thornleigh
Hilltop, Hurstville Hilton House, Armidale Holmwood, Bexley Hume, Greenacre Huntingdon, Bexley Jacaranda, Ashfield Jenny-Lyn, Brighton-Le-Sands Jessie Hunt, Narrabri Julie Anne, Bondi
Kenilworth, Bowral Killara, Killara Kurmala, North Strathfield La Salette, Ryde Learmonth Lodge, Hamilton Lochinvar, Coogee
Lyndhurst, Hunters Hill
Mareeba, Maclean Milton, Roseville Miranda, Miranda

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 539

All Multi-bed

bed

ward

fee

fee

$

$

34.51

33.76

32.92

36.05

32.81

36.26

37.26

34.22

34.70

36.09

34.24
34.15 32.91

33.27 34.22

34.89
33.08 37.93

33.09
34.41 33.71
35.05
35.41 34.25

35.47

33.00 47.10

32.79 36.59
35.80 -37.99
36.58

34.65

33.18

33.74

5 bed ward
fee
$ 34.51

4 bed ward
fee
$
33.76 32.92 36.05 32.81 32.99 36.26 32.76 37.26
34.22 -35.25
36.16

36.02

36.09 34.36
34.79 36.02
32.91
32.94

3 bed ward
fee
$ 34.51 33.76 33.47 37.10 32.81 32.99 36.26 32.88 38.26
35.25

2 bed ward
fee
$ 36.35 33.76 34.02 37.65 34.81 32.99 36.26 33.03 38.26 -39.48 35.25

I bed ward
fee
$ 37.85 35.16 34.99 38.55 38.31 36.03 39.06 34.43 40.98
37.05

35.32
37.09 34.36
34.79 37.02
32.91 33.24 33.36

37.66 34.90 -35.32 37.09 34.96 -35.46 34.79 37.52 35.15
35.14 34.35

39.16 36.26 -36.76
38.09 36.51 -37.51
38.04 39.02 36.15 35.48 37.49 35.35

34.41 33.71 35.05
32.91 33.14 35.47

35.60 -36.60
34.05
34.71 33.71
35.41
33.45 -34.04
33.41
34.55 33.47
34.29 37.59 38.44 36.37

36.60 -37.60
34.05
34.71 33.71
35.41 35.25 33.45
33.41
34.14 35.92 34.55 33.47
34.29 37.59
36.55

38.10 -39.10
34.76
37.11 33.71
35.05
36.12 37.87 33.45 -34.04 35.41 -37.21
36.52 35.93 34.47
38.59 39.94 36.85

40.60 -43.10
36.19
39.81 37.21
36.55
37.34 38.87 33.45 -34.04
35.14 37.96 37.36 35.47
34.29 39.59 41.44 37.85

40.58 39.84 34.23
33.09
33.74

34.23 33.09 33.74
35.87

40.58 40.54
33.09
36.87 38.03

41.04 34.84
34.43
36.28 -37.76
37.72 38.73

46.58 42.54 37.00
35.50 -37.54
39.06 -41.06
39.06 39.83 -41.43

540 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Name of nursing home and location
Mona Vale, Mona Vale
Montana, Mosman Monteith, Chatswood Mountview, Pymble Nareen Gardens, Bateau Bay Narrandera, Narrandera Natalda, Brookvale Nazareth House, Turrumurra Norah Head, Toukley Olunda, North Wollongong Orana, Moss Vale Orana, Point Clare Otama, Petersham Palm Grove, Narraweena
Palms, The, Kirrawee Peel, Tamworth Peninsular Gardens, Mona Vale
Penycraig, Randwick Piarena, Mayfield Pinjarra, Gordon Pittwater, Avalon Queanbeyan, Queanbeyan
Queens Lynne, Roseville Restwell, Strathfield Riverview, Cooranbong Rockdale, Banksia Rocklea, North Rocks Romsey Hall, Croydon Rosemont, Manly
Rotheram, Ryde Rothesay, Rose Bay
Ryde, West Ryde
St Joachims, Lidcombe Sans Souci, Katoomba Seaview, Mosman Shoalhaven, Bomaderry Stonehaven, Kogarah Summerview, Summer Hill Sunningdale, Five Dock Tamworth, Tamworth Tanderra, Albury
Terrey Hills, Terrey Hills Todman House, Kensington Toukley Lakeside, Toukley
Tumut, Tumut Vaucluse, Vaucluse Wahroonga, Wahroonga Wallawa, Chatswood Wavertree, Strathfield Whitehall, Lindfield
Willandra, Marrickville Willowood, Chatswood
Willows, The, Ashfield Windsor Lodge, Windsor Winston House, Croydon

All Multi-bed

bed

ward

fee

fee

$

$

33.39 36.34

35.07 41.44

32.80 32.95

36.21
35.76 36.36

33.46 35.14 34.32

33.34 35.51 33.94

32.90 35.15 33.41

33.77 34.00

36.66

36.02
33.74 35.76

33.18 34.08
34.42

34.95

5 bed ward
fee
$

4 bed ward
fee
$

34.06 37.01
37.50 36.54

41.44

36.39 35.07
33.00 33.57

38.21
35.76 36.36 34.54

38.21 35.10 35.76
36.75 35.30 33.02

34.94

36.13 33.34 34.94

32.90 33.82 36.66

32.90 -33.76
35.15
34.22 37.26

35.58

32.69 36.45 33.18 37.08 34.69 38.65 35.43 34.42

33.32

33.20 34.14

3 bed ward
fee $
34.74 34.20 37.56 36.06
34.58
35.07
33.00 33.57
38.21
36.72 36.75 35.57

2 bed ward
fee $
35.74 35.48 38.11 37.56 39.00 38.04 34.58 37.89 36.07 42.88
34.30
35.70
38.12 36.15 -38.40 34.52

I bed ward
fee
$ 37.24 -41.84 37.56 40.41 40.06 40.50 39.54 36.73
39.39
44.31
35.33 37.14 -40.00
38.21 38.16 -41.10 37.18
37.16 39.42 37.57 -39.10 36.02

36.90 33.34 37.03
33.19
33.82 37.26 35.51 32.99 37.45 33.18 34.69 38.65 35.43 34.42 34.65 33.62 34.14

36.90 34.84 37.73 35.94
34.44 -35.94
34.87
33.82 35.72 38.66 36.66 33.54 38.45 35.18 -37.18 34.69 39.31 36.43 36.74 36.10
35.79

37.90 36.34 39.23 36.94 -37.94 36.44 -43.33 35.87 36.65 35.82 37.22 40.66 37.80 34.26 -35.69 42.45 39.18 -43.18 40.08 36.09 40.65 38.43 36.74 -44.07 37.55 -47.35
36.89

Answers to Questions
Name of nursing home and location
Wyong, Wyong
Yamala, Killara
Abalene, Elsternwick Abberfield, Elsternwick Alexandra, Caulfield Alice Berry, Emerald Alimar, Essendon Allanvale, Laverton Altona Meadows, Altona Meadows Amaroo, Ringwood Ardruda, Geelong Arlington, Thornbury Balmoral Lodge, Grovedale Balwyn, Balwyn Banksia Court, Croydon Barkly, Bendigo Blackburn, Blackburn Blairgowrie, Camberwell Burnley, Richmond Burwood Hill, Burwood Camberlea, Camberlea
Canterbury, Canterbury Carisbrooke, Canterbury Claverley, Geelong Clyde, Newtown Coburg, Coburg
Coleman Park, Rosebud Coogee, Boronia Cranbourne, Cranbourne Culcairn, Frankston Culroy, Reservoir Eastern Districts, Croydon Eildon, Ringwood Evangelia, Parkdale Findon, Hawthorn Galilee Lodge, St Kilda Garthowen, Surrey Hills Maroona, Glenhuntly Moonee Ponds, Moonee Ponds Mount Martha, Mt Martha Mowbray House, Middle Brighton Myola, East Malvern Newcomb, Newcomb North Western District, Tullamarine Osburn Lodge, Wodonga Pineville, Geelong West Preston and Districts, West Preston Princeton, Camberwell Queenscliff, Queenscliff Regent, Preston Riverside, Patterson Lakes St Heliers, Camberwell St Ives, East Melbourne St Judes, Surrey Hills St Lawrence, Morwell St Marys, Ivanhoe St Michaels, Murrumbeena. Glenalwyn, Box Hill Glenburn, North Geelong Glenferrie, Hawthorn

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 541

All Multi-bed

bed

ward

fee

fee

$

$

36.58
VICTORIA 48.00

45.10 41.85 43.05 45.80
44.80 45.20

47.85
44.35 42.55
42.95 43.70

44.55

46.75

42.80

43.45 43.80

42.75
43.05 42.95 47.20

47.35 43.40 42.50 44.50 43.55 50.40 45.75 43.40
44.70
41.85 42.55 44.50
43.40 44.90 43.90
44.30
43.85

47.75 41.55
44.95 41.90

46.15

5 bed ward
fee $
47.85 42.55
48.60 41.90 44.00 46.15

4 bed ward
fee
$ 33.07
36.58

3 bed ward
fee
$ 33.07
40.58

2 bed ward
fee
$ 34.87 -35.72 40.58

1 bed ward
fee
$ 36.57
46.58

43.40 47.85

43.40 48.85

50.00 46.40
49.85

44.35

44.85

44.85 44.55

45.35 46.55

45.20 42.35 48.20
49.65
43.80 43.25

41.55 48.20 48.25
50.20
43.80 44.25 -45.75

46.70 42.35 41.55 49.45 50.25
64.85
50.75
44.80 45.75 -47.25

46.95 51.20 42.85 42.05
53.25
65.95 -67.05
51.25 47.45

42.95 46.75

42.95 46.75

44.95 48.25

43.90 41.55

44.90

42.55

46.50
51.75 43.55

46.40

46.40

49.40

48.60
43.45 46.15 44.75

48.60
42.90
44.00 43.75 46.15

49.60
44.00 44.05 46.75

46.45 50.10
43.90
45.00 45.20 48.15 49.75 -50.75

542 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Name of nursing'home and location
Gracedale, Camberwell Hallam, Hallam Hanslope, Alphington Hazle Mere, Montrose Hillview, Surrey Hills Holmwood, Healsville Innisfree, Kyneton Ivanhoe, Ivanhoe Joycedale. Ivanhoe Kalonga, North Balwyn Keswick, Mentone Kiandra, Sandringham
Latrobe, Alphington Leighton, Bulleen Lucinda, St. Kilda Lynn, Armadale
Maidstone, Maidstone St. Peters, Armadale St. Winfreds, East Malvern Sherbrooke, Upper Ferntree Gully Siesta, Moorabbin Springvale, Springvale Sunraysia, Mildura Sunshine, Sunshine Thomastown, Thomastown Villa Franca, Werribee Wahroonga, Sandringham Walmsley Friendship Village, Kilsyth Wattle Glen, Wattle Glen Werribee Private, Werribee Westbury, Balwyn Western, Footscray Western Suburbs, Yarraville Westgate, Newport Wynnstay, Prahran Wyuna, Northcote
Bundaberg, Bundaberg
Crana, Windsor Herstonville, Brisbane Marooma, Windsor Palm Beach, Palm Beach Palm Lodge, New Farm
Sea Haven, Sandgate Warrawee, Wilston Heights
Abbingdon, Kingswood Adaire, Kensington Pk
Burnleigh, Parkside Carinya, Myrtle Bank
Christies Beach, Christies Beach District of Light Freeling Flinders House, St. Peters Halsbury, Hawthorn
James Martin, Willaston
Martindale, Gawler

All Multi-bed

bed

ward

fee

fee

$
44.40 43.20 41.55
44.40 42.10

$ 51.50
42.45

5 bed ward
fee
$

42.55

47.35 42.50 42.95

41.90

45.95
41.45 44.25 46.30
41.95 43.95
43.00 41.75 43.55

42.05

44.95 43.20

46.05

42.70 QUEENSLAND

31.60

30.80 33.00

31.60

30.20

SOUTH AUSTRALIA

41.45 38.00 38.00

38.50

42.70 39.15

4 bed ward
fee $
51.50
42.45 44.75 43.85 42.00
46.40 41.45
45.15
41.60 43.70
30.80 33.00
30.20
39.80
42.70 42.50 38.00

3 bed ward
fee
$ 51.50

2 bed ward
fee
$ 52.50

I bed ward
fee
$ 54.50

42.45

42.45

43.45

44.60 43.65

45.75 45.30 43.00
43.65 -44.65

46.30 44.00
44.65

42.25

43.25 -44.75
46.90 41.45

46.75 -47.75
41.95

45.15 41.60
42.60

41.60
43.60 43.70

46.95 42.60 47.05 44.60

30.40 33.00 30.20

30.20 -30.60
30.80
30.80 32.00
30.20

31.40 -32.40
32.80
35.40 32.80 34.10 -35. IO 31.20

39.80 43.05
42.70
38.00 39.15

39.80
44.70 43.50 39.00 40.15 -41.15 43.50

43.30 44.45 -50.45
48.70 -50.70
44.50
41.00 41.15
38.50 -42.00

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 543

Name of nursing home and location
Mitcham, Kingswood Ridge Park, Myrtle Bank
St Davids, St Peters Western, West Croydon Winchester, Malvern
Cabrini, Maylands Craigwood, Como
Deloraine, Mt Lawley Undercliffe, Greenmount
Adaihi, Ulverstone . Freemasons', Hobart Hathaway, Hobart Mayfair, Hobart Meercroft, Devonport Nazareth, St Leonards Springslade, Legana
Strathaven, Hobart Sunny Brae, Launceston

All Multi-bed

bed

ward

fee

fee

$

$

40.45

39.60

37.95

5 bed ward
fee
$ 40.95 40.45

4 bed ward
fee
$
39.45 -40.45
37.60

WESTERN AUSTRALIA 28.35
30.90
TASMANIA 31.25 31.15

29.40
30.90 30.10

32.60
31.80 32.25

35.55

3 bed ward
fee
$ 40.95 39.45
37.60

2 bed ward
fee
$ 42.95 39.45 -42.45 39.60 37.60 37.95

I bed ward
fee
$ 44.95 44.45 -46.45 40.60 38.60 37.95 -40.95

30.15 -30.40
30.90
31.25

32.40
31.90 31.90

32.55

32.55

33.80

31.30

31.30 36.25

32.30 30.50
37.25 -38.25

At 16 February 1982 there were no approved nursing homes in the Australian Capital Territory or the Northern Territory where the cheapest ward accommodation exceeded the sum of the minimum patient contribution and basic nursing home benefits.
Medical Benefits Funds: Payment of Benefits
(Question No, 3811)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
(I) Are all registered hospital and/or medical benefits funds required to pay benefits immediately to persons previously classified as disadvantaged who lose their eligibility and join a fund.
(2) If so, have any cases been brought to the Minister's attention where funds have refused to pay benefits in such circumstances.
(3) Is the Minister satisfied that in cases where a fund applies a 'pre-existing ailment' or 'chronic illness' rule on higher table benefits, the basic benefit component of the table is paid.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. It is a condition of registration under the National Health Act that registered medical and/or hospital benefits organizations provide immediate benefits under the basic tables from the date of becoming a contributor provided a person becomes such a contributor within two months before, or within three months after, ceasing to be a person in special need, as defined. The same provision also applies to persons who cease to be eligible pensioners. The arrangement does not extend to benefits above basic levels.

(2) No. If any cases were brought to my attention I would ensure that organizations met their obligations under the legislation.
(3) On all of the information available to me, I am satisfied that where limiting or restricting rules such as those mentioned are applied to higher benefit, the basic benefit component is paid.
Medical Benefits Schedule: Deletion of Items
(Question No. 3812)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
Further to the answer to question No. 3360 (Hansard, 16 February 1982, page 119), can the Minister provide a list of the relevant details for changes to the Medical Benefits Schedule which have involved the deletion of an item without a corresponding insertion of a new item which covered the service deleted.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The items which have been deleted from the Medical Benefits Schedule and which did not involve a corresponding insertion of a new item or a variation to the description of an existing item, are as follows:

Item 827
829

Description
Haemodialysis in the patient's home using a KilL or similar dialyser including necessary attendances, supervision and provision of disposable equipment-each week of treatment
Haemodialysis in the patient's home using a DOW or similar dialyser, including necessary attendances, supervision and provision of disposable equipment-each week oftreatment

544 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Item
954
1712 1713 3189 3643
3777 3841
4118
4216 4299
4497
4594 4856 5325 5351
5566 5568 5973 6170 6216 6230
6267 6286
6782 6790
6814 6822 6946 6948
6970
6976 6978 6990

Description
Venesection, not covered by ITEM 902 or 904 in this Schedule--each attendance at which venesection is performed
Examination by animal inoculation (SP) Examination by animal inoculation (OP) Bursa, incision of Operation for lymphoedema by extended indwell-
ing subcutaneous tube or tubes Liver abscess, transpleural drainage of Gallbladder and/or bile ducts radical excision and
reconstruction for carcinoma Pancreatectomy, total, including surrounding vis-
cera Rectum and anus-perineal excision of Orchidectomy and radical dissection of iliac
lymph glands Haemorrhoids, injection into, each attendance at
which the procedure is performed Pubo-rectalis muscle, division of Operation on nasal bones Sphenoidal sinus, proot puncture of Nasopharyngeal tumour, operation for removal
of, involving hard palate Arytenoid cartilage, fixation of Arytenoid cartilage, removal of Urethral valves transvesical removal Urethral abscess, drainage of Scrotum, drainage of abscess of Orchidectomy, with excision of retroperitoneal
glands or seminal vesicles Simple tumour of vulva, removal of Skene's duct, incision of, or removal of calculus
from Conjunctivorhinostomy Parotid duct, transplantation of, into conjunctival
sac Trachoma, crushing operation for Cornea, tattooing of Artificial pneumothorax-induction Artificial pneumothorax-each filling subsequent
to induction Pectus excavatum or pectus carinatum, limited
correction of Thoracic duct, cannulisation Phrenic avulsion or crush Mediastinal abscess, drainage of

-Ite-m- - - - -D-es-cr-ip-ti-on- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 7068 Local infiltration around nerve or in muscle with alcohol, novocaine or similar preparationeach attendence at which an injection is given 7165 Neurectomy, periarterial 8203 Oesteotomy, bilateral iliac, preliminary to repair of ectopic bladder 8254 Ilopsoas tendon, transplantation of, to greater trochanter 8300 Volkmann's contracture, operation for 8308 Scapulopexy 8318 Ilium, stripping of (Soutter's operation) 8350 Genu varum or genu valgum-manipulation and plaster with osteoclasis 8360 Subdural haemorrhage, osteoplastic flap and excision of 8364 Ventriculo-jugular shunt 8416 Pinhole urinary meatus-meatotomy 8420 Incontinence of urine (congenital)-plastic operation to sphincter 8456 Electrolysis epilation, each treatment 8526 Cineplastry for amputation stump 8534 Hair transplants, multiple punch or similar technique, involving not more than 40 punch grafts 8536 Hair transplants, mUltiple punch or similar technique, involving more than 40 but not more than 100 punch grafts 8538 Hair transplants, multiple punch or similar technique, involving more than 100 punch grafts 8550 Melonoplasty 8584 Partial reconstruction of eyelid or socket 8589 Reduction of lower eyelid of one eye 8591 Reduction of upper eyelid of one eye 8610 Pinna, amputation of, complete
Health Scheme Charges
(Question No. 3813)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
Can he provide figures on the (a) administrative, (b) printing. (c) advertising, (d) public relations and (e) additional staffing resources used for each of the health changes since 1976 by head of expenditure and health scheme.
Mr Carlton~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Date of health scheme change October 1976
November 1978 September 1979 September 1981

Administrative costs
It is not possible to determine administrative costs. Each publicity program was undertaken as a part of normal departmental activities, and no separate costing can be made.

Printing (and
distribution) costs
$ 535,300

Advertising costs
$ 542,742

Public relations costs
$11,100 (for the services of an outside public relations consultant)

461,736
84,074 228,241

470,000
401,412 413,790

$6,000 (for the services of an outside public relations consultant)
nil
nil

Additional staffing
resources nil
nil nil nil

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 545

Petroleum Products Freight Subsidy Scheme

(Question No. 3829)

Mr Morris asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:

(I) Is it a fact that differentials calculated for outports in the Petroleum Products Freight Subsidy Scheme do not include the cost of coastal freight from the refineries; if so, what estimates can be provided for the additional costs to the scheme if shipping freight costs to outports were included in the 1981-82 estimates.

(2) Do differentials for outports include costs for maintaining adequate terminal facilities.

(3) When were (a) outport differentials and (b) road and rail differentials last reviewed.

(4) Is it a fact that if costs of coastal freight for outport differentials are not included and freight costs are included for
road and rail differentials the scheme (a) discriminates against coastal shipping, (b) maintains a higher fuel price for areas served by outports, (c) involves the oil companies serving out-
ports cross-subsidising outport freight costs by higher capital
city prices rather than explicit Government assistance and (d) leads to misallocation of transport resources due to differen-
tial assistance to land and sea modes of transport.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Fuel freight subsidy payments are based on freight differentials calculated by the Petroleum Products Pricing Auth-
ority (PPPA).

When the Prices Justification Tribunal (PJT) assumed the
responsibility for calculation of freight differentials in 1974, there existed a list of differentials for certain petroleum prod-
ucts supplied to 28 ports outside the refining centres which had not been changed for some years. With the exception of freight differentials for aviation fuels and lubricants, they
have not been altered since. Differentials for aviation fuels
and lubricants supplied to these ports, and all petroleum products supplied to ports not included on the list are all adjusted regularly to reflect current costs. The frozen differentials ap-
plying to the 28 ports would now account for only a small part of the costs of shipping products from the refinery centres.

In its March 1981 report on petroleum product prices, the PJT estimated that the costs of sea transport to ports outside
refining centres 'to be of the order of $50m per annum '. Most of these costs would relate to transport of subsidised products.

The 28 ports referred to above are as follows:

Cairns, Qld Townsville, Qld Mackay, Qld Gladstone. Qld Bundaberg. Qld Urangan. Qld Trial Bay. N.S.W. Newcastle, N.S.W. Port Kembla, N.S.W. Eden, N.S.W. Burnie, Tas. Bell Bay, Tas. Devonport, Tas. Portland, Vic.

Port Pirie, S.A. Port Lincoln, S.A. Esperance, WA. Albany, WA. Bunbury. WA. Geraldton, WA. Carnarvon. WA. Dampier, WA. Point Samson, WA. (Cape Lambert, WA.) Port Hedland, WA. Broome, WA. Derby, WA. Wyndham, WA. Darwin, N.T.

(2) No.

(3) Apart from the differentials referred to in (I) above which have not been altered for some years, freight differentials are reviewed approximately each 6 to 9 months on a State by State basis.

(4) The PJrs March 1981 report drew attention to the situation described in (I) above and its implications were discussed in paragraphs 7.29 to 7.31. The effect of the freezing of differentials for the major petroleum products at the relevant 28 ports is that increases in sea transport costs have been recovered through base wholesale prices which apply to the entire distribution network.
Following on from the comments made in the March 1981 report on the PJT, the PPPA has the matter under current investigation.
Cash Packaging of Salaries: Department of Health
(Question No. 3872)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) What was the cost of cash packaging for salary payments in each of the departments and statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction in each year since 1976-77.
(2) What is the estimated saving on cash packaging charges for salary payments in each department and statutory authority under the Minister's jurisdiction in the 1981-82 financial year due to the elimination of cash payments to staff.
(3) Which industrial payrolls are still being paid by cash in each of the departments and statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(4) What is the charge for cash packaging of these salaries.
(5) How many staff positions in each of the departments and statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction have been abolished due to the elimination of cash payments.
(6) Are any fees paid to (a) building societies, (b) banks and (c) credit unions for carrying out salary transactions by each of the departments and statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(7) Has any study been conducted by any of the departments and statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction as to the effect on private enterprise security organisations and cash packaging organisations of the elimination of cash salary payments; if so, what were the results of each of these studies.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I )-(7) I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister for Finance to Question No. 3866 on 9 March 1982 (Hansard, page 777).
Sun Screen Preparations
(Question No. 3939)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
Has the Minister's attention been drawn to (a) the high cost of sun screen preparations exempt from sales tax and (b) the skin cancer rate in Australia being the world's highest in a predominantly caucasian country; if so, has the Minister considered making the exempted sun screen preparations, which are in the top category of protection from the sun, deductible under health insurance schemes.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am aware of the order of cost of sun screen preparations and the high incidence of skin cancer in Australia.
Consideration has been given to providing sun screen preparations through the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.

546 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Under the provisions of the National Health Act, drugs or medicinal preparations may be made available as pharmaceutical benefits only after a recommendation to that effect by the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC).
The PBAC has recently considered the matter of listing sun screen preparations as pharmaceutical benefits but was not prepared to so recommend. a wide range of relatively inexpensive sun screen preparations is currently available for sale over-the-counter from pharmacies, department stores and supermarkets, without the requirement for a prescription from a medical practitioner. To provide such sun screen preparations as pharmaceutical benefits, for which the prescription of a medical practitioner is required, would add substantially to the cost of such items to the community as, in addition to the medical practitioner consultation, a prescription dispensing fee would apply.
On the matter of health insurance benefits, a number of registered health funds provide benefits under their supplementary ancillary tables towards the cost of drugs and medicinal preparations not available under the pharmaceutical benefits arrangements. However, most funds provide such benefits for prescriptions only and require the contributor to meet a patient contribution (currently $3.20) equivalent to that payable for pharmaceutical benefits prescriptions.
There is no specific provision under the health insurance legislation governing the operation of supplementary ancillary tables. As a result, health funds are free to determine for themselves the nature and extent of any supplementary ancillary benefits they wish to provide. The Government's role in this area is largely one of ensuring that the contribution rates are sufficient to finance the benefits being provided.
Water Fluoridation
(Question No_ 3955)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) What is the officially recommended fluoride tablet daily dosage for infants aged less than I year.
(2) What is the estimated (a) average and (b) maximum likely intake of fluoride from fluoridated water for infants totally bottle fed with powdered milk preparations, juice concentrates and in summer extra drinking water from the age of 3 weeks until the age of I year
(3) What are the known hazards in the maximum dosage level.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The National Health and Medical Research Council recommends that (in areas where the water supply is not fluoridated) daily fluoride supplements of 0.25 milligrams for infants aged less than one year and 0.5 milligrams at one year of age.
(2) There is no satisfactory way that the figures for fluoride intake which the honourable member has requested, can be given accurately. The fluid intake of infants varies greatly. Also, it is most unlikely that after six months of age, an infant would be totally bottle-fed. Estimates of the average and maximum fluoride intakes of infants of three weeks of age, totally bottle-fed using powdered milk preparations and juice concentrates, are of the order of 0.5 (average) and 0.75 (maximum) milligrams respectively. It is inappropriate to estimate the fluoride intake of a 12 months-old child on this feeding regime because, as already mentioned, a child of this age is most unlikely to be totally bottle-fed.

(3) There is no known hazard at the levels of fluoride intake indicated in (2) above. Occasionally some minor mottling of the teeth may develop, which would not even be of aesthetic significance.
Quarantine
(Question No. 4097)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 March 1982:
(I) Did Queensland and Western Australia request that Commonwealth quarantine powers be transferred to them.
(2) If so, what was the response from the Commonwealth.
(3) If the reply was negative, what was the reason given for denying the request.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I know of no such request nor does my Department.
(2) and (3) See (I).
Private Hospital Ownership
(Question No. 4098)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 March 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to a study 'Patterns of Private Hospital Ownership in Victoria' by J. B. Morley, R. G. Taylor and L. J. Opit.
(2) If so, does this study show that more than one third of private, for profit, hospitals in Victoria had doctors or their relatives as directors or shareholders and at least one quarter of the hospital investors were doctors or their relatives.
(3) Was the Minister or his Department asked to supply details on the utilisation by doctors of their hospitals' beds; if so, was this information refused; if so, why.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) With some caveats the study noted that 21, or 36 per cent, of the 58 private hospitals included in the study had doctors or their relatives with a financial interest. In the study, of the Victorians with financial investment in hospitals, 24.6 per cent were medical practitioners, or were doctors' relatives.
(3) Neither I nor my Department has knowledge of any formal request for details on the utilisation by doctors of their hospitals' beds. In any event, such information is not collected by my Department.
Defence Services Homes Corporation Lands
(Question No. 4106)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
(I) What was the (a) date and (b) cost of purchase of each of the following Defence Service Homes Corporation lands in Victoria; (i) Craigieburn (an area of approximately 125.6 hectares fronting Patullos Lane), (ii) Croydon (an area ofapproximately 13.13 hectares fronting Plymouth Road), (iii) Kilsyth (an area of approximately 21.24 hectares with frontages to Mt Dandenong and Cambridge Roads), (iv) Lilydale (an area of approximately 81.82 hectares with frontages to Nelson and Victoria Roads), (v) Mooroolbark (an area of approximately 29.04 hectares fronting Manchester Road) and (vi) Wantirna (an area of approximately 8.37 hectares fronting Templeton Street).

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 547

(2) In relation to the proposed sale of each of the lands in part (I), how many have been sold and at what price.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1)-

(i) Craigieburn-125.6 hectares (ii) Croydon-13.13 hectares (iii) Kilsyth-21.24 hectares (iv) Lilydale-81.82 hectares (v) Mooroolbark-29.04 hectares (vi) Wantirna--8.37 hectares

Purchase Price Date
$ 1,485,000 1974
264,946 1973 365,593 1972 1,114,180 1973 252,250 1970 236,660 1972

(2) Croydon: Sold for $545,000; Kilsyth: Sold for $480,000 and Wantirna: Sold for $593,500.
Newcastle Post Office: Staffing
(Question No. 4107)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
(I) Is the Newcastle Post Office telegraphic section currently experiencing staff shortages; if so, does this explain why it took from 1.51 p.m. on Friday, 29 January 1982, until about 12.30 p.m. on Tuesday, 2 February 1982 for a telegram to be delivered to Canberra.
(2) What efforts are underway to relieve the staffing situations at the Newcastle Post Office.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The Newcastle Telegraph and Phonogram Sections are controlled by the District Telecommunications Manager at Newcastle and under normal circumstances are adequately staffed.
On Friday 29 January two of the four Newcastle staff members who receive and transmit telegrams on the Telegraph Switching system were absent on sick leave without suitable relief available. Traffic was heavy because of the following long weekend and was being handled satisfactorily until about noon when it was known that considerable delays would be encountered.
From this time customers lodging telegrams were advised that because of staff shortages delivery could not be guaranteed that day. Accordingly telegrams of an urgent nature were given priority with greeting type telegrams held for transmission as soon as practicable.
Orthomolecular Treatment
(Question No. 4112)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to an article by R. F. Harrell and others (Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, Vol. 78 No. I, pp574-8, January 1981) reporting progressive significant improvement for longer than eight months, in IQ and physical abnormalities, and possibly in visual acuity and growth rate, with multiple dietary supplements in double-blind control studies of retarded children with genetic abnormalities.
(2) Have other studies discounted this significance.

(3) Will his Department review the indications for payment of benefits for screening of nutrillite levels in blood in the light of the above report.
(4) Will his Department check the claims of Dr C. Reading, B.Sc., M.B., B.S., MRANZCP in his letter to the editor, Journal of Orthomolecular Psychiatry, Vol. 10, No. I, page 33, 1981, that of all 1230 patients he has treated by orthomolecular methods to date between 74 per cent (sex drive) and 95.83 per cent (drug abuse) showed improvement in each of 39 psychological and behavioural symptoms among 558 who responded to a forwarded questionnaire, with good or extremely good progress in the majority of those improved for each symptom and of those not improved only a small fraction worse for each symptom except drug abuse.
(5) Does he reject the use of diagnostic tests as legitimate only if those ordering the tests identify the tests or their practice methods as orthomolecular.
(6) Before making a decision, has he satisfied himself as to what such practitioners mean by the term 'orthomolecular'; if so, what definition has he accepted.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) In the article mentioned by the honourable member the authors have referred to the need for 'more extensive experiments' to confirm their findings. It is not known whether such experiments have been undertaken.
(3) My Department is not intending to review the indications for payment of benefits for screening of nutrillite levels in blood on the basis of this article.
(4) The claims of Dr Reading have been considered by the Medical Benefits Schedule Revision Committee. The Committee rejected Dr Reading's claims, having regard to the advice of specialist Colleges that orthomolecular medicine currently has no generally accepted status in the practice of medicine or psychiatry, that its clinical role is unproven and the pathology tests cannot be justified for the rational practice of internal medicine or psychiatry.
(5) Diagnostic tests are rejected where they conform to a pattern known to be used by practitioners of orthomolecular medicine.
(6) The pertinent issue is not the definition of orthomolecular medicine, but whether the large range of pathology tests routinely ordered in this form of treatment is necessary.
North West Shelf Gas
(Question No. 4146)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to reports that further delays in meeting obligations on the part of Japanese purchasers of North West Shelf gas could threaten the position of one of the partners, Woodside Petroleum.
(2) Will the Government's ideology of leaving everything to the market place prevent official action to ease this serious situation; if not, will the Minister take action to ensure that the Government offers its involvement immediately.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. On 12 January 1982 the North West Shelf Joint Venture participants announced that some elements of investment on the project were to be deferred. The Joint Venture decided to defer the second production platform and to review some aspects of work on the onshore LNG plant. On I

548 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

March 1982 the North West Shelf LNG sellers and the Japanese buyers issued a statement indicating that the target date for the commencement of LNG exports had been deferred to around April 1987 with deliveries building up to plateau levels in 1990.
(2) A rescheduling of this type to take account of economic circumstances is not unusual in a project of this scale, which has a development phase of some ten years. Construction of the domestic gas phase of the project is proceeding on schedule and Woodside, operator of the project, advises that it has made secure arrangements for all the finance it expects to need for this phase of the project. Woodside has consistently maintained that it will not be able to arrange funding for its participation in the more costly LNG phase of the project until sales and purchase agreements for LNG are completed. The rescheduling of the target delivery date for LNG has not changed this position, and does not threaten Woodside's position in the domestic gas phase.
These developments reflect the Joint Venture's appraisal of the current international situation and its concern for prudent financial planning, pending the final conclusion of the sales contracts. I believe the Japanese electricity and gas utilities will adhere to undertakings given to me to strive for an early conclusion of the negotiations. The Government will continue to monitor the progress of this major resource project.
'A New Start for the Under-Achiever' Organisation
(Question No. 4151)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
(I) Has the Minister received representations from an organisation called A New Start for the Under-Achiever (ANSUA) for Government funding.
(2) Can the Minister say whether ANSUA, as a non-profit organisation, relies on private donations to provide aid in six centres throughout Australia to children with learning disabilities.
(3) Will the Minister consider funding for ANSUA in his budgetary deliberations.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) There is no detailed and authoritative information available to me about ANSUA's funding.
(3) My understanding is that the service provided by ANSUA is primarily one of remedial education. It is therefore unlikely that it would qualify for assistance under the only two programs administered by my Department that might otherwise be considered relevant, the Handicapped Persons Welfare Program and the Children's Services Program.
Bureau of Health Economics
(Question No. 4214)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 18 March 1982:
Will a Bureau of Health Economics, as proposed by the Joint Committee of Public Accounts in 1979 and endorsed by the Jamison Commission of Inquiry on Hospital Efficiency and Administration, be established; if so, when.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The recommendations for the establishing of a Bureau of Health Economics are still under consideration.
Water Fluoridation
(Question No. 4242)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 23 March 1982:
(I) Is the Minister able to say whether the official report of the United Kingdom Department of Health in 1969, summarising the results of the better designed British fluoridation trials, found the effects to amount to an average of about one less cavity per child.
(2) What is the estimate. cost per child for (a) treating one cavity in the Australian School Dental Service, (b) fluoridating all public water supplies in Australia and (c) promoting dietary reform sufficient to reduce the average incidence of dental decay in Australia by one cavity per child.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The report to which the honourable member refers shows that children using fluoridated water had an average of 1.3 less decayed, missing or filled permanent teeth than children living in areas where the water was not fluoridated. There was a similar difference in respect of the deciduous teeth.
(2) (a) In the school dental services the estimated costs of treating an average cavity by filling is approximately $1 I. This does not include a component for capital costs of establishing the clinics.
(b) The annual operating cost for fluoridating water is approximately 50 cents per person. Assuming reticulated water is available to some 90 per cent of the population, the annual operating cost for fluoridation of these water supplies would be approximately $6.7m. If this cost was in respect only of children under 18 years of age the estimated annual cost per child would be $ I.50. It is emphasised that the benefits of fluoridation are not confined to children.
(c) Without substantial research, it is not possible to estimate with any degree of accuracy the annual cost of a continuing effective national program of dietary reform. However, the 'Help-Yourself-To-Better-HeaIth' project which operated for a 5-week period in 1980 in Adelaide, Canberra and Goulburn cost $500,000. A pilot study would be required to assess the impact of a national program on community behaviour and attitudes, and also on the incidence of dental caries.
Multicultural Television Service
(Question No. 4291)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
What action has been taken to overcome the very serious reception problems in Sydney, and the poor transmission facilities to Melbourne, which the Special Broadcasting Service described in its 1980-81 annual report as applying to its multicultural television service.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department, and the Special Broadcasting Service, are actively examining several options with regard to improvement of the multicultural service. I understand that proposals will be submitted for my consideration in the near future.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 549

Report 'Health Hazards of Asbestos'
(Question No. 4303)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 20 April 1982:
(I) When will stocks of the National Health and Medical Research Council Report 'Health hazards of asbestos' be made available to the House of Representatives Table Office for distribution to members.
(2) What was the reason stocks were not made available at the time the report was presented to the House.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Stocks are expected from the printer at the end of May 1982. They will be provided to honourable members as soon as possible thereafter.
(2) See (I). Stocks were not available. Presentation of the document to Parliament could have been deferred until printing had been completed. However. because of the significance of the report it was decided to bring it to the notice of Parliament sooner rather than later. As indicated at that time (Hansard, 16 March 1982, pp. 988, 989). arrangements were made through the Parliamentary Library for honourable members having a particular interest in the subject matter to be able to see advance copies.
Royal Australian Navy: Recruitment
(Question No. 4312)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 20 April 1982:
(I) How many officers and men from the (a) Royal Navy and (b) other Navies have applied for transfer to the Royal Australian Navy in each of the last 5 years.
(2) How many have been accepted in each category.
(3) How many were officers (a) below the rank of Commander and (b) officers of rank above Commander and what was the rank in each case.
(4) What effect does this recruitment have on promotion from within the RAN.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) A total of 94 officers and 361 sailors applied for entry into the RAN during the period 1977-1981. Of this total, 63 officers all of whom were of Commander rank or below, and 145 sailors were entered. A yearly breakdown is as follows:

1977 1978 1979 1980 1981
1977 1978

Royal Navy

Other navies

Applied Accepted Applied Accepted

a. Officers

23

14

13

12

13

10

18

14

23

8

2

*3

90

58

4

5

b. Sailors

151

t51

24

t53

Royal Navy

Other navies

Applied Accepted Applied Accepted

1979 1980 1981

20

12

66

16

100

13

361

145

* includes one entrant who applied in 1976.
t the large 1977 and 1978 intake of sailors was a result of increased recruiting of Naval Police applicants.
(3) The following is a breakdown of officer entries by rank:

CMDR LCDR L1EUT

1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

4

5

8

5

4

3

4

2

5

2

6

6

I

7

I

(4) Navy has ensured throughout its program of recruitment of overseas personnel, that the promotion prospects of all RAN personnel have been preserved.
Wool Transport and Distribution
(Question No. 4323)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) With reference to the on-shore distribution activities of wool shipment and greater involvement of the Australian Wool Corporation in these activities mentioned in the last two paragraphs of page 14 of the Corporation's annual report for 1980-81, (a) what are the specific aspects of on-shore activities and costs referred to in the paragraphs and (b) what specific action is being taken or planned to increase the Corporation's involvement in these activities.
(2) What estimates can he provide for the proportion of (a) wool's transport and distribution costs related to on-shore activities and (b) final sale price of exported wool, landed at an overseas port, related to transport costs.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) The Australian Wool Corporation has identified the following activities involving preparation of wool for export:
Receiving wool at dump from brokers store; Marking bales for shipment; Dumping bales; Packing dumped bales into containers; Cartage of container to terminal; and Co-ordination of wool movements.
(I) (b) Through membership of the Wool Commodity Group for Europe, the Australian Wool Corporation (A WC) has been involved in discussions with shipping companies on the question of splitting the freight rate into separate components for ocean transport and on-shore activities. The aim is to create a more competitive environment by identifying the separate charges involved.
The AWC is also participating in studies of wool preparation activities in main wool ports throughout Australia in order to evaluate the need for more efficient preparation facilities and procedures and to determine the present level of charges for services currently provided.

550 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(2) (a) On-shore costs for wool as a proportion of total transport and distribution costs vary according to overseas market destinations. It is estimated that the on-shore charges from broker's store to ship's side in Australia average approximately a third of the total transport and distribution cost of delivering wool from broker's store to overseas ports.
(2) (b) For average type wools, greasy basis, the on-shore (Broker's store to ship-side) component and the sea freight (including insurance) component are equivalent to around 2.4 per cent and 5 per cent, respectively, of the landed price of wool at an overseas port.
There are in addition some costs, prior to the delivery from store, which have not been included in the figures just given; these costs, which relate to transport from farm to store and warehousing, are equivalent to about 2.5 per cent of the landed price of wool at an overseas port.

Burbong Bridge, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 4332)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
What are the specific reasons for the estimated underspending of $270,000 from the 1981-82 appropriation of $300,000 for the construction of the new Burbong Bridge, Australian Capital Territory under Division 835:01 of Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Preliminary estimates for the design of the Burbong Bridge and other expenses likely to be incurred in 1981-82 were $300,000.
Department of Main Roads, New South Wales, is responsible for constructing the Bridge. On 30 December 1981 the Department of the Capital Territory received advice from the Department of Main Roads that no more than $30,000 would be required this financial year on the project design and documentations.

Seaport Waste Disposal Facilities

(Question No. 4333)

Mr Morris asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:

What are the specific reasons for the estimated underspend-
ing of $95,000 from the 1981-82 appropriation of $277 000 for seaport waste disposal facilities and associated works for the disposal of garbage from overseas ships, under Division 822: 10
of Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82.

Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The amount appropriated in 1981-82 was to provide for the installation of waste disposal facilities at:

Karratha, Western Australia Port Kembla, New South Wales
Hobart, Tasmania

$ 65,000 150,000
42,000

and commissioning costs at Whyalla, Port Lincoln, Thevenard and Wallaroo, South Australia

257,000 20,000

Total

277,000

The revised estimate for 1981-82 indicates that a saving of $95,000 is expected in this item mainly due to a delay in

establishing administrative arrangements with the New South Wales waste disposal authorities in regard to the disposal of shipboard refuse at Port Kembla. It is expected these details will be agreed to during 1982-83 so allowing construction to commence in that financial year. The saving of $150,000 in 1981-82 is partially offset by an estimated increase of $45,000 in commissioning costs at the South Australian ports and an additional $10,000 required for the facility under construction in Hobart.
Defence Force: Aboriginal Recruitment
(Question No. 4359)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) How many Aborigines (a) were enlisted and (b) began training as apprentices in the (I) Australian Army, (ii) Royal Australian Air Force, and (iii) Royal Australian Navy in each of the years 1971 to 1982.
(2) How many Aborigines were (a) enlisted personnel under training, (b) enlisted personnel, (c) officers under training and (d) officers, in each Service in each of the years 1971 to 1982.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is a follows:
(I) and (2) Service documents do not distinguish Aboriginals from other Australians. Enlistment in the Defence Force is open without restriction to Aboriginals who qualify under the normal conditions of entry.
Tenosynovitis: Department oflndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 4379)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examination of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Viner-As Minister for Defence Support, with responsibility for the industrial undertakings formerly administered by the Minister for Industry and Commerce, I provide the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a) All employees of this Department undergo preappointment medical examinations. In addition, employees are examined at Commonwealth expense whenever symptoms are reported which might be connected with work related illnesses or disease. In the Department's production factories a number of biomonitoring programs are in operation for the protection of employees working with chemicals or materials which may be deleterious to health. These programs are under the supervision of the Director General of Health.
(b) The Department's Central Safety Section, in conjunction with establishment safety officers routinely inspects all workplaces. Ergonomic aspects are taken into consideration

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 551

along with other safety and health matters. Redesign of workplaces, improved work layout and organisational aspects such as job rotation are all used as strategies to overcome work situations which may lead to repetitious injuries. Where practicable, National Health and Medical Research Council recommendations will be implemented when available. In the interim, information sources such as Standards Association of Australia and the Working Environment Division of Department of Employment and Industrial Relations are used by this Department. The Department has an approved policy on Manual Handling, designed to reduce injuries or physical stress related to repetitious handling tasks.
(2) Due to the large number of workplace situations arising in this Department's industrial undertakings, it has not yet been possible to closely survey all work areas from a purely ergonomic point of view. However, the system of regular safety surveys, backed up by the existence of active workermanagement Safety or Area Committees, ensures that areas where repetitious injuries might occur are regularly assessed and brought to the attention of senior management.
(3) Recommendations made as a result of these surveys have been carried out subject to availability of resources.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 4404)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction:
(a) What steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment'.
(b) What percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties and
(c) How many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) All operators of VDU's and screen based equipment and their supervisors, within my Department and statutory authorities within my jurisdiction, have been notified of the need for rest breaks as per P.S.B. memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment'. It is noted that the requirement for rest breaks relates specifically to those operators whose duties involve sustained or full time operation of a VDU.
(b) The majority of screen based installations within my Department are manned by officers whose duties predominantly are other than actual keyboard activities. It is estimated that less than 30 per cent of the working day would be spent in keyboard activity by these officers.
Word Processing is an exception. The range of duties available in a Word Processing Centre are limited with the result that operators are expected to spend most of their working day in keyboard activity. While the

actual percentage of th~ working day spent on this activity is not recorded, in accordance with sound management technique, regular breaks from concentrated activity at the screen are provided for with access to a separate and suitably furnished rest area within the Word Processing Centre.
(c) Although workloads and operator output are monitored output expectations in terms of keystrokes per day are not placed on operators.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department ofIndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 4405)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment', (b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on their duties and (c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Viner-As Minister for Defence Support, with responsibility for the industrial undertakings formerly administered by the Minister for Industry and Commerce, I provide the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) Management of sections having significant users of Visual Display Units and Screen Based Equipment have been circulated with PSB Memorandum 81/418 and in general supervisors and operators are aware of its provisions. To further educate supervisory and operational staff the Occupational Safety and Health publication 'VDUs at Work' has been made available.
(b) Full time data and word processing staff spend in total between 4 to 6 hours per day at work stations. Scheduled and unscheduled breaks are taken by agreement with local supervision during which time clerical and data control tasks may be performed.
(c) Keystroke targets are not set as operators work as a group to meet overall work schedules.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department ofScience and Technology
(Question No. 4420)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction.
(a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board

552 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment ';
(b) what percentage of their working day
(i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties, and
(ii) do operators spend on other duties, and
(c) how many key strokes per 7 hour 21 minute day
(i) are operators expected to complete, and
(ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Information about health and safety factors including desirability of rest periods has been circulated to all appropriate staff.
(b) VDUs are being used by a wide cross-section of staff for a variety of purposes and in different degrees. It is impracticable for most units to provide complete details of time spent by every person operating this equipment.
(c) For most units the key stroke rate is not used as an index of performance for operators of VDUs. In the Patent, Trade Marks and Designs Office the expected number of key strokes is 90 000 and actual rate varies between 85 000 and 90 000.
Salt
(Question No. 4444)
Dr EYeringham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 22 April 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the cover story in Time, 15 March 1982, page 48. entitled 'Salt: A New Villain?'
(2) Will the Minister take steps to (a) inform the public of the relevant facts, (b) document similarly the effects of other processed foods and (c) popularise healthy diet habits.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) I refer the honourable member to the answer given to Senator Townley (Senate Hansard, 27 April 1982, page 1562) on the subject. Reference is made in that answer to the report from the National Health and Medical Research Council Working Party on Sodium in the Australian Diet. It is now expected that the Council will consider the report at its 94th Session (October or November 1982).
(b) Nutritionists are concerned at the excessive use of processed foods containing large amounts of added fat and sugar. These foods, while having a high content of food energy (kilojoules) usually contain only small amounts of essential vitamins and minerals and dietary fibre. The Dietary Guidelines for Australia~developed by my Department to improve the diet habits of the community~include advice to reduce the consumption of fat, sugar and salt.
A publication on those guidelines, to be available for distribution shortly, provides practical suggestions on how the intake of fat, sugar and salt can be limited. It also refers to the health problems associated with excessive consumption of these food components.
(c) My Department actively promotes healthy dietary habits through publications such as 'Eat Better for Less' and 'Your Health and Your Figure' and the posters 'A Food Guide for Good Health' and 'Help Yourself to Good Food'.

Staff Engaged in Matters Arising from Claims by Vietnam Veterans: Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet
(Question No, 4470)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
(I) How many officers in the Minister's Department have been engaged on (a) a full time and (b) a part time basis, in each year from 1979-80 to 1981-82 in any matters arising out of claims made by Vietnam veterans for disabilities as a result of their war service, whether related to exposure to toxic chemicals or not.
(2) What are the names, substantive gradings and salaries of those officers.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1)-(2) (a) None.
(b) Consistent with the broad responsibilities of my Department for co-ordination and advice, a number of officers of various classifications have been involved in matters arising out of Vietnam veteran's claims from time to time during the 3 year period to which the honourable member refers.
Commonwealth-New South Wales Land Exchange Agreement
(Question No. 4478)
Mr West asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
(I) How many parcels of coastal land owned by the Commonwealth have been granted to the New South Wales Government in exchange for New South Wales land under the Commonwealth-New South Wales Land Exchange Agreement.
(2) Where are these lands located and when were they exchanged.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 25.
(2)~

Location
North Head (first release) Laings Point/Green Point Georges Heights Clarke Reserve Marks Park Burroughs Park Dobroyd Head Williams Park Middle Head (first release) South Head (first release) Steel Point Rushcutters Bay Barrenjoey Head Bumborah Point Signal Hill South Head (second release) Botany Bay, Towra Point Henry Head/Congwong Bay North Head (second release) Middle Head (second release)

Date transferred
2.8.79 2.8.79 2.8.79 2.8.79 2.8.79 29.10.79 29.10.79 29.10.79 22.11.79 22.11.79 25.1.80 24.4.80 1.6.81 20.3.81 4.9.80 14.8.81 23.2.82
*

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 553

Location

Date transferred

Signal Hill (second release) Dover Heights, Rodney Street

-

Newcastle, Shepherds Hill

Newcastle, Camp Shortland Port Kembla, Hill 60

-

- Still to be transferred
Allegations of Aboriginal Activists Training in Libya
(Question No. 4524)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 4 May 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to Queensland Press reports of an allegation by the Premier of Queensland that Aboriginal activists are being trained in terror tactics in Libya according to a Queensland Police report which has been passed on to the Prime Minister and the Australian Federal Police.
(2) Has he been provided with any evidence from the Premier of Queensland, or any other source, which would justify this allegation; if not, has he caused any inquiries to be made to establish its veracity.
(3) If there is no truth in the allegation, will he publicly disclaim it on behalf of his Government and thus repudiate the slur which the allegation casts upon Australian Aboriginal citizens.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) The Premier of Queensland provided me with a confidential report on this subject. Appropriate Commonwealth authorities examined the matter and will continue to keep it under review.
To date, the allegations contained in the Press reports referred to, and similar allegations made elsewhere, have not been substantiated.
Companies Involved with Herbicides and Pesticides
(Question No. 4566)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
What companies were (a) importing (b) manufacturing and (c) distributing (i) herbicides and pesticides and (ii) components used in their manufacture in 1960, 1965, 1970, 1975, 1980 and 1982.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Pesticides, which includes herbicides, are subject to registration in the State(s) in which they are to be sold and/or used. The relevant State legislations require that a list of registered products be maintained and available to the public. Five States publish these lists covering pesticides registered at a particular date together with the distinguishing name of the product, the identity and proportion of the active constituent(s) present in the product and the name and address of the registrant. The format and context of such lists vary between States and range in size from 50 to 300 pages. Current lists are available from the State Government Printers in all States except New South Wales. Access to lists published prior to the current issues may be difficult and would depend on the archival services of the individual States.

Available statistical data lacks the detail necessary to identify importers, manufacturers and/or distributors of herbicides and pesticides or components used in the manufacture of such products.
Medical Fees: Discounting
(Question No. 4628)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Further to the Minister's answer to Question No. 4215 (Hansard. 4 May 1982, page 2224), how many times and on what dates have the Minister and officers of the Department of Health met with the Australian Medical Association on the question offees discounting.
(2) What other groups have been consulted and when did the consultations take place.
(3) Will the examination of the proposal be advanced to enable a specific proposal to be made at the 1982 Fees Tribunal.
Mr CarIton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The matter was discussed at a meeting between officers of the Australian Medical Association and my Department on 18 December 1981.
(2) None at this time.
(3) If it is decided to pursue the proposal, the Government's views will be made known in its submission to the next Medical Fees Enquiry.
Ammunition Cargoes: Parramatta River
(Question No. 4649)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Is ammunition carried upon defence vessels and barges on the Parramatta River, New South Wales.
(2) What has been the frequency of movements of cargoes of ammunition since 1 January 1982.
(3) What security precautions are taken in relation to the ammunition to ensure public safety.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) 169to 14May 1982.
(3) Set precautionary rules based on the Commonwealth Explosives Regulations are observed to ensure the maximum degree of safety at all times. For example, ammunition lighter movements are confined to daylight hours, ammunition is packed in approved packages, high explosives are stowed below the water-line, quantities of explosives are limited as are the number of lighters towed in convoy, the fitting of fire extinguishers and lightning conductors to the lighters, no smoking or naked flames, et cetera. In addition a red flag is flown whilst ammunition is being carried, this is an internationally recognised maritime signal fOf loading, carrying and discharging ammunition.
Taxation: Exemption in Respect of Approved Overseas Projects
(Question No. 2575)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:

554 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(I) What is the estimated cost of the exemption for income derived in respect of approved overseas projects provided under section 23AF of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 for 1980-81 ?
(2) What is the reason for providing this allowance?
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Based on information supplied by Australian firms which were successful tenderers for overseas contracts, it is estimated that the remuneration of their employees which would be exempt under section 23AF of the Income Tax Assessment Act would involve a cost to income tax revenue of about $50,000 in respect of the 1980-81 income year.
(2) Income tax relief for Australians working overseas on approved projects was introduced to enhance the ability of Australian consultants to obtain a greater share of the growing market overseas for consultancy and contracting services.
Prior to the introduction of this initiative, Australian firms had to cost their tenders for overseas projects on the basis that the earnings of Australians performing services for them were subject to tax in Australia at normal rates if the overseas country did not tax them. This placed Australian firms at a disadvantage because competitor firms from a number of other countries have been able to cost their tenders on the basis that they will be able to pay their employees at lower rates because the employees' earnings have been wholly or partly free of tax in their home country.
The tax exemption now provided allows Australian firms to reduce their costs while maintaining the after-tax value of reo muneration paid to persons working on approved overseas projects.
Health Care
(Question No. 3820)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
What was the estimated proportion of (a) gross domestic product and (b) Commonwealth budget expenditure devoted to health care in (i) 1960, (ii) 1965, (iii) 1970, (iv) 1975 and (v) 1980.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Information on the proportion of gross domestic prod. uct devoted to health care is not available within my Depart. ment for certain of the years for which it was requested, but is available for other years. This is set out below:

Year
1960-61 1963-64 1966-67 1968-69 1969-70 1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77

Total Health Expenditure as percentage of GDP
% 4.9 5.0 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.8 5.9 5.8 5.9 6.7 7.7 7.7

Year

Total Health
Expenditure as percentage
of GDP

%

1977-78

8.1

1978-79

7.9

(b) The Australian Bureau of Statistics has advised that Commonwealth Budget Outlays on Health as a proportion of
Total Commonwealth Budget Outlays are as follows:

Year

%

1961.62(i)

5.9

1964-65

6.1

1969-70

6.3

1974-75

7.1

1979-80

9.9

(i) Figures for 1961-62 are the earliest available from Australian Bureau of Statistics records.

Advertising on Pay Packets
(Question No. 3849)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(l) Is it a fact that on several pay days prior to the cash mode of salary payment being eliminated the pay packets of staff paid by the Department of Administrative Services, Syd. ney, contained advertising material for a number of banks and building societies soliciting staff members' salary deductions.
(2) Was any charge levied against organisations for providing this advertising outlet.
(3) Were all building societies, banks and credit unions offered this service; if not, which organisations were offered this service and why.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) The Department of Finance is responsible for arranging the packaging of salaries for Commonwealth Public Servants; these include the staff of the Department of Administrative Services in New South Wales. The Minister for Finance was asked a question, upon notice, on a similar matter by Senator Evans on 17 February 1982 and I refer the honourable member to her answer (Senate Hansard, 18 March 1982, page 1013).
Australian Shipping Commission Terminal at Mort Bay, New South Wales
(Question No. 3852)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) What is the current state of negotiations with the New South Wales Government regarding the future of the Australian Shipping Commission Terminal at Mort Bay, Balmain, New South Wales.
(2) How many meetings have occurred regarding these negotiations.
(3) What parties have been present at each of these meetings.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 555

Mr Newman~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As a result of negotiations with the New South Wales Government an alternative solution to the Department of Defence requirement (the former Balmain Power Station site) has been conditionally accepted in principle. Consequently the Australian Shipping Commission Terminal at Mort Bay, Balmain, N.S.W. is no longer required for defence purposes.
(2) and (3) There has been a number of meetings involving Commonwealth and State Ministers and officials since the Department of Defence first indicated an interest in the possible acquisition of this area. There have also been meetings involving officers of the N.S.W. Department of Lands, the N.S.W. Department of Environment and Planning, the Maritime Services Board, the Australian National Line, my Department, and the Department of Defence.
Traffic Management Study of City of Sandringham, Victoria
(Question No. 3919)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) Is a private firm, Loder and Bayly, involved in a Traffic Management Study of the City of Sandringham, Victoria; if so, what is the precise role of the firm in this study.
(2) Does the study involve issues such as alterations to existing street furniture, traffic signs, etcetera; if so, what are the (a) details and (b) costs.
(3) Is a film being made of this study by the Office of Road Safety; if so, who will control the filming, editing and marketing of the film.
(4) Have plans been made as to what will happen to such street alterations and structures after the study and film are complete; if so, what are the details.
(5) Will Loder and Bayly receive financial and other assistance in relation to the study and the film, if so, (a) what are the details; (b) what organisations will provide assistance, and (c) who requested the financial and other assistance for the study and film.
(6) Will any organisations benefit financially from showing the film; ifso, what are the details.
(7) What will be the total cost of the study and of the film.
Mr Hunt~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. The Office of Road Safety (ORS) in my Department commissioned the Road Safety and Traffic Authority, Victoria, (RoSTA) to undertake the study using Loder and Bayly as consultants. Loder and Bayly were selected by a steering committee of ORS, RoSTA and Sandringham City Council ahead of three other consultants who were also invited to submit proposals.
(2) Yes. (a) Physical devices including humps, road markings, warning devices, street lighting, road narrowing, and signs were installed experimentally in two streets to deter through traffic and reduce speeds.
(b) I am advised that Sandringham City Council has spent $20,000 on the trial implementation of these techniques.
(3) Yes. Filming and editing are being controlled by Film Australia in consultation with ORS. Marketing will be in accordance with Film Australia's standard marketing procedure.

(4) Retention or dismantling of the devices involved is dependent upon performance and acceptability to residents during the trial period and will be a matter for the State and local government jurisdictions.

(5) (a) Loder and Bayly have been engaged under a standard arrangement for the engagement of consultants. They
will be paid a total of $79,000 for their consultancy services in
relation to the research and traffic engineering investigations involved. I am advised that a principal of the firm and a staff member may be seen on film at a meeting and the principal was interviewed for the film. This was incidental to the consultancy task and is not being separately remunerated.

(b) Financial assistance is being provided by:

RoSTA ORS

$ 46,000 33,000

79,000

(c) The study was initiated and is being managed by the steering committee referred to in (I) above. The estimate of expenditure was derived by ORS and RoSTA based on the requirements and scope of the study coupled with experience of previous consultancy arrangements.

The film is largely concerned with recording the process of public participation in identifying problem areas, posing solutions and evaluating measures employed in the trial. The film
therefore complements an earlier ORS film "Streets are for Sharing". The earlier film showed what could be done to im-
prove the local street network while the current film is
intended to show local authorities how to go about involving the local community in making changes. The film is being funded under the ORS Research and Promotion vote (Appropriation Code 655/3/ II).

(6) No.

(7) The total cost of the study, the film and installation costs in relation to the trial will be in the order of $163,000,
the components of which are as follows:

Study phase Trial installations Film

$ 79,000 20,000
64.000

TOTAL

163,000

Rights to Flights to and from Australia
(Question No. 3999)
Mr JuIl asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 23 February 1982:
(I) Which international airlines applied for (a) additional and (b) new rights for flights to and from Australia in 1981.
(2) Which of these applications for rights were (a) granted and (b) rejected.
(3) What were the reasons for the rejection of any of these applications.
Mr Fife~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) During 1981, the following international airlines applied for and were granted rights to operate capacity additional to their existing entitlements under relevant air services arrangements on services to and from Australia: Air New Zealand, Air Pacific, Air Vanuatu, Cathay Pacific, Garuda Indonesian Airways, Japan Airlines, Malaysian Airline System, Pan Am, Philippine Airlines, Qantas Airways Ltd, Singapore Airlines, Thai Airways International.

556 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

During 1981 also the following international airlines applied for, and were granted, new traffic rights at points which they were not previously entitled to serve: Air New Zealand, Cathay Pacific, Garuda Indonesian Airways, JAT Yugoslav Airlines, KLM, Malaysian Airline System, Philippine Airlines, Qantas Airways Ltd, Singapore Airlines, Thai Airways International.
(3) Not applicable.
Promotion of North Queensland Tourist Facilities
(Question No.4031)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 24 February 1982:
(I) How much has been spent by Federal Government tourist authorities in the promotion of North Queensland tourist facilities.
(2) Are the tourist authorities encouraging international visitors to make their point of disembarkation Townsville International Airport; if so, in what way.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Commonwealth Government bodies involved in the promotion of North Queensland as a tourist destination are the Australian Tourist Commission and Qantas Airways Limited. Details of the nature and extent of their involvement are given below.
Australian Tourist Commission (ATC)-There is no simple answer to the question, 'how much is spent by the Australian Tourist Commission on the promotion of North Queensland tourist facilities' as much of this promotion is incorporated in Australian umbrella campaigns and an apportioning of funds to specific regions is misleading.
Further, expenditure by the ATC is often in the form of 'seed money' where a relatively small amount by ATC is placed in such a way as to bring forth major contributions by other organisations (for example, journalist and publicist programs).
In addition, many significant and productive activities require no money at all (for example, tour planning and design work by ATC executives in association with overseas wholesalers and producers).
In view of the foregoing, ATC's activities can be categorised into four groups, viz., those dedicated to North Queensland, those umbrella-style operations with North Queensland components, 'seed money' activities with low ATC financial contributions, but manpower commitment, those with insignificant expenditure and high productivity.
(a) Dedicated PromotionsThe main source market, with the introduction of the Townsville services, is North America. In 1981-82 $70,000 was specifically invested to promote the Townsville service and North Queensland. This was spent in association with funds from the States and individual producers.
In Japan $24,200 was invested. In addition, $430,000 is being spent on a consumer campaign, of which a major component is North Queensland.
In the UK. and Europe, $5,000 was earmarked for North Queensland. This is appropriate to these markets where their stage of development does not respond well to regional promotions.
In New Zealand, $15,000 is set aside to promote the region through the Townsville service. This is in conjunction with the State, and Qantas, and a $60,000 campaign will result.

The total ATC investment is in the order of $150,000 which is at least trebled by contributions by other organisations.

(b) Umbrella Promotions-
(i) ATC produces publications appropriate to service consumer and trade information needs in each market.

In the UK. and North America there are two publications. In each other market there is one. In addition
to ATC's editorial references to regions and products, operators are encouraged to use these publications as vehicles to promote their own products.

The proportion of publications devoted to North Queensland are:

Worldwide Travel Planner
North America New Zealand UK.
Europe Asia-currently being produced

5 percent
9.5 per cent 3 percent 13 percent 10 per cent

These publications are supported by distribution costs amounting to some $tm, in addition to gross pro-
duction costs over $800,000.

There is in addition to these publications a high pres-
tige book devoted totally to North Queensland and the Barrier Reef which is distributed throughout ATC
offices.

(ii) ATC also initiates and co-ordinates umbrella pro-
motions where the Australian producers meet overseas wholesalers and retailers.

North Queensland operators are encouraged to join
these events, and do so. The region is also reflected in stand publicity materials, posters, et cetera, as well as
the ATC publications being distributed at these events. The cost of mounting these events exceeds $400,000, though this cost is partly shared by industry.

(c) 'Seed Money' Promotions-This vital form of promotion takes place in all markets across a diverse range of
activities, and accordingly it is not possible to define precise amounts. However, the following will serve as indications:

(i) In the 1981-82 financial year to date, on ATC's journalist/publicist programme whereby editorial opinion
leaders are sponsored to Australia, 31 participants have spent 139 days (that is, 4,309 man days) in North Queensland. Articles from these visits are generated
for at least several years and therefore it is not possible to quantify the total return. However, ATC's Japan expenditure of $15,000 returned $115,000 worth of
publicity within 12 months.

(ii) ATC encourages media around the world to undertake editorial specials on Australia through the financial support of an advertisement or journalist assistance. The editorial result is far beyond the value of
the advertisement.

(d) Insignificant Expenditure but High ProductivityATC offices around the world provide advice and assistance
to both the trade and consumers throughout all useful markets. This is generated through extensive contacts within the travel trades of the world, and ATC's willingness to meet anywhere there is an opportunity to develop tourism to Australia.

North Queensland is strongly promoted at any such opportunity. Discussions with the trade are often in the area of itinerary planning by wholesalers and most wholesaler programmes are directly influenced, if not initiated, by ATC
senior executives.

In addition, ATC maintains film lending systems around
the world. One of the ATC's most recently produced films is devoted to the Great Barrier Reef and this film is being used extensively.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 557

It is the ATC's priority to develop promotional programmes in co-operation with those who will commercially benefit from the promotion-the effectiveness of any regional promotion is a function not only of ATC's expenditure, but also the effort and expenditure of the industry in that region in supporting the ATC activity and the method used to employ these available funds.
In summary, the best estimate of funds expended specifically in reference to North Queensland would be $200,000 to $300,000 (out of a total budget for 1981-82 of $9.2m), but such an estimate does not reflect the true 'investment' given to this or any other region.
(e) Qantas Airways Limited-Qantas Airways has been most active in promoting Townsville as a point of disembarkation for international visitors both in anticipation of and since the commencement of its services to Townsville from Los Angeles and Auckland in February 1981.
In New Zealand Qantas has spent over NZ$I 00,000 in television, radio and Press advertising, and in the production of promotional literature and merchandising material, in the last 12 months. New tour programmes have been launched in conjunction with New Zealand-based tour wholesalers which use Townsville as a point of disembarkation in Australia. The emphasis on Townsville as a gateway from New Zealand has been heightened following Qantas's decision to operate nonstop services from Auckland to Townsville commencing April 1982.
In North America, the launch of new services to Townsville and Brisbane in February 1981 was heralded by a major promotional blitz early last year. Thirty-five presentations were made to over 3,400 travel agents, featuring an audiovisual on Northern Queensland and the Great Barrier Reef, recommending' a selection of tours using Townsville as the gateway and highlighting the new Qantas service. Door prizes at each function were tickets on Qantas from US. West Coast to Townsville. Over US$ I00,000 was spent by Qantas on this launch. Additionally the Townsville gateway to Australia has featured strongly in all print and television advertising in the USA. and Canada throughout 1981, with a budget in excess of US$800,000 being dedicated to promoting Queensland as an important Qantas destination from North America.
In Australia Qantas has worked in close partnership with the Australian Tourist Commission, the Queensland Travel and Tourist Corporation, inbound tour operators, hotels and attraction operators to ensure the best possible presentation available through the Townsville gateway in overseas markets. Several of its senior officers have visited Townsville and Northern Queensland frequently to speak to industry groups and to extend this partnership to the mutual benefit of all concerned. Qantas's objective has been to increase the numbers of overseas visitors from all over the world to Northern Queensland and to encourage them to extend their stays there.
Promotional activities planned for 1982 include increased effort and expenditure not only in New Zealand and North America, but also in the UK., Europe and Asia, with the advent of new services from London and Singapore direct to Townsville which commenced in April 1982.
In addition to the above, increased tourism flows to North Queensland are facilitated by the availability of a number of package holidays at reduced prices to the region offered by the domestic airlines-as well as the inclusion of Townsville and Cairns on some of the round Australia routes offered by the airlines at below normal economy airfares (viz., TAA's 'Discover Australia' fares and Ansett's 'Explore Exciting Australia' fares).

Australian National Railways
(Question No. 4094)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 9 March 1982:
Does Australian National have any plans to further reduce the services now provided by the tea and sugar train to AN employees stationed along the trans-continental railway between Port Augusta and Kalgoorlie.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian National Railways Commission has not reduced nor does it have plans to reduce the level of service to its employees provided by the Commission through the tea and sugar train. The Commission does, however, have plans to further reduce the number of fettler's camps along the railway. These reductions will not affect the level of service to employees.
Members oCParliament: Superannuation Entitlements
(Question No. 4113)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
Will he take steps to have superannuation entitlements for members of parliament included in the terms of reference of the Remuneration Tribunal.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Superannuation entitlements for members of parliament are embodied in the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act 1948. How any review of entitlements under the legislation might be carried out is a matter of Government policy.
Human Rights
(Question No. 4123)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
(I) Further to the Government's undertaking (Hansard. 18 September 1980, pages 1483-8) to accept the recommendation expressed in paragraph 5 of the final chapter of the report of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence on Human Rights in the Soviet Union, can he now state (a) which trials have Australian Embassy officials attended since 21 July 1981, (b) where were these trials held, (c) on what date were the trials held, (d) what were the (i) charges and (ii) sentences in each case, (e) if Australian officials were not given access in any case, what were the reasons given for such denial, and (f) what representatives from other countries attended, or attempted to attend, these trials.
(2) Has the Australian Government supported any initiatives to support the release of Dr Yuri Orlov or Mr Anatoli Shcharansky since 13 October 1981; if so, what were these initiatives.
(3) Further to the Government's undertaking to accept the recommendation expressed in paragraph 31 of the final chapter of the report, can he indicate (a) how many family reunions of Soviet citizens who wished to join relatives in Australia occurred in (i) 1979, (ii) 1980 and (iii) 1981, (b) what the total number of persons emigrating from the USSR. was in (i) 1979, (ii) 1980 and (iii) 1981, and (c)

558 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

what explanation can be offered for any trend shown in these figures.
(4) Has the Government given any recent reconsideration to its decision not to support the establishment, in the Commonwealth Parliament, of a Standing Committee on Human Rights to report on serious violations of human rights in any country, including Australia, in accordance with paragraph 65 of the final chapter of the report.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Australian Embassy officials have attempted to attend the following trials since 21 July 1981:
(a) Chernobilsky, Boris, (b) Krasnogorsk, (c) 9 December 1981, (d) (i) Section 191 (2) RSFSR Criminal Code~offering resistance to those seeking to protect the public order, (d) (ii) I year, (e) 'Court full', (f) No representative permitted to attend~ UK, USA attempted.
(a) Kovalyov, Ivan, (b) Moscow, (c) 31/3/82~2/4/82, (d) (i) Section 70 (i) RSFSR Criminal Code~Anti Soviet agitation and propaganda, (d) (ii) 5 years imprisonment plus 5 years exile, (e) 'No places available', (f) No representatives permitted to attend~ USA, Canada attempted.
(2) During my visit to Israel earlier this year I spoke with Mrs Shcharansky about her husband's circumstances and, at her request, made further inquiries about him. Since my meeting with Mrs Shcharansky the Government has also made representations to the Soviet authorities on her husband's behalf. No new initiatives to obtain the release of Dr Orlov have been launched since 13 October 1981.
(3) I am advised by my colleague the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs that (a) the following family reunions of Soviet citizens who wished to join relatives in Australia occurred in (i) 1979,27; (ii) 1980,36; (iii) 1981, 17.
(b) The total number of persons emigrating to Australia from the USSR was (i) 1979,106; (ii) 1980, 152; (iii) 1981, 79.
(c) No explanation can be offered for fluctuations in these figures from year to year.
(4) As my predecessor noted on 18 September 1980, the question of establishing a Standing Parliamentary Committee is a matter for the Parliament. I should, however, reiterate the Government's position which is to agree with the reservations expressed by several members of the Committee, including its Chairman, on Recommendation 65.
The Government believes that existing structures offer adequate opportunities to canvass human rights issues. In Australia, for example, the Australian Human Rights Commission, which came into operation on 10 December 1981, now plays a significant role in safe-guarding human rights in areas of Commonwealth responsibility. State Governments have their own machinery for monitoring human rights in their areas ofjurisdiction.
Internationally, in addition to direct bilateral representations on cases of human rights violations, Australia pursues its concerns through various multilateral channels, including the United Nations, Commission on Human Rights and the UN General Assembly. The Government maintains its firm commitment and support for UN and other international human rights bodies as the most effective means of promoting increased respect for human rights in all parts of the world.
At the same time, members of parliament retain their freedom to raise domestic and international human rights questions in both Houses and to refer such questions to the appropriate existing committees, such as the two Foreign Affairs and Defence Committees. The Parliamentary Amnesty

Group has also provided an informal and often singularly effective channel for action.
The Government therefore believes that existing channels provide ample scope for action aimed at promoting and protecting human rights.
Equal Employment Opportunities: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 4132)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
(I) Does the Minister's Department have an equal employment opportunities program; if so, (a) how long has the program been in existence, (b) what are the aims of the program, (c) what is the Department's assessment of the success of the program in achieving its aims, (d) how have, or are, the aims of the program been, or being met, (e) is the program aimed at covering the whole Department, or merely a section of it, (f) what are the procedures for union consultation and involvement in the program, (g) what involvement does the Equal Employment Opportunities Bureau of the Public Service Board have in the program and (h) has the program changed in its priority rating within the Department since its introduction.
(2) If there is no program, on what basis was this decision reached.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(a) The concept of equal employment opportunity was introduced in the Australian Public Service in 1977 following the recommendations of the Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration. The Department of Primary Industry has progressively implemented the initiatives of the Public Service Board in this area.
(b) The main aims of the program include:
(i) recruitment of selection of staff on the basis of merit and qualifications without regard to ethnic background, sex, disability, religious beliefs, etc.
(ii) ensuring that all training and development courses recognise the need for equal employment opportunity, e.g. selection interviewing.
(iii) attendance by Departmental officers at seminars conducted by the Equal Employment Opportunities Bureau of the Public Service Board and other groups.
(c) The policy is being applied successfully.
(d) The aims of the policy are being met through
revision of personnel procedures and recruitment practices to delete discriminatory words and any appearance of bias
modification of instructions to selection committees to emphasise EEO policies
employment of disadvantaged people
modification of training courses to ensure content is non-discriminatory.
(e) The policy is aimed at covering the whole of the Department wherever possible.
(f) The Department consults with Staff Associations on a wide range of subjects including equal employment opportunity policies.
(g) The Equal Employment Opportunities Bureau of the Public Service Board has responsibility for the Service-wide equal employment opportunities policies and programmes

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 559

and consults with and advises Departments. This Department distributes publications and attends seminars prepared by the Bureau.
(h) No.
(2) Not applicable.
Australian National Railways
(Question No. 4183)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 16 March 1982:
What was the total number of (a) salaried and (b) wages staff of Australian National at the end of each year since 1978.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian National Railways Commission has provided the information in respect of the December month of each year in the following table:

Year
1978 1979 1980 1981

Salaried
2,591 2,448 2,394 2,326

Wages
1O,Q35 9,514 8,995 8,715

Total
12,626 11,962 11,389 11,041

Fuel Consumption of Aircraft in Use with Ansett Airlines and Trans Australia Airlines
(Question No. 4207)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 17 March 1982:
(I) When may I expect an answer to Question No. 3421 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 27 October 1981.
(2) What are the reasons for the 5-months delay in answering this question.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The answer to Question No. 3421 appeared in Hansard on 21 April1982,page 1708.
(2) The delay in answering this question was largely due to the collection and compilation of the required information for TAA and Ansett in a comparable format.
Airways and Shipping Labour and Non-labour Costs
Question No. 4208)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 17 March 1982:
(I) When may I expect an answer to Question No. 3099 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 15 September 1981.
(2) What are the reasons for the 6-months delay in answering this question.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The answer to Question No. 3099 appeared in Hansard on 20 April 1982, page 1599.
(2) The delay in answering this question was largely due to the collection and compilation of the required information.

Taxation Avoidance
(Question No. 4268)
Dr Blewett asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 March 1982:
(I) Did he state to the 1982 Congress of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia that 'one of the most effective ways of countering taxation avoidance must be an increasing reliance on indirect taxes'.
(2) If so, what is the evidence and rationale for this assertion, that is, in what ways do increased or broadened indirect taxes attack tax avoidance.
(3) Does his statement assume that an increasing reliance on indirect taxes forces 'cash-economy' tax-evaders to pay indirect taxes on their purchases in the rest of the economy.
(4) Are there any estimates of the revenue loss due to tax avoidance in the 'cash economy'; if so, what are these estimates.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Liability for indirect taxation falls upon registered taxpayers who pass the tax on to their customers in the price for which they sell the goods. The taxpayers, therefore, do not bear the cost of the tax.
Any incentive for avoiding such a tax is, therefore, substantially less than may be the case under a direct tax system.
A much smaller number of taxpayers is required to account for indirect taxes as compared with the number required to pay direct taxes. Administration of an indirect tax system is more easily controlled.
(3) Yes, it is not necessary to assume the proposition in the question. It is a fact.
(4) The 'cash' economy is part of the field, also described as the 'grey' or 'hidden' economy, in which tax evasion and avoidance are considered to be practised. This field also includes the 'cashless' economy, where barter takes the place of money transactions. Numerous estimates have been made of the revenue losses through these unrecorded transactions but none can be regarded as firmly-based because of the lack of hard evidence, in terms of statistical or financial aggregates. I need scarcely mention that the activities covered by the cash economy are usually concealed and, therefore, not readily capable of measurement.
There have been no official estimates of the extent of revenue losses through evasion, but some estimates have been made of the immediate impact on revenue collections of certain blatant avoidance schemes of the kind against which the Government has put in place safeguarding legislation.
Currency and Coinage
(Question No. 4282)
Mr Jull asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
(I) What is the cost of producing a $1 note.
(2) What life is usually expected of a $1 note SUbjected to normal circulation.
(3) What is the current status of the proposed $1 coin.
(4) What is the estimated cost of producing a $1 coin.
(5) What life is usually expected of coinage subjected to normal circulation.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

560 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(I) About four cents in 1980-8l.
(2) The average period for which a $1 note remains on issue is currently about 10 months.
(3) Responses to a questionnaire sent to major users of the currency and representations received from other interested individuals have been received and are under evaluation.
(4) Cost would be dependent upon the size and composition of the coin, neither of which has been determined.
(5) In excess of 20 years.
Railways: 1981 Report on Rail
(Question No. 4286)
Mr Connolly asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
With reference to his Press release of 26 February 1982 in which he commended the 1981 Report on Rail prepared by the Australian Railway Research and Development Organisation which suggested that the total deficit of Australia's government-owned railways could be reduced very significantly over the coming decades, what action is he or his Department taking to consider and implement the recommendations of the report.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Commonwealth Government has been concerned with the problem of deficits in State and Commonwealth-owned railways and their impact on Government revenues for some time. The Commonwealth has taken positive steps to improve the position of the railways in the past. These include funding of projects proposed by the States for the improvement of the quality, capacity, efficiency and safety of urban public transport in major cities such as new rolling-stock in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Adelaide and electrification of certain suburban lines in Brisbane, and the funding of standard gauge rail links between all State mainland capitals, the remaining link to Adelaide being currently under construction.
The Commonwealth is currently providing funds under the National Railway Network (Financial Assistance) Act 1979 for mainline upgrading, and played a significant and active role in establishing and subsequently funding the Australian Railway Research and Development Organisation (ARRDO).
It is important to realise that such initiatives are necessarily undertaken in close co-operation with the States. In this regard, I am particularly pleased that ARRDO's 1981 Report recommendations support the Commonwealth's 'commercialisation' of its own railway, Australian National, as a deficit-reducing measure, and I hope the States will give serious consideration to pursuing a similar policy with their own railway systems. In addition I look forward to further discussions with my Australian Transport Advisory Council colleagues on such questions as cost recovery in the land transport sector and future investment in government railways-matters which our advisers are already examining.
The Commonwealth is also carefully examining its own role in the railway area in the light of the ARRDO Report with a view to developing new initiatives and policies for the future. Such initiatives cannot be viewed in isolation and must reflect the overall budgetary priorities of the Commonwealth Government and recognise that many of the railway problems identified by ARRDO lie entirely within the States' area of responsibilities.

Rural Bank Building, Martin Place, Sydney

(Question No. 4302)

Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 20
April 1982:

(I) With reference to the full page advertisement by the National Trust of Australia on page 9 of the Sydney Morning Herald of 25 March 1982, does the National Trust oppose the demolition of the Rural Bank Building in Martin Place, Syd-
ney, because, inter alia, it is of great cultural significance and, for those who bought flowers nearby or who celebrated an
evening at Prince's, it is a landmark.

(2) How is the National Trust of Australia funded.

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) I have no reason to believe that the advertisement in question, which advocates the preservation of the building, does not represent the views of the National Trust of Australia (New South Wales).

(2) The National Trust of Australia (New South Wales) is a community organisation. It was established in 1945 and incorporated by an Act of the New South Wales Parliament in 1960.

The income of the National Trust of Australia (New South Wales) was given in its 1980-81 Annual Report as follows:

$

Donations

78,017

Entrance Fees

88,467

Functions-

gross

210,007

expenses

(120,857)

Commonwealth Government grant

30,000

New South Wales Government Grant-

general

28,000

Investment Income

228,826

Legacies

Rent from Tenants

27,163

Royalties

6,998

Surplus on sale of goods

222,887

Subscriptions

243,719

Other income

56,543

1,099,770

Australian National Railways: Public Service Obligations
(Question No. 4324)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) What specific information is he able to provide on potential Public Service Obligations (PSOs) identified by the Australian National Railways Commission, up to the date of the answer to this question.
(2) What has been his response to each of the potential PSOs, up to the date of the answer to this question.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Provision exists in the Australian National Railways Act (Section 44) for the Commission to be directed by the responsible Minister 'to make any alteration in any existing practice or carry out any system or matter of policy'. The Commission could be directed under this section to undertake Public Service Obligations.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 561

To date the only such direction given to the Commission was in respect of the operations of the 'Tasman Limited' passenger train over the period I July 1977 to 28 February 1978 pending a decision on its future. The Commission has not yet specifically identified any other aspects of its operations which it would not undertake unless given a direction pursuant to Section 44 of the Act.
Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme
(Question No. 4327)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
What are the precise reasons for the estimated underspending of $1,950,000 from the 1981-82 appropriation for the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme under Division 655:3:06 of Appropriation Act (No. I) 1981-82.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Under the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES) assistance is paid on the interstate movement by sea of eligible cargoes. As the Government does not regulate the total amount of assistance paid under the Scheme, savings in the annual appropriation will occur when the amount of cargo attracting TFES is lower than estimated. Such a shortfall has occurred to date for 1981-82.
Sale of Domestic Air Terminals
(Question No. 4330)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) What specific progress has been made by his Department, to the date of the preparation of the answer to this question, in its investigation of the feasibility of the sale of Commonwealth owned domestic air terminals referred to on page 125 of the 1980-81 annual report of the former Department of Transport.
(2) What are the precise criteria being utilised in the assessment of the feasibility or otherwise of selling Commonwealth owned domestic air terminals.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) An Interdepartmental Committee has been studying various aspects of major airport development, including the future construction and/or sale of domestic terminals. The feasibility of the sale of existing domestic terminals is to be considered further by the Government in this context. Account will need to be taken, inter alia, of the impact of such sale on aviation policy and take account of economic, budgetary, legal and administrative implications.
Import of Used DC6 Aircraft
(Question No. 4331)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
What information is he able to provide on any inquiries or applications for the import of used DC6 aircraft that have been made from I January 1982 to the date of preparation of this answer.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Consideration of applications for the importation of aircraft is a matter for the Minister for Aviation.

Importation of Military-type Automatic Rifles
(Question No. 4355)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
Is there an embargo on the importation of military-type automatic rifles and ammunition; if so:
(a) is the embargo designed to reduce the availability of such weapons in Australia, and
(b) does the Government consider this embargo justified as a measure to prevent public access to these weapons.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes, there are restrictions on the importation of:
(a) firearms of a machine gun construction,
(b) any semi-automatic firearm, not being a pistol, which incorporates a pistol grip in its design, or which incorporated a pistol grip in its design when originally manufactured.
Such firearms may be imported only for use by defence and law enforcement authorities.
There is also an import control on military type ammunition which may be imported where there is no objection from State authorities.
The new embargo on firearms was introduced by the Commonwealth Government in September 1981 on the recommendation of the Australian Police Ministers' Council. The Commonwealth Government shared the concern of the Governments of the States and the Northern Territory about the ready availability of such firearms.
The answer to questions (a) and (b) is thus yes in both cases.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 4382)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) and (b): No. As I advised the honourable n:Iember in response to his earlier Question No. 3015, there has been only one case of repetitious strain injury reported in my Department. Pending the outcome of recent research into repetitious strain injury, which I expect to be in the form of a National Health and Medical Research Council Occupational Health Guide, I do not consider that my Department should act unilaterally in this matter.
(2) and (3) See above.

562 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Tenosynovitis: Department of Defence
(Question No. 4385)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) No. To date the conduct of medical examinations (which, in the case of Defence personnel, would total more than 100,000) has been considered unnecessary in view of the relatively few cases of repetitious injuries reported. Medical examinations are generally arranged on request or when a possible injury has been detected.
(b) No. An ergonomic assessment has not been undertaken because of the low incidence of reported repetitious injuries. However advice has been sought from relevant authorities on suitable working environments for operations where the possible existence of health hazards is suspected, for example, those involving screen based equipment.
Ergonomic principles are taken into account when purchasing office machines, furniture and other equipment for these areas.
(2) Not applicable.
(3) Not applicable.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 4393)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Comprehensive medical examinations for the staff of my Department are conducted routinely as part of their appointment process to the Service and prior to an overseas posting.
On 23 October 1981 the Public Service Board issued advice to all Departments regarding the eyesight testing of staff operating visual display units and other screen based equipment.

My Department authorised and arranged for eyesight testing of all the staff concerned at Departmental expense.
Medical examinations by a Commonwealth medical officer are arranged whenever staff report symptoms of apparently job related illnesses/injuries.
(I) (b), (2) (a and b) and (3) The wide range of occupations in which repetition strain injuries are reported would make a program of ergonomic assessment impracticable on economic and resource grounds. However, my Department has available to it, and from time to time uses, advice from other Departments for example Health and Housing and Construction on suitable working environments for operations where the possible existence of health hazards is suspected e.g. those involving screen-based equipment.
Existing work places have, of course, been designed, fitted out and equipped having regard to local Government and State safety regulations and relevant standards and guidelines issued by such bodies as the Standards Association of Australia, the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) and the Department of Science and Technology.
It is expected that an occupational guide on repetition strain injury will be issued by the NHMRC. Subject to the availability of respurces my Department will make every effort to comply with the NHMRC recommendations when they are received.
Tenosynovitis: Department ofIndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 4397)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been:
(a) medical examinations of all workers, and
(b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so,
(a) when are assessments made, and
(b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) No.
(b) No, because there are no work areas with a history of repetitious injuries. The small number of cases of tenosynovitis and one of carpel tunnel syndrome reported to date have involved persons employed in a range of various working environments. However the Department is continually seeking advice from the various responsible Departments on suitable working environments for operations where the possible existence of health hazards is suspected.
(2) Not applicable.
(3) Not applicable.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 563

Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 4403)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Public Service Matters, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and Other Screen Based Equipment', (b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties and (c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-(a) As part of their duties, supervisors see to it that the provisions of Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 are complied with. In addition, all staff employed as full-time operators were provided with a copy of the Memorandum.
(b) (i) 80 percent (ii) 20 per cent
(c) (i) and (ii) No target number of keystrokes is set; Departmental systems do not record keystrokes.
Public Service Board-(a) All operators have been provided with a copy of Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 of 23 October 1981 and its contents have been fully discussed with them. Provision has been made for a minimum break of 40 minutes each day in 2 breaks of 20 minutes.
(b) (i) Operators are expected to spend 70% of their productive time on operating duties; (ii) The remaining 30% of their daily available time is spent on other duties including consultation with supervisors and authors and includes the break of 40 minutes.
(c) (i) and (ii) No daily production standard has been established due to the variable nature of the workload-both in volume and content.
Auditor-General's Office-
(a) All operators and supervisors have been made aware of the need for sufficient breaks and all correspondence relating to this matter is circulated within the word processing centre.
(b) (i) 75 percent (ii) 25 percent
(c) (i) There is no pre-determined number of keystrokes set (ii) Statistics on completed keystrokes are not maintained.
Advisory Council for Inter-Government Relations-
(a), (b) and (c) Screen based word processing equipment is in the process of being introduced into the Council and PSB memorandum 81/418 has been drawn to the Council's notice.
Australian Science and Technology Council, Commonwealth Ombudsman, Office of National Assessments
These organisations do not use screen based equipment.

Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 4408)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and Other Screen Based Equipment', (b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties, and (c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete, and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department has two discrete areas which use screen based equipment, namely Communications and Word Processing.
(a) Word processing operators and communications are encouraged to take a rest break of 10 minutes in every hour of operation.
(b) (i) 60 percent (ii) 40 percent
(c) Performance standards which currently apply in the areas of word processing and communication are geared to the minimal qualifying requirements for word processing and communications operators. These standards are:
40 words per minute for communications operators;
40 words per minute. for word processing operators.
These rates of throughput vary with the difficulty of a given task. For this reason performance measurement is task oriented in the word processing environment and geared to the volume of message traffic in the communications environment.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 4426)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) in respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and Other Screen Based Equipment', (b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties and (c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The recommendations contained in Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 of 23 October 1981 have been

564 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

brought to the attention of all staff who are mainly or totally employed in operating visual display units and screened based equipment, and the supervisors concerned are also required to ensure that regular rest breaks are taken as recommended.
(b) and (c) No standards are prescribed for either the percentage of time spent on operating duties or the number of keystrokes to be completed.
Duty Free Import of Rolls Royce Motor Vehicles
(Question No, 4429)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) How many Rolls Royce saloons have been admitted into Australia, on a duty free basis, under passenger concessions available to non-diplomatic personnel, in each of the years from 1977-78 to 1981-82.
(2) Who were the owners of these vehicles.
(3) Were they 'first time immigrants'.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Motor vehicles imported into Australia by persons coming to take up permanent residence are not recorded by manufacturer's name, therefore it is not administratively practicable to ascertain the number of Rolls Royce motor vehicles imported under the above concession.
(2) See answer to Question (I).
(3) See answer to Question (I).
Thai-Lao Border Region: Chemical Weapons
(Question No. 4475)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
(I) With reference to his statement that samples of vegetable matter said to have been contaminated by chemical weapons attack have been obtained by our embassy in Bangkok from the Thai-Lao border region (Hansard, 21 April 1982, page 1633), (a) by what means did the Australian Embassy obtain the samples, (b) from whom or from what organisation was the material obtained, (c) with which officer in the embassy was the contact made and (d) does Australia have personnel in the Thai-Lao border area whose activities are likely to attract the donation of such material.
(2) With reference to his further statement that Australian experts currently in Bangkok have examined a rocket grenade which is said to be a chemical weapon, (a) by what means did Australia come into possession of the rocket grenade, (b) from whom or what organisation was the rocket obtained, (c) who are the Australian experts currently in Bangkok who examined the rocket grenade, (d) to which Australian authority are they attached and (e) what is the reason for their visit to Thailand.
(3) Are visits being made to other countries by the same or similar experts and have the visits been made under ministerial approval, if so, by which Minister.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) to (c) Following advice from the United States Embassy in Bangkok that samples of material reputedly the subject of chemical warfare attack had been brought from Laos to the Ban Vinai refugee camp in Thailand and would be made available for analysis, a First Secretary of the Australian Embassy in Bangkok travelled to Ban Vinai. The samples were handed to him by a leader of the refugees from Laos who live in the camp. At the same time, the latter informed the

Australian Embassy officer that the samples had been recently brought across the Thai-Laotian border to the camp by refugees from Laos.
(d) No. See (a)-(c) above.
(2) (a)-(b) An Australian citizen engaged in humanitarian work amongst Indochinese refugees in Thailand and an Australian news media organisation made the rocket grenade available to the government for examination through the Australian embassy in Bangkok.
(c)-(e) The rocket grenade was examined in Bangkok by two scientists of the Defence Science and Technology Organisation of the Department of Defence who were sent to Thailand specifically for that purpose.
(3) At present no visits to other countries are contemplated. The previous visits were made under approval of the Minister for Defence at my request.
Customs (Endangered Species) Regulations
(Question No. 4479)
Mr West asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
(I) How many convictions have there been for violations of the Customs (Endangered Species) Regulations since 1976.
(2) What fines and/or prison sentences have been imposed resulting from these convictions.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Two.
(2) Fines imposed of two hundred dollars and fifty dollars.
Department of Administrative Services: Costs of Special Meeting of the Liberal Party
(Question No, 4537)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
What were the total costs incurred by his Department in respect of (a) travel and (b) all other expenditure, including travel allowances, associated with the recent special meeting of the Liberal Party to elect a leader and deputy leader.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) As the honourable member would be aware, in accordance with Clause 1.1 of Remuneration Tribunal Determination 1981/13 and Clause 16 of Determination 1981/12, Senators and Members are entitled to travel to Canberra at official expense, and to be paid travelling allowance for an overnight stay in Canberra which is occasioned by their attendance at a meeting of their parliamentary political party.
Some members of the Parliamentary Liberal Party were overseas at the time and their return to Australia did not involve any additional official expenditure. However, the Minister for Social Security and the President of the Senate resumed their itineraries overseas at official expense.
I am not prepared to authorise the considerable expenditure of time and money which would be required to separate out the costs requested by the honourable member. Payment of travelling allowance within Australia is a matter for the Parliamentary Departments.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 565

Funding of Organisations in Grayndler: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 4549)
Mr Leo MeLeay asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) What organisations in the Electoral Division of Grayndler receive funding from the Minister's Department.
(2) What are the addresses of these organisations.
(3) What is the amount and type of funding for each organisation.
Mr N. A. Brown-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) There are no organisations located directly in the Electoral Division of Grayndler which receive funding from my Department. However, the Marrickville Legal Service which receives funding from the Department is located on the boundary between the Divisions of Grayndler and Sydney and provides services for persons in both these Divisions.
(2) The Marrickville Legal Service is situated at 407 Marrickville Road, Dulwich Hill.
(3) $25,000 was provided as a grant to this organisation in 1981-82. The Service has applied for a further grant in 1982-83.
Funding of Organisations in Grayndler: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 4555)
Mr Leo MeLeay asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) What organisations in the Electoral Division of Grayndler receive funding from the Minister's Department.
(2) What are the addresses of these organisations.
(3) What is the amount and type of funding for each organisation.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Benelong's Haven, 321 Livingstone Road, Marrickville 2204. Marella Aboriginal Project, 10 Harney Street, Marrickville 2204.
(3) Benelong's Haven: In 1981-82 $192,332 was provided under the Health function for alcoholic rehabilitation programs at Marrickville and Kinchela (Kempsey). Marella: In 1981-82 $16,986 was provided under the social support function for assistance in the provision of home care for Aboriginal children at risk.
Funding of Organisations in Grayndler: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 4556)
Mr Leo MeLeay asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) What organisations in the Electoral Division of Grayndler receive funding from the Minister's Department.
(2) What are the addresses of these organisations.
(3) What is the amount and type of funding for each organisation.

Mr MeVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) (a) Wentworth Bookshops, 26 Harriett Street, Marrickville, N.S.W. 2204. (b) Greek Cultural Association of Sydney, 142-144 Addison Road, Marrickville, N.S.W. 2204. (c) Koledari, P.O. Box 105, Summer Hill, N.S.W. 2130. (d) Hrvatska Folklorna Grupa (Velebit), Croatian Club, 265 Illawarra Road, Marrickville, N.S.W. 2204. (e) Greek Cultural Association, 142 Addison Road, Marrickville N.S.W. 2204. (f) Australian-Turkish Music Society, 39/142 Addison Road, Marrickville. N.S.W. 2204. (g) Sidetrack Theatre, 9/142 Addison Road, Marrickville, N.S.W. 2204. (h) Sidetrack Theatre, Mr Don Mamouney, 9/142 Addison Road, Marrickville, N.S.W. 2204. (i) Sidetrack Theatre, Mr Don Mamouney, 9/142 Addison Road, Marrickville, N.S.W. 2204. (j) One Extra Dance Theatre, 34 Cecil Street, Ashfield, N.S.W. 2131. (k) One Extra Dance Theatre, 34 Cecil Street, Ashfield, N.S.W. 2131.
(3) (a) $912Young Street Poets, Editor Director-- Vivian Smith. (b) $2,500Towards artists fees at three festivals to be held at Addison Road Community Centre, October 1981-April 1982. (c) $500-Towards tutors fees for instrumental classes 1982. (d) $1,000-Towards tutors fees for music and dance 1982. (e) $2,500-Towards tutors fees for workshops January-December 1982. (f) $1,800--Towards tutors fees for folk dance and music program 1982. (g) $10,000-Towards costs of multi-cultural theatre group, January-December 1982. (h) $21,000-General grant towards 1982 activities. (i) $1 ,OOO-Challenge grant for 1982 activities. (j) $498-Towards return economy airfare and living allowance for choreographer, G. Lester. (k) $360-- Towards return economy airfare and living allowance for dancer, I. Shanahan.
Pesticides
(Question No. 4565)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to articles in the Age of 3 May 1982, page 4, entitled 'After Spraying, a Shroud of Secrecy' and 'State Study Being Planned'.
(2) Has he ordered any investigation of claims made in those articles which relate to primary industry matters; if not, will he do so; if not, why not.
(3) What was his Department's role in the arrangements that existed at that time for the registration of pesticides.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (i) No. (ii) No.
(iii) In regard to the article 'After Spraying, a Shroud of Secrecy', Telodrin (isobenzan) has not been registered or available for use in Australia since 1963. An extensive investigation of the incident referred to was conducted by the relevant Victorian authorities commencing in April 1963 when the situation came to notice. The investigation is reported in the 'Forty-second Report of the Commission of Public Health for Victoria for the Year Ended 30th June, 1964' and in the 'Report of the Committee of Enquiry Appointed by The Honourable The Premier of Victoria to Enquire Into the Effects of Pesticides-Melbourne, February, 1966' (pages 68 and 69).
With respect to the article 'State Study Being Planned', there is a proposal for an epidemiological study in Victoria as a means of further studying whether users of 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T are subject to any significant variation in health

566 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

paremeters when compared to an unexposed group of people, Data obtained would be useful in overall evaluation of epidemiological studies conducted overseas which have not produced clear evidence of any relationship between the use of these herbicides and health defects among users,
(3) At the time of the use of Telodrin and first use of 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T in Victoria the Commonwealth Department of Primary Industry had no direct role in respect to pesticides registration,
Aboriginal Legal Services
(Question No. 4580)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) Further to the Minister's press release of I December 1981 concerning the restructuring of Aboriginal legal services in Queensland (a) what funds have been, or will be, made available for community-based Aboriginal legal services in that State, (b) what progress has been made on the restructuring of legal services to date, (c) what interim arrangements have been made to ensure the continuance of Aboriginal legal services in Queensland, (d) what arrangements exist for monitoring interim legal services to ensure that they are providing the services required, (e) will the Minister make available to Members and Senators, on request, the report of Mr J, p, Harkins mentioned in that press release; if not, why not, (f) what officers of the Minister's Department are responsible for assisting Aboriginal communities to develop their own legal services and (g) can the Minister provide more detailed information than was contained in his press release about which Aboriginal communities will be responsible for the development of their legal services and how the Minister expects those services to operate; if not, why not.
(2) Furthertothe Press Releaseof9 December 1981 on the same subject, (a) how many solicitors formerly retained by the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Legal Service are still providing legal services under the short term arrangements and (b) what has been the cost of these short term arrangements to the date of preparation of the answer to this question,
Mr Wilson~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) $684,721 from I February to 30 June 1982,
(b) Seven new Aboriginal legal aid services have been established in NAC areas: QEA (Brisbane), QEB (Roma), QC (Rockhampton), QED (Townsville), QEE (Mt Isa), QEF (Cairns), QEG/H/I (Cape York Peninsula, Torres Strait),
In QEF the new legal service has applied for incorporation and in the interim functions through trustees, Organisations in QEA, QEB, QC, QED and QEE commenced operations on I February, In QEF the Trustees commenced operations on I May, In QEG, H and I the organisation though already incorporated will of its own choice commence operations on I July and in the meantime accepts service from its neighbouring organisation in QEF,
(c) and (d) Interim arrangements for providing legal aid to Aboriginals were made with legal aid authorities in Queensland and grants-in-aid were given to private firms of solicitors to provide legal services, These arrangements ceased in QEA, QEB, QC, QED, QEE on 31 January and in the remaining areas on 30 April.
(e) Yes,
(f) Assistance in developing legal services is provided by the region's eight Area Officers and their field staff and selected Regional Office staff with functional responsibilities in the legal aid field,

(g) The Rules of each of the new legal aid organisations provide for the division of its area of operations into sub-areas and for each sub-area to provide a resident of that sub-area to be on the governing committee, Governing committees range in size from nine to twenty-two members, This arrangement is to provide the broadest possible community representation on the governing committee from communities or groups of communities throughout the State, By the rules of the organisations, meetings of the full governing committees take place at least once a quarter. Sub-committees of the governing committees handle the day to day operations,
(2) (a) None, (b) $235,493,
Development of International Sporting Facilities
(Question No. 4585)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister in his policy statement on 30 September 1980 promise, that over the next three years the Government would provide $25m on a dollar for dollar basis with the States and Territories, for the further development of international sporting facilities,
(2) If so, what facilities have been identified in each State and Territory for funding in fulfilment of his promise,
(3) What was the appropriation and spending in each case in (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82,
Mr McVeigh~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes,
(2) The following faciities have been identified for funding under the International Standard Sports Facilities Program:
New South Wales-Construction of the Homebush Bay Indoor Sports Centre (Commonwealth share, $8,000,000),
Victoria-Improvements to the State Hockey Centre, Werribee Park (Commonwealth share, $750,000),
Improvements to the State Equestrian Centre, Royal Park (Commonwealth share, $750,000),
Improvements to the Olympic Park No, I Ground, Melbourne (Commonwealth share, $2,050,000),
Queensland-Improvements to the Belmont Rifle Range, Brisbane (Commonwealth share, $260,000),
Lighting at the Chandler Velodrome, Brisbane (Commonwealth share, $207,500),
Improvements to the Queen Elizabeth II Jubilee Sports Centre, Brisbane (Commonwealth share, $330,000),
South Australia-Construction of the State Aquatic Centre, Adelaide (Commonwealth share, $3,750,000),
Western Australia-Construction of a baseball park at Belmont (Commonwealth share, $480,000),
Northern Territory--Construction of an Indoor Sports Centre, Darwin (Commonwealth share, $1,500,000),
In the case of Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory discussions are proceeding to determine suitable projects, while with respect to Western Australia it is expected that additional projects will be identified in the near future,
The Government is also committed to providing a sum of $3m under the International Standard Sports Facilities Program to establish an international standard motor racing circuit in Victoria, subject to the outcome of a feasibility study and Victorian Government acceptance of this project.
(3) (a) 1980-81: Appropriation $1,000,000; Expenditure $386,852,

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 567

(b) 1981-82: Appropriation $6,613,000.
Final expenditure figures for 1981-82 will not be available until the end of this financial year. However, because of delays in commencing or completing several projects, claims for expenditure are not expected to exceed $3.5m at 30 June 1982.
Telephone Interpreter Service
(Question No. 4589)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister, in his policy statement of 30 September 1980, promise that the Telephone Interpreter Service was to be expanded, especially in remote areas like the Pilbara, the Riverina and Mount Isa.
(2) If so, to which new areas has this service been extended since 30 September 1980.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The question of extending the Telephone Interpreter Service (TIS) to remote areas like the Pilbara, Riverina and Mount Isa was raised in the policy statement of 30 September 1980. For some years, automatic telephone diverters have been used with success to extend the Telephone Interpreter Service to remote localities. Now that the INWATS system is available within the Telecom network, the Department oflmmigration and Ethnic Affairs is examining with Telecom the possibility of using the INWATS system to extend TIS not only to the above centres but to Australia generally.INWATS would allow calls to be made from any location in Australia to a TIS centre or centres for the cost to the caller of a local telephone call.
(2) No extension of the service has taken place using automatic telephone diverters since 30 September 1980 because the better technology provided by the INWATS system will probably replace the existing diverters and any others which may have been contemplated in the short term. In the meantime, callers in localities not presently served by a TIS centre or an automatic telephone diverter make use of the nearest TIS centre on a reverse charge call basis.
Australian Volunteers Abroad
(Question No. 4611)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister in his policy statement on 30 September 1980, promise additional support for the program of the Australian Volunteers Abroad?
(2) If so, what has been the Commonwealth's spending on the program in each year since 1975-76, in both current prices and 1974-75 prices?
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2)-

Current prices

Inconstant 1974-75 prices

1975-76
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79
1979-80 1980-81
1981-82

$
200,000
200,000 220,000 290,000
300,000 330,000 420,000 (estimated)

$ 173,391
156,186 159,665 194,618
181,800 181,965 209,054 (estimated)

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme
(Question No. 4625)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Which Federal Government set up the inquiry into transport to and from Tasmania.
(2) Did that Government commit itself to abide by the findings of the inquiry.
(3) Did the Freight Equalisation Scheme arise out of the inquiry.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Labor Government established the Nimmo Commission of Inquiry into transport to and from Tasmania on 10 April 1974.
(2) I am not aware of any such commitment by that Government.
(3) The Liberal-Country Party Government introduced the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES) on I July 1976 based on recommendations of the inquiry. However it decided to introduce full freight cost equalisation rather than partial freight cost equalisation recommended by the inquiry.
Assessments of Ointments Developed in the Soviet Union
(Question No. 4631)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
What assessments have been recognised by Australia of the efficacy, safety and composition ofOmain (colchamine) ointment for skin cancer, Oxolin and Florenal for herpes zoster, herpes simplex and eye viruses developed at the Oncological Centre of the Soviet Union.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No data have been provided to my Department to make an assessment of the efficacy, safety and composition of Omain, Oxolin and Florenal. Consequently, the products have not been approved for marketing in Australia.
Funding for Immigrant and Ethnic Services
(Question No. 4632)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
Has his attention been drawn to the decision of the Federation of Ethnic Communities Councils made at their national conference in Melbourne relating to funding for immigrant and ethnic services and calling for specific allocations in the

568 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

1982-83 Budget; if so, what is his attitude to the Federation's decision in view of the criticisms of the Government.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I understand that the resolutions arising out of the Executive Meeting on 23 April 1982 of the Federation of Ethnic Communities' Councils of Australia have not yet been released.
Funding levels for Departmental welfare and other programs are currently being considered in the context of the Government's overall budgetary processes and strategIes. The Federation's known views on the needs of ethnic communities were taken into account in the formulation of the Department's draft estimates for 1982/83.
The report of the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs on its evaluation of the implementation of the Galbally report's recommendations will also be an importa~t consideration in determining post-arrival programs for mIgrants and ethnic communities and related funding.
Consultants' Reports on River Murray
(Question No. 4638)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
Further to his answer to Question No. 3301 (Hansard, 17 November 1981, page 2950), (a) how many consultants' reports on matters relating to the River Murray and its tributaries have been commissioned since 1965 by State or Federal authorities other than the River Murray Commission, (b) what was the nature of the work undertaken by each consultant, (c) what was the authority or groups of authorities or governments which commissioned each report, (d) when was each of the reports (i) commissioned and (ii) completed, (e) which firm was engaged on each of the studies, (f) what was the consultant's fee for each report, (g) why was the consultant engaged in each instance, (h) if tenders were called, was the lowest tender engaged in each case; if not, why not and (j) was the report made public in each case.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) Only one such report has been commissioned by the Commonwealth jointly with the three States concerned. Consultants' reports commissioned by the States have not been made available to the Commonwealth.
(b) The study dealt with Murray Valley salinity and drainage problems, with the development o~ a co-?rdinated plan of action to deal with urgent problems as Its major obJectIve.
(c) Commonwealth, New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia.
(d) (i) 3 March 1978, (ii) 28 September 1979
(e) Maunsell and Partners Pty Ltd
(f) $223,044.60, including printing costs
(g) The consultants engaged for this study have had a long experience in matters related to Murray Valley salinity problems.
(h) Tenders were not called; the selection was made from invited proposals. The consultants engaged submitted the lowest cost estimate.
(j) Yes.

Employment of Refugees
(Question No. 4657)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
Can he provide information as to (a) the level of employment among and (b) the employment entered into by refugees who have arrived in Australia in the last six months.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) No. The Australian Bureau of Statistics does not keep separate statistics on the level of employment among refugees who have arrived in the last six months.
(b) Similarly, information is not available on the categmies of employment entered into by refugees, but a hIgh proportIOn accept initially jobs at low levels when entering the workforce while they improve their English and obtain acceptance of their employment qualifications.
Air Services to Yugoslavia
(Question No. 4674)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Has Qantas Airways Ltd been granted a second flight to Yugoslavia each week.
(2) Has Yugoslav Airlines (JAT) applied for a third weekly flight to Australia, operating through Perth, to servIce the large Yugoslav community in Western Australia.
(3) If so, what stage has been reached in the negotiations concerning this application.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Qantas has operated two services per week to Belgrade since the end of March 1982.
(2) No.
(3)Not applicable.
Review of Australia's Demographic Trends
(Question No. 4679)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the Review .of Australia's Demographic Trends, 1982, presented to Parhament on 4 May 1982, by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and, in particular, the fact that the proportion of settler arrivals in the family reunion category has fallen from 26.2 per cent in 1977 to 17.6 per cent and arrivals in other categories have risen from 54,000 in 1977 to 91,600 in 1981.
(2) Given that settlers in the other categories are likely to require a higher proportion of separate accommodation than family reunion settlers will he explain why the Government has reduced Federal outlays on public housing and held down home building activity in the private sector.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) There is little data available on the accommodation occupied by settlers in the short term after their arrival, however

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 569

it is likely that the honourable member's implication that settlers in other categories require a higher proportion of separate accommodation than family reunion settlers is correct. In this context it should be kept in mind that the housing requirements of new settlers account for a minority of the total addition to housing demand in each year, the remainder being a result of new household formation by existing Australian residents. On the subject of the Government's actions in regard to the housing industry and public housing, the Government has not acted to hold down building activity in the private sector. The Government's housing package, announced by the Treasurer on 18 March, contains measures to increase the availability of finance to home buyers, and also provides a range of other measures to make home purchase easier for first home buyers. The effect of this package should be to reduce present constraints on home building activity in the private sector, and there is already some evidence that such an effect has been achieved. In the area of public housing, the Government remains committed to providing housing assistance for those most in need. Under the present Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement the Commonwealth has undertaken to provide the States with a guaranteed minimum level of funding for welfare housing of $200m for each of the five years of the Agreement. Additional funding will also be provided to the States each year to the extent that it can be afforded in the context of the'Budget. In the current financial year, a total of$62.2m was provided in this way. The Commonwealth's total budget outlays for housing and accommodation purposes have increased from $554.7m in 1980-81 to $723.2m in 1981-82. Commonwealth funds are not the only source of finance for public sector housing, and decisions on funding levels are taken with due regard to what other funds are available to the States. In recent years the States have received increased general revenue moneys from the Commonwealth, which they can also direct to welfare housing where they recognise housing as an area of priority.
Cancellation of Airline Services to Canberra
(Question No. 3506)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) What scheduled flights have been cancelled by Trans Australia Airlines and Ansett Airlines of Australia on the:
(a) Sydney-Canberra-Sydneyand
(b) Melbourne-Canberra-Melbourne route for the period I August 1981 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question
(2) What were the reasons given by the respective airlines for the cancellation of the flights.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) The two airlines have provided the following information in regard to cancellations of scheduled flights.
(a) Sydney-Canberra-Sydney
Flights cancelled
Reason for cancellation

Flights cancelled

Reason for cancellation

28-Day period ending

Flights scheduled

Low load factor

Other

November 28 December 25 January 29 February 26 March 26
MonthAugust '81 September October November December January '82 February March

Ansett
320
292
330 264 264
TAA
405 400 401 353 365 360 328 303

o

7

7

7

23

2

2

I

12

4

26

107

53

14

'42

12

34

6

56

10

63

12

61

5

21

15

(b) Melbourne-Canberra-Melbourne

Flights cancelled

Reason for cancellation

28-Day period ending

Flights scheduled

Low load factor

Other

August 28 October 2 October 30 November 28 December 25 January 29 February 26 March 26
MonthAugust '81 September October November December January '82 February March

Anselt
220 275 214 208 188 210 200 188
TAA
252 250 253 231 242 238 216 223

3

4

16

10

24

o

4

4

12

2

5

2

2

o

12

o

9

74

16

3

28

6

10

2

24

2

18

7

25

o

14

7

In providing this information, TAA indicated that an industrial dispute resulted in the high level of cancellations it
recorded in August 1981.

28-Day period ending
August 28 October 2 October 30

Flights scheduled
Ansett 352 440 336

Low load factor
4 50 26

Other
7 24 4

Ministerial Stationery Requirements: Minister for the Capital Territory
(Question No. 3806)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:

570 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

What are the details, including: (a) quantities, and
(b) costs, of ministerial stationery requirements for their ministerial offices since the 1980 general elections.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Description

Unit Quantity Value

Envelopes-

White, DL, Ministerial

Box

White, C6, Ministerial

Box

Minister for Capital Territory

and Minister Assisting Min-

ister for Industry and Com-

merce, DL

Box

Minister Assisting, Minister for

Industry and Commerce,

220x II0mm

Box

Minister Assisting the Minister

for Industry and Commerce,

B4

Box

Minister's Hobart Office, DL

Box

Minister's Hobart Office, B5

Box

Minister's Hobart Office, C4

Box

Brown, B4, Ministerial

Box

Brown, Kraft, C4, Ministerial Box

Paper Letterhead-

A4, Minister for Capital Terri-

tory, Manifold/Bank

Ream

A4, Minister Assisting the Min-

ister for Industry and Com-

merce, Bond

Ream

A4, Minister for Capital Terri-

tory, Minister Assisting the

Minister for Industry and

Commerce, Bond

Ream

$ 21 1195.98
5 172.00
2 96.76
2 96.76
4 96.76 20 967.60 2 48.38 4 145.14 12 350.04 6 140.04
20 184.00
8 236.00
8 236.00

Description

Unit Quantity Value

A4, Minister for Capital Terri-

tory, Superfine/Bond

Ream

Compliments Slips, Minister

for Capital Territory

Ream

Miscellaneous-

Pad, Minute, Minister for

Capital Territory

Pad

DS 1/1 Schedule of

Correspondence-Minister Pad

Business Cards . . . . . Pkt

Invitations for Pakistani dinner

Business Cards

Business Cards

$ 70 1417.00 14 482.02

50 92.00

16 1
2500 600

30.08 120.00
38.08 195.00
125.00

Total

6464.64

The information provided above relates only to new stock purchased since the 1980 general elections. It does not include stock already held and put into use since that date.
Department of Transport: Airworthiness Surveillance Staff
(Question No. 3846)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
How many (a) airworthiness surveillance staff and (b) licensing staff were employed by his Department in each of the years 1971 to 1981.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The totals of airworthiness surveyor staff employed by my Department in the years 1971 to 1981 are shown in the table below, which also shows numbers at the various classification levels.

Airworthiness S.urveyor Sectional Airworthiness Surveyor Senior Airworthiness Surveyor Supervising Airworthiness Surveyors Chief Airworthiness Surveyor
Total

1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

83 80 82 83 78 71 69 76 74 69 75

48 49 52 50 49 51 48 49 45 51 47

14 13 12 12 12 12 12 11 12 11 12

4

4

5

5

6

5

6

5

5

5

5

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

150 147 152 151 146 140 136 142 137 137 140

A total of 23 surveyors are involved on surveillance.
A total of eighteen full time and three part time surveyors are employed on licensing. In Regions, all base-grade surveyors and about half the sectional surveyors have involvement with licensing such as marking papers or conducting oral exams or interviews.
About 30 per cent of airworthiness surveyor's total duties involve licensing and surveillance tasks.
Apprenticeships
(Question No. 3853)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:

(1) How many tradesmen in the (a) building and (b) metal trades industries are (i) currently employed in each State and (ii) were employed in each year since 1976.
(2) What was the intake of (a) indentured and (b) trainee apprentices in each of these industries in each year since 1976.
(3) How many apprentices were admitted to each of these trades in each Commonwealth department in each year since 1976.
(4) Is there now a uniformity in examination standards in these trades throughout the Commonwealth.
(5) What secondary education qualifications are required to be admitted as an apprentice to these trades.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 571

(I) It is not possible to provide the information sought as available statistics merge trades occupational data with nontrades data relating to production-process workers and others.
(2) Apprenticeship statistics are based on a compilation of

information about apprentices from administrative records of the State and Territory apprenticeship authorities and Com-
monwealth Departments and Instrumentalities. Data on new apprentices, which are only available by trade groups are as follows:

New Apprentices in Building and Metal Trades Groups: (a)

Building

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

New South Wales (b) (c) Victoria (b) Queensland (b)
South Australia (b)
Western Australia (b) Tasmania (b) Metal-
New South Wales (b) (c)
Victoria (b)
Queensland (b) South Australia (b)
Western Australia (b) Tasmania (b)

1,026 1,016 2,150 1,145
570 693 391
5,197 186
3,392 2,133 1,332 1,844
464

988 971 2,467 1,312 750 472 481
5,175 230
3,780 2,118 1,580
936 450

1,486 1,764 2,657 1,168
421 954 394
6,062 414
4,308 1,801 1,275 1,863
473

1,493 1,576 1,936 1,020
259 617 350
6,462 336
4,081 2,162 1,164 1,772
422

1,944 1,511 2,124 1,385
296 612 340
6,938 274
4,477 2,466 1,323 1,753
479

2,970 1,807 1,861 1,843
411 670 365
7,080 309
3,990 3,012 1,433 2,185
451

(a) Occupations comprising these trade groupings are outlined in the publication 'Essential Features of Australian Apprenticeship Systems,' compiled by the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs, and published by the Australian Government Publishing Service.
(b) Indentured Apprentices. (c) Trainee Apprentices. (3) The Public Service Board figures are:
Apprentice Intakes by Department 1976-1981

Department

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

Building TradesCapital Territory Health Commission
Defence Housing and Construction
Industry and Commerce Transport Metal Trades (a)-
Administrative Services Capital Territory Health Commission
Defence Housing and Construction Industry and Commerce
Transport Mint

I

I

2

2

13

13

13

16

12

24

51

34

53

52

74

65

2

12

8

10

14

2

3

I

I

86

96

94

119

94

156

14

18

13

20

28

18

108

142

155

128

150

188

I

3

2

2

3

4

(a) Excludes motor mechanics.
(4) While the levels of tests are similar from State to State, they are not uniform.
(5) Information on admission requirements to trade courses is shown at page 17 of the publication 'Essential Features of Australian Apprenticeship Systems'. The States and Territories are currently reviewing this information for inclusion in the next edition of the publication due to be released in June 1982.
TownsYille International Airport, Queensland
(Question No. 3978)
Mr John Brown asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 18 February 1982:

(I) How many (a) departures and (b) arrivals have been handled by the Townsville International Airport, Queensland, each week since it came into operation.
(2) What was the cost of (a) building and (b) provision of plant, equipment, furnishing, et cetera for the Townsville International Airport.
(3) What have been the specific details of maintenance costs, including salaries, in each year since the building of the Airport.
(4) What company or corporation is responsible for the operation of facilities at the international terminal.
(5) Is the international terminal air conditioned; if so, for how many hours each week is the air conditioning operative.

572 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(6) Which international carriers make use of the Townsville International Airport.
(7) When was the Townsville national terminal built and at what cost.
(8) How many (a) flights and (b) passengers are handled at the domestic terminal each (i) day and (ii) week both (A) arriving and (B) departing, in respect of each airline.
(9) What facilities are available at the domestic terminal for passengers travelling within Australia.
(10) Are there any proposals to amalgamate the Townsville national and international terminals; if so, what are the details.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Weekly figures for international passenger arrivals and departures at Townsville Airport are not readily available. Monthly figures for the period from the opening of the International Terminal in February 198.1 to December 1981 are given in the following table:

Arrivals Departures

February
March April May June July August
September October November December

118

168

409

439

603

545

728

544

652

512

524

436

588

538

353

311

614

339

386

284

426

421

(2) The total cost of the internatinal terminal building, associated plant, equipment, apron extension work and engineering services was $5.58m.
(3) Figures from the beginning of construction of the airport have little meaning, however, in the period from the completion of construction of the new international terminal building to 16 December 1981, the cost of maintenance of those facilities has been $22,000.
(4) The Department of Aviation operates the terminal.
(5) Yes. The air conditioning operates for about thirty hours each week at various operating levels.
(6) Qantas is the sole international carrier using Townsville Airport.
(7) The existing domestic terminal building was built in 1947. The book value at present, including extension and improvements, is $114,000.
(8) There are not figures readily available which would accurately answer this question. However, the following figures are for a typical week at Townsville Airport:

Airline

Arrivals Departures

Ansett TAA
Ansett TAA

Aircraft movements 51 71
Passenger movements 3,953 2,874

51 71
3,742 3,234

(9) Facilities available to passengers in the domestic terminal at Townsville include normal terminal facilities and a kiosk, cocktail bar and rental car facilities.

(10) A preliminary examination is being made of the feasibility of amalgamating the domestic and international terminals into the one building. The Government has, however, not given any commitment to this project.
National Acoustics Laboratory, Western Australia
(Question No. 3984)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 18 February 1982:
Is it a fact that pensioners must wait in excess of nine months for appointments at the National Acoustics Laboratory in Western Australia; if so, (a) what are the reasons for the excessive delay and (b) what steps are being taken to rectify the situation.
Mr CarIton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Until recently the waiting time has been approximately nine months: (a) Shortages during 1981 of qualified audiologists led to the delays. (b) Recruitment of three audiologists has recently been completed and they are now working in Perth. Waiting times are being reduced.
Ministerial Transport Costs
(Question No. 3991)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 23 February 1982:
What were the transport costs and travelling expenses for (a) the Minister for Primary Industry when he attended a cattle auction at the Prime Minister's property 'Nareen' on Wednesday, 10 February 1982 and (b) the Deputy Prime Minister when he attended the 'Haddon Rig' Field Day on Sunday, 7 February 1982.
Mr Newman-Following consultation with the Ministers concerned, I can indicate that the answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The Minister for Primary Industry travelled to 'Nareen' on official duty from Melbourne on 10 February by charter aircraft. Total costs involved were $700.
(b) The Deputy Prime Minister travelled by RAAF Special Purpose Aircraft from Coolangatta to 'Haddon Rig' on 7 February to officially open the Centenary Field Day and then to Sydney for an official engagement. The cost attributed to the diversion to 'Haddon Rig' was $910.
Townsville International Airport Terminal
(Question No. 4036)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 24 February 1982:
(I) What rent is charged Qantas Airways Ltd per annum for use of the Townsville International Airport terminal.
(2) Are (a) any commuter airline companies operating without hangar space or terminal facilities and (b) any domestic airline companies operating under extreme difficulties out of the domestic terminal at Townsville Airport.
(3) What is the total rental for space per annum in the domestic terminal.
(4) What are the (a) maintenance and (b) running costs per annum of the domestic terminal.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 573

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) $18,240 per annum.
(2) (a) No.
(b) Recognising the difficulties facing the airlines and the travelling public using the existing domestic terminal at Townsville, arrangements have been made to develop a proposal, for consideration in the Budget context, which would relieve the present unsatisfactory conditions.
(3) $24,660 per annum.
(4) Maintenance and running costs for financial year 1980-81 were $11,534 and $22,167 respectively.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act
(Question No. 4041)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 24 February 1982:
(I) Further to the answers to question Nos 2707 (Hansard, 9 September 1981, pages 1145-6) and 3461 (Hansard, 16 February 1982, pages 122-3) will he now state precisely when the Government will introduce amending legislation to the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act.
(2) Can he provide any additional information on what the new liability limits will be and what the current general levels applying internationally are.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Civil Aviatior. (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Bill 1982 was introduced into Parliament on 24 March 1982, and proposes increases to the liability limits applying for domestic and non-convention international carriage under Part IV of the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
(2) The Bill proposes new liability limits of $100,000 for death or injury to passengers, $900 for loss or damage to registered baggage and $90 for other than registered baggage.
With regard to the current general level applying internationally, I cannot add to the answer given to the honourable member by the former Minister for Transport in response to a similar question asked upon notice on 29 October 1981.
Public Telephones in Electoral Division of Sydney
(Question No. 4044)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 24 February 1982:
(I) How many public telephones are there in the electoral division of Sydney.
(2) How many new public telephone boxes have been installed in the last year in the division.
(3) How many public telephones in the division (a) have been repaired in the last year and (b) were in need of repair because of vandalism.
(4) What is the average time lapse between reporting of an out of order public telephone and its repair in the division.
(5) What is the staff strength within Telecom Australia for maintenance of public telephones in the division.

Mr N. A. Brown-Telecom has advised me that the answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 642.
(2) 90.
(3) Telecom records do not provide information on how many of the 642 public telephones in the district were repaired. However:
(a) 10,970 orders for the repair of the 642 public telephones in the division were processed in the last year.
(b) 5,239 of these orders were for public telephones in need of repair because of vandalism.
(4) Ninety-four per cent of out of order telephones are repaired within two days of being reported.
(5) 7.
Pensions: Percentage of Average Australian Earnings
(Question No. 4077)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 25 February 1982:
(I) What approximate percentage of average Australian earnings in (a) 1968-69, (b) 1974-75 and (c) 1980-81 was constituted by the maximum (i) social security benefits and (ii) supplementary assistance for (A) a single pensioner and (B) a pensioner couple, (iii) guardian's allowance and (iv) child allowance for (A) a lone parent and (B) a pensioner couple, including (I) allowances for children under the age of 6 years or invalided and (II) other dependent children, as at 31 December (aa) 1969, (bb) 1975 and (cc) 198\.
(2) What approximate percentage of average Australian earnings in (a) 1968-69, (b) 1974-75 and (c) 1980-81 was constituted by the (i) minimum pension rate for (A) a single pensioner over 70 years of age and (B) a pensioner couple with (I) one and (II) both pensioners over 70 years of age, (ii) maximum non-pension income for (A) a single pensioner and (B) a pensioner couple, at which tapered means test does not reduce pension in each case, (iii) minimum non-pension income at which no supplementary assistance is available for (A) a single pensioner and (B) a pensioner couple, paying one sixth of average Australian earnings in rent in each case, (iv) minimum (A) non-pension income at which fringe benefits cease for and (B) net taxable non-pension income at which income tax is payable by (I) a single pensioner and (II) a pensioner couple and (v) tax payable on a taxable income equal to half average Australian earnings as at 31 December (aa) 1969, (bb) 1975 and (ce) 198\.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The following table shows for the years 1968-69, 1974-75 and 1980-81, in money terms and as a percentage of average weekly earnings (AWE), the various social security payments specified by the honourable member. The rates shown are the average weekly rates for the respective years. Averages for these years have been used in lieu of rates at 31 December 1969, 1975 and 1981, as the latter cannot validly be related to AWE for the years 1968-69, 1974-75 and 1980-81 (which ended six months before).

574 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

1968-69

1974-75

\980-81

Payment

Percentage $p.w. of AWE

Percentage $p.w. of AWE

Percentage $p.w. of AWE

Standard rate'of pension Married rate of pension (a) Supplementary assistance Guardian's allowance (b) Guardian's allowance (c) Additional pension for each child

13.73

19.5

31.58

21.3

63.44

22.6

24.60

34.9

52.67

35.5

105.70

37.6

2.00

2.8

4.65

3.1

5.00

1.8

4.00

5.7

4.00

2.7

5.31

1.9

4.00

5.7

6.00

4.0

7.31

2.6

2.23

3.2

5.62

3.8

9.\3

3.2

(a) Combined rate for a pensioner couple. (b) Assuming no child under 6 or invalid. (c) Assuming one or more children under 6 or invalid.
(2) The following table shows for the years 1968 -69, 1974-75 and 1980-81, both in money terms and as a percentage of average weekly earnings (AWE), the data specified by the honourable member. The weekly figures shown are the average weekly rates for the respective years. Averages for these years have been used in lieu of data as at 31 December 1969, 1975 and 1981 as the latter cannot validly be compared with AWE for financial years 1968-69, 1974-75 and 1980-81 (which ended six months before).

1968-69

1974-75

1980-81

Payment

Percentage $p.w. of AWE

Percentage $p.w. of AWE

Percentage $p.w. of AWE

Minimum pension rate for a single person aged

70

O.OO(a)

0.0 6.92(b)

4.7

51.45

18.3

Minimum pension rate for a married person

aged 70

O.OO(a)

0.0 5.77(b)

3.9

42.90

15.3

Minimum pension rate for a married couple

both aged 70

O.OO(a)

0.0 11.54(b)

7.8

85.80

30.5

Free area (c)-

single pensioner

10.00

14.2

20.00

13.5

20.00

7.1

pensioner couple

17.00

24.1

34.50

23.3

34.50

12.3

Non-pension income at which eligibility for

supplementary assistance ceases-

single pensioner

3.00

4.3

5.00

3.4

6.00

2.1

pensioner couple

O.OO(d)

0.0

10.00

6.7

12.00

4.3

Income at which eligibility for fringe benefits

ceases (e)-

single pensioner

23.73(f)

33.7

33.00

22.3

40.00

14.2

pensioner couple

41.60(f)

59.1

57.50

38.8

68.00

24.2

Taxable non-pension income at which tax

commences for (j)-

a single pensioner

24.02(g)

34.1 13.79(h)

9.3 14.31(h)

5.1

a pensioner couple

42.02(g)

59.7 19.04(i)

12.8 36.79(i)

13.1

Tax payable on an income of one half of AWE

(k)

3.54

5.0

7.52

5.1

20.14

7.2

(a) There was no minimum age pension in 1968-69.
(b) The means test on age pensions was abolished for persons aged 70 to 74 with effect from I May 1975 (75 and over from 4 October 1973). The maximum rate of age pension thus became the minimum rate for 70-year-olds. This rate, in money terms and as a percentage of seasonally adjusted average weekly earnings in the June quarter 1975, was$36.00 a week for a single pensioner (23.3 per cent);
$30.00 a week for a married pensioner (19.4 per cent);
$60.00 a week combined for a pensioner couple (38.8 per cent).
As a result of this measure, the minimum age pension payable to 70-year-olds for 1974-75 as a whole was $360 (single), $300 (married) and $600 (pensioner couple)--each figure representing five fortnightly payments. Dividing these amounts by 52 gives weekly average rates for the year as a whole of, respectively, $6.92, $5.77 and $11.54.
(c) Amount of income not affecting the pension under the means or income test, as the case may be. For 1968-69 and 1974-75, when the means test applied rather than the present income test, the amounts shown are the free areas of 'means as assessed' divided by 52.
(d) Supplementary assistance was not payable to a pensioner couple in 1968-69. A married pensioner whose wife attracted 'wife's allowance' was entitled to supplementary assistance if the couple's income was below $3.00 a week (4.3 per cent of AWE for the year).
(e) Amount of non-pension income at which a single pensioner or pensioner couple lose entitlement to Pensioner Health Benefits (1980-81) or Pensioner Medical Service benefits (1968-69 and 1974-75). The method of calculation for 1968-69 and 1974-75 corresponds to that in footnote (c).

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 575

(f) All pensioners were entitled to Pensioner Medical Service benefits in 1968-69. Thus in effect the point where eligibility ceased was the sum of the 'free area' under the means test and the maximum rate of pension. The figures shown have been calculated by adding the weighted average weekly rate of pension for the year as a whole to the relevant 'free area' which applied
throughout the year. (g) Assuming pensioner is a resident of age pension age and thus entitled to the age allowance. This allowance had the effect
of ensuring that a single aged person did not pay tax unless his or her taxable income was $1,249 ($24.02 a week) or more. The
corresponding figure for a married aged person who derived all of the couple's non-pension income, and contributed to the maintenance of the spouse was $2,185 ($42.02 a week) or more. Age pensions were not subject to tax in 1968-69.
(h) Assumes pensioner of age pension age. (i) Assumes both partners of age pension age and that all non-pension income derived by one partner. (j) For 1974-75 and 1980-81, assumes no expenditure-related concessional deductions or concessional rebates, respectively
(assumption not relevant in 1968-69). (k) Assumes no concessional deductions or concessional rebates as the case may be.

Computerised Axial Tomography Scanner
(Question No. 4084)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 March 1982:
(I) Further to the answer to Question No. 3221 (Hansard, 17 November 1981, pages 2947-8), what was the cost in each State of the (a) provision of and (b) services involving the Computerised Axial Tomography (CAT) Scanner referred to in the question.
(2) Has the Minister's Department sought a role in approving the importation of CAT scanners into Australia, bearing in mind their cost and location.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) The only information available on the cost of CAT scanning equipment, additional to that supplied in answer to Question No. 3221 on 17 November 1981 (Hansard, pages 2947-8), relates to CAT scanners installed in Royal Canberra Hospital (Australian Capital Territory) and Darwin Hospital (Northern Territory).
Royal Canberra HospitalEMI 5005 Series 2 Body Scanner installed in 1977 at cost
of $0.5m. Updated in 1980 at additional cost of $123,000.
Darwin HospitalOhio Nuclear Head Scanner Series 190 installed in 1978
at cost of $297,762.
(b) The numbers and costs of CAT scanning services estimated in private practice in 1979/80 for each State and Australia are set out in the attached table.
(2) No.
INCIDENCE AND COST OF CAT SCANNING SERVICES

Item number

Number of

services

Cost

Item number
2968 2970
Total
2960 2962 2964 2966 2968 2970
Total
2960 2962 2964 2966 2968 2970
Total
2960 2962 2964 2966 2968 2970
Total

Number of services

Queensland

431 940
7,855

Cost
$ 74,607 202,280
1,169,536

72 2,641
59 436

3,208

South Australia

31 33 188 1,504 247 298

2,301

Western Australia

6,410 446,644
10,025 94,175
557,254
1,935 4,277 16,180 243,007 39,937 62,624
367,960

65 1,726
381 237
2,409

5,547 289,150
65,161 51,710
411,568

2960 2962 2964 2966 2968 2970
Total
2960 2962 2964 2966

New South Wales 95
1,603 1,952
6,022
716 1,241

11,629

Victoria

594 1,921
202 3,767

$
6,086 210,315 167,398 996,888 120,831 275,678
1,777,196
35,435 207,196
17,340 632,678

2960 2962 2964 2966 2968 2970
Total
2960 2962 2964 2966 2968

Tasmania
I 6 2 I
14
Undefined 6 13 2 25 6

65 339 95 1,150 380 243
2,272
466 2,603
177 4,936 1,385

576 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Item number

Number of

services

Cost

2970

$

12

3,388

Total

64

12,995

2960
2962
2964 2966
2968 2970

Australia

727 3,573 2,482 15,691 1,842 3,165

43,987 424,730 213,147 2,614,453 312,326 690,098

Total

27,480 4,298,741

Footnote: The number of services and cost relate to benefit claims processed during 1979-80 by registered medical benefits organizations and my Department's direct billing payment system. The figures are estimated, taking into account some services not included in basic statistics. The 'cost' relates to amounts indicated as being the fees charged.
Department of Transport: Compulsory Transfer Program
(Question No. 4204)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 17 March 1982:
(I) When may I expect an answer to Question No. 3526 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 29 October 1981.
(2) What are the reasons for the five month delay in answering this question.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The answer to Question No. 3526 was provided by Mr Hunt in his former capacity as Minister for Transport. It appeared in Hansard on 24 March 1982.
(2) The honourable member's question was one of a number of such questions he directed at various aspects of the 1981 82 Budget Estimates for the former Department of Transport. Provision of responses to these questions entailed a good deal of research effort at a time when Departmental resources were already extended in meeting ongoing responsibilities.
Department of Transport: Expenditure on Travel and Subsistence
(Question No. 4205)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 17 March 1982:
(I) When may I expect an answer to Question No. 3519 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 29 October 1981.
(2) What are the reasons for the five month delay in answering this question.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The answer to Question No. 3519 was provided by Mr Hunt in his former capacity as Minister for Transport. It appeared in Hansard on 21 April 1982.
(2) The honourable member's question was one of a number of such questions he directed at various aspects of the 1981--82 Budget Estimates for the former Department of

Transport. Provision of responses to these questions entailed a good deal of research effort at a time when Departmental resources were already extended in meeting ongoing responsibilities.
Cancellation of Airline Services to Canberra
(Question No. 4206)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 17 March 1982:
(I) When may I expect an answer to Question No. 3506 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 29 October 1981.
(2) What are the reasons for the five month delay in answering this question.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The answer to Question No. 3506 appears in this issue of Hansard.
(2) The delay in answering Question No. 3506 was largely due to the collection and compilation of the required information.
Photo Reconnaissance Aircraft
(Question No. 4250)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 23 March 1982:
Is it a fact that the Canberra aircraft of No.2 Squadron, Amberley, Qld, are to be phased out immediately; if so (a) what arrangements are being made to meet photo reconnaissance requirements after the Canberras are withdrawn from service, (b) when is it anticipated that aircraft to replace the Canberras as photo reconnaissance craft will be purchased and (c) what will the Department do with the Canberra aircraft.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Canberra aircraft from No.2 Squadron, Amberley, are to be withdrawn from service by 31 July 1982.
(a) The acquisition of medium size utility jet aircraft is planned as the replacement for the No.2 Squadron Canberra aircraft in the photo reconnaissance role.
(b) Current plans are for the new aircraft to be introduced into service in 1986.
(c) The Canberra aircraft will be stored at RAAF Base Amberley and disposed of as required.
Helipads: Gold Coast, Queensland
(Question No. 4266)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 24 March 1982:
(I) At what locations are heJipads currently available for use in the Gold Coast area, Queensland.
(2) Who are the (a) owners and (b) users of these helipad sites.
(3) Do all the helipad sites meet the requirements of the former Department of Transport regulations; if not, what is the specific nature of the deficiencies at each site.
(4) Which helipads have been inspected by departmental officers in the last six months.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 577

(I) and (2). The locations of principal heliports authorised for use in the Gold Coast area, together with owners and users, are as follows:
Carrara-
owner: privately owned users: operations conducted with specific approval of
owner
Coolangatta Airport-
owner: Commonwealth of Australia users: open to the public
Dreamworld-
owner: Dreamworld Ltd users: operations conducted with specific approval of
owner
Evandale-
owner: Gold Coast City Council users: open to public use, with prior approval of owner
Seaworld-
owner: Seaworld Enterprises users: restricted to Seaworld helicopters
Wave Station/Nobbys Beach-
owner: Queensland State Government users: restricted to Wales Rescue Helicopters
Operators on specific instruments of authorisation are permitted to operate to other locations within Coolangatta control zone provided that sites meet the physical characteristics and operational criteria for an authorised helipad.
(3) It is the responsibility of the operator to ensure that an authorised helipad meets the standards laid down by the Department. My Department is not aware of any deficiencies at these sites.
(4) Except for the initial establishment of the helipad, officers of my Department do not inspect the sites unless some significant activity draws their attention, or specific requests are made.
ARPAD Security Agency Pty Ltd
(Question No. 4269)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 March 1982:
(I) Have members of the Australian Defence Forces been authorised to undertake private employment with Assistance and Security Pty Ltd.
(2) Can he say whether this firm is linked with the ARPAD Security Agency Pty Ltd.
(3) Have defence personnel been given permission to engage in part time employment, based on their military skills, withARPAD.
(4) Can he say whether ARPAD is engaged in the sale of specialised military training techniques in world trouble centres.
(5) Have special training courses in para.military activities been arranged for Special Air Service personnel who are engaged in private employment and is leave granted for these activities.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) The only known common factor is the listing by the Western Australian Commissioner for Corporate Affairs in the Register of Directors, Managers and Secretaries of one person as a director in both companies.

(3) Some Defence personnel have been authorised to engage in part time employment as security guards with ARPAD Security Agency Pty Ltd provided such employment does not directly involve the use of information or special experience acquired in the course of their official duties.
(4) It is not appropriate for me to comment on the internal operations of a company. Nevertheless, I would note that no serving member of the Defence Force would be permitted to have any connection with such activities described in the honourable member's question. Authorisation for part time employment would be revoked if the association of a member with any firm would bring discredit on the Service.
(5) No.
Adelaide Airport: Noise Abatement Procedures
(Question No. 4276)
Mr Scott asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 24 March 1982:
(I) With reference to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works' final report relating to the upgrading of airport facilities for the introduction of domestic wide-body aircraft (2nd report of 1982), in particular, recommendations and conclusions Nos. I to 5 (pages 33 to 35), will he, as a matter of urgency, take steps to initiate a further parliamentary committee study into the subject of aircraft noise as recommended by the committee.
(2) Will he agree to an environmental impact statement in relation to extensions and development of Adelaide Airport, if not, why not.
(3) Will he direct his Department to pursue a more rigor. ous application of noise abatement procedures, especially in regard to the operation of light executive jets and the groundrunning of turbo.propellor aircraft within curfew hours; if not, why not.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Aircraft noise matters referred to in recommendations Nos. I and 5 of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works' final report relating to the Upgrading of Airport Facilities for the Introduction of Wide-Bodied Aircraft (Second Report of 1982) are to be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation.
(2) In relation to the current proposals for the introduction of wide body jet aircraft and the provision of facilities for the introduction of international services at Adelaide, the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment has agreed that while these works and the associated air services will have some environmental effect, at this stage an Environmental Impact Statement is not required to meet the object of the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act 1974. A draft Environmental Impact Statement and Provisional Master Plan covering the environmental and social consequences likely to be associated with the continued development and use of Adelaide Airport as the sole primary airport serving the Adelaide region will be released for public comment in July 1982.
The draft Environmental Impact Statement will address, among other issues, the effects of any significant increases in international air traffic at Adelaide Airport.
(3) Subject to safety considerations, noise abatement procedures are already being rigorously applied by my department on all operations at major airports, including those during curfew hours. In addition, strict limitations on the ground running of aircraft engines during curfew hours apply and

578 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

these are strictly monitored. Nevertheless, these aspects of aircraft noise will no doubt form part of the considerations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation.
Royal Australian Air Force Base, Learmonth, Western Australia
(Question No. 4281)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
What developments at the Royal Australian Airforce Base, Learmonth, Western Australia, have been delayed or abandoned as a result of recent decisions to reduce defence expenditure.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No developments at Royal Australian Air Force Base Learmonth have been delayed or abandoned as a result of recent expenditure decisions.
Air Freight Costs
(Question No. 4307)
Mr John Brown asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 20 April 1982:
(I) Have air freight costs increased by 41 per cent during the last 12 months;
(2) Are considerable delays occurring in handling of air freight at various airports; if so (a) are these delays caused by staff shortages and (b) are resultant costs then charged to customers in the form of storage costs;
(3) What is the specific situation regarding the matters raised in parts (I) and (2) at Eagle Farm Airport, Brisbane;
(4) What action does he and his Department intend to take to remedy this situation.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am not aware of the detail of changes in air freight costs over the period. As the honourable member may be aware air freight was removed from the ambit of the two airline policy as a result of passage of the Airlines Agreement Act 1981.
Freight rates have been deregulated since that time and are set in response to market forces.
(2) (3) and (4) In dealing with these parts of the question, it is assumed that the honourable member is inquiring into delay which may be due to staff shortages in the Department of Aviation.
I am advised that there are no delays occurring in the handling of freight that would be as a direct result of activities of the Department of Aviation. I further understand that there have been no significant delays in freight handling at Eagle Farm Airport during recent restrictions on operations which involved short delays to aircraft movements. These restrictions have now been lifted.
Computer Re-equipment Plans
(Question No. 4308)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 20 April 1982:
(I) What was the specific nature of the appropriate resources that were lacking in availability to mount and sustain

a planning capability for the development of computer reequipment plans referred to in paragraph 17.2 on page 142 of the report of the Auditor-General of March 1982.
(2) What action (a) has been taken and (b) is planned to overcome the lack of appropriate resources referred to by the Auditor-General.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Department's ability to mount and sustain an ADP planning capability was inhibited by a departmental and service wide shortage of computer systems officers with relevant expertise and experience.
(2) A position of Director, Planning was created in the ADP Branch and filled in Canberra, in early 1980. A new establishment for the Planning Section was approved in 1981 and action taken to recruit appropriately qualified and experienced staff in Canberra.
Recruitment of Computing Staff
(Question No. 4309)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 20 April 1982:
(1) What were the specific (a) competing demands for qualified computing staff and recruitment problems associated with the transfer of positions to Canberra and (b) major difficulties in maintaining an effective operation referred to by the Auditor-General in paragraph 17.2 on pages 142-3 of his report of March 1982.
(2) What specific action (a) has been taken and (b) is planned to overcome the matters referred to in (I ).
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The competing demands within the Department were development work on urgently needed application systems, the investigation of Department's ADP requirements, the support and maintenance of ongoing production systems and support of the computer bureau and data entry operations.
Apart from the general industry problem in attracting suitably qualified staff the Department had difficulty recruiting in Melbourne suitable staff who were willing to transfer to Canberra.
(2) Recruiting problems were addressed by transferring ADP positions to and concentrating recruitment action in Canberra. The ADP Branch's Canberra Transfer Program was advanced; high priority was given to recruiting computer systems officers.
Department of Transport: Transfer from Melbourne to Canberra
(Question No. 4310)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
What were the costs incurred for the transfer of officers of the former Department of Transport from Melbourne to Canberra for each of the years from 1976-77 to 1980-81.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by Mr Hunt on 17 March 1982 (House of Representatives Hansard, page 1107) in reply to a similar question asked by him on 29 October 1981.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 579

Erindale Drive Intersections
(Question No. 4316)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 20 April 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the serious traffic hazards and the number of fatal accidents that have occurred at the intersections of Erindale Drive with Ashley Drive, Sternberg Cresent and Sulwood Drive, Australian Capital Territory.
(2) If so, what action does he propose to take in order to improve these intersections.
(3) Will he give Canberra residents an assurance that these intersections will be upgraded this financial year; if not, why not.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) I an informed by the National Capital Development Commission that a contract for the construction of a roundabout at the intersection of Erindale Drive and Ashley Drive was let on 18 June 1982.
(3) Upgrading of the Erindale Drive/Ashley Drive intersection will be completed before the end of 1982. Accident patterns at the other intersections mentioned will continue to be monitored and traffic management improvements will be carried out where warranted.
Import of Used DC6 Aircraft
(Question No. 4325)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
What information is he able to provide on any inquiries or applications for the import of used DC6 aircraft that have been made from I January 1981 to the date of preparation of this answer.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Secretary to the Department of Aviation has received one application for the import of a DC6 aircraft since I January 1981. A proposal has been put forward by an Australian company to import a DC6A aircraft for use in domestic and overseas freight operations. Policy and operational aspects relevant to this application are presently under consideration.
Public Rental Accommodation
(Question No. 4339)
Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
Is he able to state what the current number of applicants for public rental accommodation is with each of the State housing authorities, and in the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Outstanding applications for public rental accommodation at 31 December 1981 were as follows:

New South Wales (a) Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Total six States
Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory
(a) Includes 9,802 applications awaiting review.

45,194 15,345 7,469 21,312 5,503 3,972 98,795
2,117 2,278

Company Income Payable Overseas
(Question No. 4340)
Mr Hayden asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
Will he update the information he provided in his Press release of March 1980 on company income payable overseas.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Information relating to the proportion of total company income, after payment of tax, that is payable overseas is as follows:

Year
1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

Adjusted (a) income

Income payable overPayable overseas as

seas as a precentage

a percentage of

of total company total company income

income after tax (b)

after tax (b)

26.1

28.9

23.8

26.6

28.2

30.8

28.8

31.2

23.5

25.7

30.3

32.2

32.4

34.2

35.7

37.7

28.5

30.0

32.6

34.2

26.2

28.9

Source: Derived from Australian Bureau of Statistics data. For details of method of calculation, refer to my Press release No. 350f31 March 1980.
(a) Adjusted income payable overseas is derived by adding to income payable overseas an estimate of the equity of overseas portfolio investors in the undistributed profits of companies in which they hold shares. This estimate is based on the assumption that the companies concerned ploughed back one-half of their profits each year.
(b) Since my Press release of March 1980, revisions have been made to the Australian Bureau of Statistics data used to derive the proportions of total company income payable overseas in 1977-78 and in earlier years.
The table indicates that the proportion of total (adjusted) company income payable overseas fell from 34.2 per cent in 1979-80 to 28.9 per cent in 1980-81. This compares with the increase in the ratio between 1974-75 and 1977-78.
It should be noted that the proportion of company income payable overseas is subject to a good deal of short-term fluctuation and apparent trends may be subject to reversal as revised and more recent data become available. Moreover, the proportion, apart from being calculated from data that are subject to problems of statistical estimation, would be affected

580 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

by various influences in addition to the level of foreign ownership in the economy. These include any tendency for the profitability of enterprises in which foreigners have invested to differ from that of other Australian enterprises and for the profitability and taxation payments of sectors in which foreign ownership is relatively high to vary relative to other sectors. For these reasons considerable care must be exercised in drawing any conclusions relating to the extent of foreign participation in the economy from the data.
Follow-on Destroyer Program
(Question No. 4349)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) Has the Government decided to defer commencement of the Follow-On Destroyer Program;
(2) If so, (a) what workload will Williamstown Naval Dockyard, Victoria, have during the period of deferment, (b) what will be the effective employment level in the dockyard in the period prior to commencement of the program and (c) will the dockyard have sufficient work to utilise effectively the existing work force during the period of deferment.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 'The extent of the dockyard's deficiencies revealed in the Hawke report required reassessment of the timing suggested in a statement to the House by the former Minister for Defence on 20 October 1981 in which he said:
I expect to be dealing shortly with recommendations about the future of that dockyard. Meantime, the Government has decided to order long-lead items from the United States for the construction in due course of the first vessel.
In making this decision now, we make it possible, should the problems that have beset Williamstown in recent years be resolved, to begin construction of the ship there next year'.
On 20 January 1982 the Acting Minister for Defence, Mr Newman, announced the Government's intention to introduce new management arrangements and to prosecute a program of sweeping reforms. He also said:
Time will be needed to establish the new arrangements and to assess them in action. The demonstrated success, or otherwise, of new management and work practices in improving productivity will determine whether the Government will build follow-on destroyers at Williamstown Naval Dockyard or elsewhere'.
Discussions were initiated in March 1982 between officers of my department, the ACTU, leading trade unions and job representatives.
The program then outlined, is not affected by the statement to the House by the former Minister for Defence on 29 April 1982 when he said:
'The provision for expenditure over the next five years on Follow-On Destroyers will be reduced. The level of annual expenditure will be given detailed consideration along with the planned reforms at the Williamstown Dockyard'.
(2) If we are successful in lifting Williamstown Naval Dockyard's performance to the point where it does justify orders for Follow-On Destroyers, and I would hope this will be the case, there should be little difficulty in providing sufficient work to utilise the existing workforce effectively.

Tenosynovitis: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 4389)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) a medical examination of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuring, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) No comprehensive medical examinations beyond those included in the appointment process are conducted routinely. However, medical examinations are arranged/encouraged where officers or employees report symptoms of apparently job related illnesses.
(b) No. The significance of repetition strain injury as an occupational health problem has only recently been recognised. It is understood that the Department of Health has conducted research into this problem and that a National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Occupational Health guide will be issued in June 1982 or shortly thereafter.
My department will make every effort subject to the availability of resources, to comply with NHMRC guidelines.
At the present time my department is reviewing the furniture and working environment of operators of screen based equipment. It is also participating in the Department of Transport and Construction program of designing furniture suitable for operators of visual display units.
(2) Not applicable.
(3) See I (b) above.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Aviation
(Question No. 4391)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jursidiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) No. Medical examinations have only been carried out for compensation purposes when claims have been made. (b) No. There have been few repetitive injury claims made to date. Therefore, ergonomic assessments have not been undertaken.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 581

(2) and (3) See (I) (b) above.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 4395)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Medical examinations are carried out in connection with appointment to the Public Service or on entry to the superannuation scheme. Examinations are also arranged for staff where an illness could be related to their work environment, for example, where workers' compensation is claimed.
No comprehensive medical examinations beyond those included in the appointment process are conducted routinely. Medical examinations are, however, arranged and encouraged when staff report symptoms of apparently job-related illnesses. In accordance with guidelines set out for occupational safety and health in Commonwealth employment, regular eye-test examinations are available to staff who use screenbased equipment. Regular industrial toxicity examinations are also available to photographic laboratory staff who have contact with various photographic chemicals.
(b) No ergonomic assessments have been made in areas where repetitious injuries have been reported. I understand that the significance of such injuries as an occupational health problem has only recently been recognised. It is expected that a National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) occupational health guide will be issued this year. The wide range of occupations in which repetition strain injuries are being reported would make a program of ergonomic assessment impracticable on economic and resource grounds. However, my Department and the statutory authorities within my jurisdication will make every effort, subject to the availability of resources, to comply with the NHMRC recommendations including any recommendations on ergonomic assessments. '
(2) and (3). See (1)
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 4424)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdication,
(a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per

Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment',
(b) what percentage of their working day
(i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and
(ii) do operators spend on other duties and
(c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Staff and management of the Department are aware of the problems of operator fatigue associated with sustained use of screen based equipment and the need for appropriate rest periods.
(b) (i) (ii) Word processing operators and data processing operators operate the equipment on a full time basis. Clerical staff and computer operators operate the equipment as required ranging up to 50 per cent of a working day.
(c) (i) (ii) Screen based equipment is used for a wide variety of work. The number of keystrokes expected to be completed per day by a full time operator depends on the nature and difficulty of the work, flow of the work, source documentation used and the limitations of the equipment. The usual work rate for data processing operators, depending on the above mentioned factors is about 45,000 keystrokes per day and for word processing operators an average of 45 words per minute over the working day.
Report on Toxic Chemicals Used in Vietnam
(Question No. 4433)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
Further to the Minister's answer to Question No. 4189 (Hansard, 21 April 1982, p. 1715-1723), and in particular with reference to part (5) wherein the Minister provided the Department of Health's critique of second draft of the Fleming Report (a) who was the Health Department official who wrote the critique, (b) will the Minister now provide a detailed listing of the valuable information contained in the Fleming Report, (c) why did the Minister's Department circulate various drafts of the Fleming report to Dr F. W. Gunz and others when the Health Department specifically stated in its critique that on no account should it be used as an information item and (d) will the Minister now provide the Parliament with the covering letter and any other documents supplied to Dr Gunz at the time the Fleming Report was forwarded to him by the Minister's Department: if not, why not.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) The critique referred to is a quotation from a letter dated 29 August 1980 signed by the Director-General, Department of Health.
(b) The statement in the critique that there is valuable information contained in the document was a comment by the Department of Health relating to the second draft. I have no further information to identify any particular parts of the draft.
(c) The Department did not 'circulate various drafts of the Fleming Report to Dr F. W. Gunz.' The comment of the

582 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Health Department some eight months earlier that the document referred to that Department should not be used as an information item referred to the second draft and to 'widespread distribution'. By May 1981 other material was available including 'Pesticides used in Vietnam Hostilities and their use in Australian agriculture-A Comparative Study' and 'Comment on the use of Cacodylic Acid in VietnamDepartment of Health, January 1981 '. These were also sent.
(d) The full references to the documents provided to Dr Gunz were given in my answer to Question No. 4190. The first document listed (extracts from clinical notes relating to Mr Simpson) contains personal clinical material and, as such, is confidential. It will not be disclosed without the authority of Mr Simpson's next-of-kin. The second document listed has long been available in the Parliamentary Library and the third was tabled in the Senate on \0 March 1982. The remaining documents in the list are already available publicly. The last one listed (,Comment of the Use of Cacodylic Acid in Vietnam') is a Department of Health document which has been made available to the public. The covering letter was a personal communication to Dr Gunz and made no comment on any draft of the document to which the honourable member refers, the so-called 'Evans-Fleming' paper.
Soil Conservation Projects: Funding
(Question No. 4477)
Mr West asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
What funds have been provided for soil conservation projects by the Commonwealth in each year since 1977-78.

Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
See answer to Question No. 4610.
Nabarlek and Ranger Uranium Mining Operations
(Question No. 4482)
Mr West asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
(1) How many infringements of the environmental requirements at (a) the Nabarlek and (b) the Ranger uranium mining operations between June 1981 and April 1982 have been reported to the Supervising Scientist by Queensland Mines Limited and Ranger Uranium Mines Pty Ltd respectively.
(2) What are the description and dates of the infringements and the dates of these reports.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) and (b) In the period 1 July 1981 to 30 April 1982, Queensland Mines Limited has reported one incident and Ranger Uranium Mines Pty Ltd has reported 23 incidents which may have constituted infringements of the Environmental Requirements or other prescribed instruments. The Ranger mill was commissioned during the period in question and it is not unexpected that teething troubles gave rise to a larger number of incidents than Nabarlek which was in commercialoperation.
(2)-

Date of Incident Nabalek 1 April 1982 Ranger 29July 1981
Week ending 31 July 1981
5 August 1981
August 1981

Description of Incident

Date of report

Two leaking joints were discovered on a pipeline between
the Waste Rock Run Off Pond and Evaporation Pond 2 and repaired immediately. The quantity of run off water estimated to have leaked was 39.5 to 79 cubic metres. No
environmental damage is considered to have resulted.

4 May 1982

The recycle water tank overflowed spilling process water from No.3 Pond in the neutral thickener bund area. Some of the water and a minor amount of tailings solids was pumped into the storm water collection pond which discharges to No.2 Pond during the wet season. The estimated volume pumped was 40m 3-
Fugitive slaked lime dust from a lime transfer operation was blown by a strong wind onto the surface of Djalkmara Billabong and this was reflected in a pH of 9.3 detected during routine water monitoring. The impact on the small billabong was minor and the problem is not expected to occur again as subsequently slaked lime has been sprayed with water before and during loading.
The clarified pregnant liquor tank and the associated clarifier tank overflowed into an enclosing bund due to an operator's error. The overflow was stopped by adjusting the process flow rate. The liquor was pumped back into the tanks. During the overflow the radiation intensity increased slightly around the bunded area but the incident was minor.
For the commissioning of the grinding mills counter current decantation thickeners and tailings disposal system, waste rock was used. The ground waste discharged into the tailings dam accumulated at one point in the dam, grounding the discharge pontoon and exposing some of the material to atmosphere. This situation has been corrected and now that tailings are being discharged into the dam, the routine for moving the pipe has been established.

25 August 1981 25 August 1981 25 August 1981 25 August 1981

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 583

Date of Incident I3 August 1981 3-23 November 1981
23 November 1981 25 November 1981 26 November 1981 II December 1981 14 December 1981 22 December 1981 28 December 1981
2 January 1982

Description of Incident
It was brought to notice that a sewerage manhole at the Coonjimba camp was overflowing at about 3-4 litres per minute and the effluent was flowing along the track to Coonjimba billabong. The leak was due to a failure in the automatic pump controls which did not allow the pump to start. The NT Department of Mines and Energy discovered that two islands about 20 square metres in all had appeared in the tailings dam whereas the then existing Authorisation called for a 2 metre cover of water. The Department closed the mine for 4 days while reviewing the Authorisation. Following the issue of an amendment which did not specify a minimum depth of water but simply required that free water be maintained over the settled tailings, the mine was re-opened. This amendment was along the lines recommended by the Supervising Scientist in June 1981. The infringement was of a technical nature and did not pose a hazard to people or the environment.
A spillage of concentrate from a drum occurred outside the Concentrate Store during an unloading operation. The spillage was cleaned up in accordance with safety procedures and a check by the health physicist showed the clean-up to be satisfactory. This was verified the following day by a Department of Mines and Energy inspector. There were two observed emissions of concentrate dust from the scrubber stack on the product building, the estimate of total discharge being 2 to 4 kg. The cause was failure of an interlock system due to an electrical bridge which had been left behind during commissioning. To avoid a recurrence of such an event, the bridge has been removed and a revised operating procedure has been formulated. An operator was found wading in bare feet in the tailings dam while hosing down one of the beaches formed in the dam. This should have been done while wearing boots. Both the operator and his supervisor were instructed on the importance of preventing recurrences of this nature. A small amount of tailings on the floor within the perimeter of the tailings dam had leaked from a pipeline joint. The material was covered with soil as water had not reached that level. A small spillage of tailings occurred from a breather valve on a tailings line onto the inside perimeter of the top of the tailings dam embankment. This was removed into the tailings dam and placed under water by people suitably protected. These breather valves have been removed as they are not essential and this will preclude such spillages in the future. No. 3 Sewage Retention Pond overflowed but was not noticed until the daily check because of the absence of the injured operator, a contractor (unbeknown to the mining company). To prevent recurrences of this nature the sewage treatment plant will now be operated by the mining company. Dilution of the effluent by heavy rainfall meant that environmental impact was very minor. An operator was sprayed with ammonium diuranate (ADU) while trying to locate and rectify a pipeline blockage. He showered and changed immediately and had his eyes washed at the first aid post. Subsequent urine tests showed that he had been effectively decontaminated. In future any employee sprayed with radioactive material will also be checked after showering for skin contamination. A drain valve has been installed on the line to prevent a recurrence of the incident. A break in a tailings disposal line on the inside wall of the northern embankment eroded part of the dam wall. The wall was repaired with waste rock and the line was repaired with more suitable material. The frequency of inspections of the tailings pipelines and dam has been increased to enable earlier detection of any malfunctions.

Date of report 25 August 1981 23 November 1981
24 November 1981 30 November 1981 I December 1981 12 January 1982 12 January 1982 12 January 1982 4 January 1982
12 January 1982

584 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Date of Incident 5 January 1982
22-23 January 1982 18 February 1982
25 February 1982 4 March 1982 16 March 1982 . . . . 25 March 1982 . . . . 20 April 1982 17 July 1981-2 February 1982

Description of Incident
Yellowcake was spilled from two drums being transported by forklift outside the packing area. The spillage was cleaned up under the supervision of the Radiation Safety Officer and a representative of the Department of Mines and Energy. The forklift will no longer be used to carry drums any great distance with the drum clamping device. An improved drum loading procedure will reduce the possibility of drum deformation which can lead to sealing difficulties and hence make spillage more likely. About forty fish (boney bream) were found dead in Coonjimba Billabong. Water quality checks showed nothing abnormal. Fish kills occur naturally in the region from time to time. A leak in a tailings disposal line was detected. The line was immediately shut down and flushed out and the Radiation Safety Officer notified. When the Mines Inspector arrived on site one hour later repair of the line and clean up of the tailings had been organised. The tailings were contained in the restricted release zone and supervised area. There was no danger to health or the environment. The company agreed to build a bond along the top of the tailings dam wall in order to prevent any loss of tailings from the dam wall in the event of any future leak from either of the tailings lines. Acid mist eliminators in the sulphuric acid plant became flooded owing to a blocked drain line and acid mist levels exceeded the specified limits. The plant was shut down and the problem corrected. By 3 March the plant was running satisfactorily and within specification. A small island of tailings of about one square metre and an above water height of 2cm formed in the tailings dam on nightshift. The solids were quickly dispersed and were covered by water. A planned change of pipelines on the previous night had not taken place. The SO, analyser on the acid plant was damaged by acid. Reich SO, tests were carried out on the exit gas once per shift pending the arrival of spare parts. Values were below the allowed limit. A bleeder valve at the tailings discharge pipeline leaked a small amount of tailings onto the inside top of the embankment. This was sluiced into the dam by water truck and hose. About 30 cubic metres of organic pregnant uranium solution overflowed from the organic dump tank decant sump into the storm water system to No.2 pond. The transfer operation which caused the overflow was stopped and the sump is to be modified to avoid a recurrence of the event. SO, emission levels from the acid plant stack exceeded the allowable limit of 2 kg per tonne of acid produced when measured over the period 22 January to 2 February 1982. It was determined that this situation had most likely existed since 17 July 1981.The cause of the problem was that a spectacle plate was installed where a blank plate should have been. Subsequent to the rectification of the problem the emission level has averaged around 1.3 kg per tonne of acid produced. Routine shift monitoring of the stack gas is now being carried out and should prevent such a problem recurring.

Date of report 8 January 1982
28 January 1982 2 March 1982
I April 1982
I April 1982
I April 1982 I April 1982 II May 1982
Reported on 17 February 1982 to N.T. Dept. of Mines and Energy but due to administrative error Supervising Scientist not advised until 26 May 1982.

Proposed Air Base, Derby, Western Australia
(Question No. 4484)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
Can he assure the House that the proposed airbase at Derby, Western Australia will go ahead; if so, will he give a timetable for the start and completion of the project.

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Government has recently confirmed that it intends construction of the new airfield at Derby Western Australia to begin as planned.
The project is to be examined by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works at a hearing in July this year.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 585

If, following the Committee's report, the project is approved by Parliament, construction should begin in 1982-83. It is currently intended that the project be completed by 1987.
Tree-felling at Kooringal Airstrip, Moreton Island
(Question No. 4499)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 28 April 1982:
(I) Was permission given by his Department for the felling of large trees at the Kooringal airstrip on Moreton Island, Qld, on or about Sunday, 31 January 1982; if so (a) who requested the felling of the trees, (b) what reasons were given in support of the request, (c) when was the request made and (d) when was permission granted.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that this area is already considered to be a region of erosion problems and that trees are required for soil stability.
(3) Did the Queensland Conservation Council recommend that more study be done on that area before the airstrip is extended.
(4) Were the trees felled for safety reasons and not for extension of the airstrip; if so, why were the trees not lopped to an acceptable height, thus leaving the lower trunk and root system intact to prevent erosion.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (4). The Kooringal airstrip on Moreton Island is an Authorised Landing Area (ALA) which, I understand, is owned and operated by the Queensland State Government. As ALAs do not fall under the control of my Department, I am unable to help the honourable member with any information. Perhaps he might seek an answer from the Queensland Government.
Air Services: Norfolk Island to New Zealand
(Question No. 4500)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 28 April 1982:
(I) Which airlines will operate the Norfolk Island to New Zealand route on completion of the upgrading program at the Norfolk Island airport.
(2) What aircraft will these airlines use for this route.
(3) Will Air New Zealand be operating B737s on that route.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Air New Zealand and Qantas Airways Ltd are licensed to provide scheduled services between Norfolk Island and Auckland.
(2) F27 aircraft are currently used on the route.
(3) Use of Boeing 737 aircraft raises technical and environmental questions which are being examined. Air New Zealand will be advised as soon as practicable whether B737 operations can be permitted at Norfolk Island airport.
Biological and Chemical Warfare Tests on Prisoners of War
(Question No. 4509)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, -upon notice, on 29 April 1982:

(I) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'Diggers in Test Sacrifice' on page 7 of the Melbourne SunPictorial of 27 April 1982 which alleges that Australian prisoners of war may have died in secret Japanese germ warfare experiments during World War II.
(2) Has he ordered any investigation to be made of these claims; if not, will he do so; if not, why not.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) I refer the honourable member to my predecessor's reply to Question No. 3321 which appeared in House of Representatives Hansard on 16 February 1982 (p. 148).
Psychiatric Survey of Vietnam Veterans
(Question No. 4512)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 29 April 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to an article on page 5 of the Age of 26 April 1982 entitled 'Psychiatric Survey of veterans called off'.
(2) What are the (a) names and (b) positions of (i) Veterans' Affairs Department officers, (ii) academics and (iii) others involved in the (A) preparation and (B) approval, of the survey referred to in the article.
(3) Was the questionnaire circulated to Vietnam veterans other than those in the psychiatric ward in Concord Repatriation Hospital, New South Wales; if so (a) when, (b) to how many veterans and (c) how many were returned (i) completed, (ii) incomplete and (iii) with no questions answered at all.
(4) What was the purpose of the questionnaire.
(5) What information was supplied by the Minister's Department for the purpose of preparation of the questionnaire.
(6) Will a similar, but redrafted, questionnaire be circulated; ifso, why.
(7) Will the Minister provide the Parliament with the full text of the questionnaire which has now been withdrawn; if not, why not.
(8) Was the questionnaire based on a United States of America Veterans Administration questionnaire; if so, what are the details.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes. The survey referred to was a pilot trial for a research project by university staff at Repatriation General Hospital, Concord. It was not a Departmental Survey.
(2) (A) (a) and (b) (i) No Veterans' Affairs Department officers were involved in the preparation of the survey.
(a) and (b) (ii) Associate ProfessorC. Tennant, University of Sydney, attached to Repatriation General Hospital, Concord, prepared the survey.
(a) and (b) (iii) No other persons were involved in its preparation.
(B) The questionnaire was submitted to the Branch Office Medical Research Advisory Committee in the usual way and approval was granted subject to the development of a suitable consent form and subsequent reference to the Central Office Medical Research Advisory Committee.

586 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

The Branch Office Medical Research Advisory Committee is chaired by the Director (Medical Services) who was absent on this occasion and was represented by Dr O. G. Curteis, General Medical Superintendent, Repatriation General Hospital, Concord. Other committee members were Professor M. Pheils, Professor of Surgery, University of Sydney; Professor J. Lawrence, Professor of Medicine, University of Sydney; Dr G. Crane, Senior Staff Specialist, Haematology; Dr A. Breslin, Departmental Consultant (Chest Diseases); Dr O. Peiris, Visiting Medical Specialist and Mr D. Eagleson, Assistant Deputy Commissioner.
(3) No. The intention of the research project proposed was to question only Vietnam veterans who were psychiatric inpatients at R.G.H. Concord, and wider distribution could have had an adverse effect on the research. Pending Central Office Medical Research Advisory Committee approval a draft questionnaire was given to five Vietnam veterans who were in-patients at the time, as a pilot trial. This pilot trial was undertaken without the knowledge of the central administration of my Department or of myself and when it was brought to my attention, further work on it was suspended.
(4) The purpose of the questionnaire was to obtain information for a research project, by a university staff member based at Concord, with a dual purpose. The primary purpose was to enable assessment of any relationship between experiences in Vietnam and the subsequent occurrence of psychiatric disorder, and the secondary purpose was to compare the experience of Australian and American Veterans both in Vietnam and subsequently.
(5) Nil.
(6) The research project and its methodology is being reconsidered and a decision is not available. If the project is supported as valid in objectives and methodology, a questionnaire may be used.
(7) No. The questionnaire involved was a draft being used for a pilot trial. It has no endorsed status and should not be published for that reason. Furthermore, if a decision were to be taken subsequently to permit the research project to proceed, it could be invalidated by prior publication of the questionnaire.
(8) The questionnaire was based on the most widely used questionnaire in the United States of America, one which has been used in Veterans' Administration Hospitals, presumably with Veterans' Administration approval. It was designed by Professor Charles Figley. For the purposes of comparison of the American and Australian experience it was thought necessary to follow as closely as possible the methodology used in the United States.
Training of Aboriginal Health Workers
(Question No. 4517)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 29 Apri11982:
With reference to the stated aims on page 29 of the 1980-81 Annual Report of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs to provide all Aboriginal health workers with basic skills, and train up to 6 specialised orientation and mobility trainees, (a) how many Aboriginals have been so trained, and (b) in what regions are they working.

Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The honourable member is referring to a particular training program in relation to visually handicapped persons, and not to training arrangements for Aboriginal health workers generally. A grant approved for that proposed program in 1981-82 was not taken up by the Australian National Council of and for the Blind, which has informed my Department that Northern Territory Department of Health participation could not be confirmed.
Deferred Capital Works
(Question No. 4526)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 4 May 1982:
Further to his answers to Question Nos 3523 (Hansard 16 February 1982, page 125) and 3827 (Hansard 21 April 1982, page 1728), does he have any idea at all of the principal desirable works deferred at government aerodromes; if so, can he provide the headings of the principal works involved.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Principal works deferred in 1981-82 included: building maintenance works, such as repairing, re-roofing and painting of buildings; movement area maintenance works, such as resealing runways; roads and carpark works, such as resealing; and maintenance work to engineering services.
Broadcasts of Election Speeches
(Question No. 4533)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 4 May 1982:
(I) How much time was made available to broadcast election speeches or political advertisements in respect of each political party on each radio broadcasting station and television station in connection with the Victorian State election held on Saturday, 3 April 1982.
(2) What was the percentage distribution of time purchased by parties and candidates on (a) metropolitan and (b) country commercial broadcasting and television stations.
(3) What were the costs charged for this time, and what was the percentage distribution of these costs.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
On the basis of information provided to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal by licensees of commercial and public broadcasting and television stations, the Australian Broadcasting Commission and the Special Broadcasting Service, the following tables have been prepared to show the details requested under parts (I), (2) and (3) of the question. These tables show details of radio and television broadcasts of election speeches and political advertisements for the period 25 February 1982 (date of issue of writs) t031 March 1982.
(I) Time made available to broadcast election speeches of political advertisements.

Answers to Questions

Station

Parties

**3AK

Australian Labor Party

Melbourne Liberal Party

3AW

Australian Labor Party

Melbourne Liberal Party

3CR

Australian Labor Party

Melbourne Liberal Party

National Party

Australian Democrats

Australia Party

Communist Party

Independent

JDB

Australian Labor Party

Melbourne Liberal Party

3EON

Australian Labor Party

Melbourne Liberal Party

3FOX

Liberal Party

Melbourne

3KZ

Australian Labor Party

Melbourne Liberal Party

3MP

Australian Labor Party

Mornington Liberal Party

Pen.

3UZ

Australian Labor Party

Melbourne Liberal Party

3XY

Liberal Party

Melbourne

3BA

Australian Labor Party

Ballarat

Liberal Party

National Party

Australian Democrats

3BO

Australian Labor Party

Bendigo

Liberal Party

National Party

3CS

Australian Labor Party

Colac

Liberal Party

Australian Democrats

3CV

Australian Labor Party

Maryborough Liberal Party

National Party

Australian Democrats

3GL

Australian Labor Party

Geelong

Liberal Party

Democratic Labor Party

3HA

Australian Labor Party

Hamilton Liberal Party

Independent

3MA

Liberal Party

Mildura

National Party

Australian Democrats

3NE

Australian Labor Party

Wangaratta Liberal Party

National Party

3SH

Australian Labor Party

Swan Hill Liberal Party

National Party

3SR

Australian Labor Party

Shepparton Liberal Party

National Party

3TR

Australian Labor Party

Sale

Liberal Party

National Party

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 587

TABLE A Commercial Radio Stations

Time provided (mins)

Leaders initial speech

Announcements and talks

90 72 90 100
321 157
2 56
I 40 24
90 72 121 (incl. 30 free) 73 83 (incl. 13 free)

145(incl. 10 free) 52 101 98

90 70 30 166 (incl. 49 free)

211 (incl. 47 free)

122 (incl. 19 free)

5

13

120

114

49

38

87

10

168 (incl. 5 free)

123 (incl. 5 free)

54

6 (incl. 5 free)

105

144

5

60 (incl. 30 free)

124 (incl. 30 free)

25 (incl. 15 free)

72

29

5

10

93

32

30

9

95

47

30

9

30 135

10 98

25 90

30 97

10 104

Total minutes
90 72 90 100 321 157
2 56
I 40 24 90 72 121 73 83
145 52 101 98
90 70 196
211 122
5 13 120 114 49 38 87 10 168 123 54 6 105 144 5 60 124 25 72 29 5 10 93 32 39 95 47 39 165 108 115 127 114

Amount charged
$ 5,850 6,011 5,850 7,334
4,230 4,798 5,450 4,668 4,200
11,880 6,524 7,560 7,864
6,300 6,170 7,013
4,400 3,357
2,400 4,473 2,219
922 2,063
300 4,220 3,055 1,660
30 2,250 3,220
210 330 1,619. 200 1,554 1,106
297 3,314 1,294
204 2,055 1,504
342 4,640 5,305 2,790 3,329 4,150

588 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Station

Parties

Time provided (mins)

Leaders initial
speech

Announcements and talks

Australian Democrats

3UL

Australian Labor Party

Warragul Liberal Party

National Party

Australian Democrats

Democratic Labor Party

3WM

Australian Labor Party

Horsham Liberal Party

National Party

Australian Democrats

3YB

Australian Labor Party

Warrnambool Liberal Party

National Party

Australian Democrats

2AY

Australian Labor Party

Albury

Liberal Party

National Party

2QN

Australian Labor Party

Deniliquin Liberal Party

National Party

Australian Democrats

Station

Parties

10

30 104

30 213

10 179

10

8

10

3

30 126

10 55

5

30

30 103

10

10

7

30

92

31

7 (incl. 5 free)

18 (incl. 5 free)

38 (incl. 5 free)

5

TABLE B Commercial Television Stations

Time provided (mins)

Leaders
initial speech

Announcements and talks

ATV Melbourne
GTV Melbourne
HSV Melbourne
AMV Albury
BeV Bendigo
BTV Ballarat
GLV Taralgon
GMV Shepparton
STY Mildura
SES MtGambier

Australian Labor Party Liberal Party Australian Labor Party
Liberal Party Australian Labor Party
Liberal Party National Party Australian Labor Party Liberal Party National Party Australian Labor Party
Liberal Party National Party Australian Democrats Australian Labor Party
Liberal Party National Party Australian Labor Party
Liberal Party National Party Australian Democrats Australian Labor Party Liberal Party National Party Australian Labor Party Liberal Party National Party Australian Democrats Liberal Party National Party

30 27 30 44 30 40
30 30 30 49 28 31
10
10 104 (incl. 3 free)
27 (incl. 10 free)
30 56 (incl. 15 free) 60 130 (incl. 45 free) 10 51 (incl. 15 free)
5
30 35
30 142 10 31 (incl. 10 free) 30 52 (incl. 15 free) 60 99 (incl. 45 free) 10 36 (incl. 15 free)
5
30 66 (incl. 30 free) 30 115 (incl. 30 free) 10 88 (incl. 10 free) 30 85 (incl. 15 free) 60 114 (incl. 45 free) 10 57 (incl. 15 free)
5 60 37
10

Answers to Questions

Total minutes
10 134 243 189 10
8 13 156 65 5 30 133 10 17 30 92 31 7 18 38 5

Amount charged
$
3,005 6,643 5,180
285 160 4,115 1,760
2,567
80 990 3,061 1,542
95 388 1,021

Total minutes
57 74 70 60 79 59 10 10 104 27 86 190 61 5 65 172 41 82 159 46 5 96 145 98 115 204 67 5 97 10

Amount charged
$ 35250 87077 78320 132981 64460 79130
1629 17738 3519 10 190 35808 10364
10 980 54258 9884 4253 16398 6923
6305 21837 15349 4086 10 434 2632
5837 300

Answers to Questions

Station

Parties

3LO Melbourne
4 Regional Stations

Australian Labor Party Liberal Party National Party Australian Democrats Australian Labor Party Liberal Party National Party Australian Democrats

Station

Parties

ABV Melbourne
7 Regional Stations

Australian Labor Party Liberal Party National Party Australian Democrats Australian Labor Party Liberal Party National Party Australian Democrats

Station

Parties

3RRR Melbourne
3GCR
Churchill

Australian Labor Party
Australian Labor Party Liberal Party National Party Democratic Labor Party Australian Democrats Independent

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 589

TABLE C National Radio Stations

Time provided (mins)

Leaders initial
speech

Announcements and talks

30

30

30

30

10

15

5

10

120

120

120

120

40

60

20

40

Total minutes
60 60 25 15 240 240 100 60

Amount charged
$

TABLE D National Television Stations

Time provided (mins)

Leaders initial
speech

Announcements and talks

30

28

30

29

9

14

14

207

198

210

206

65

98

99

Total minutes
58 59 23 14 405 416 163 99

Amount charged
$

TABLE E Public Broadcasting Stations

Time provided (mins)

Leaders initial
speech

Announcements and talks

93 27 27 27 13 13 13

Total minutes
93 27 27 27 13 13 13

Amount charged
$

590 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Station

Parties

TABLE F Special Broadcasting Senice Broadcasting Station

Time provided (mins)

Leaders
initial speech

Announcements and talks

3EA

Australian Labor Party

129

Melbourne Liberal Party

ll8

National Party

48

Australian Democrats

52

(2) Time purchased by parties and candidates

Total minutes
129 ll8 48 52

Amount charged
$

Liberal Party Australian Labor Party National Party Australian Democrats Democratic Labor Party Others
Total

Metropolitan

Hrs Mins

% Hrs Mins

Broadcasting

10 51

48.6

1127

51.4

27 45 14 36 II 44
18
13 10

22 18

100.00 54 46

Country. % Hrs Mins

50.7 26.7 21.4 0.5 0.4 0.3
100.0

38 36 26 3 II 44
18 13 10
77 4

Total %
50.1 33.8 15.2 0.4 0.3 0.2
100.0

Liberal Party Australian Labor Party National Party Australian Democrats Democratic Labor Party Others
Total
(3) Costs charged to parties and candidates
Liberal Party Australian Labor Party National Party Australian Democrats Democratic Labor Party Others
Total
Liberal Party Australian Labor Party National Party Australian Democrats Democratic Labor Party Others
Total

Television

44

47.2

56

52.8

12 2 3 49
3 45

3 40

100.0 19 36

Metropolitan

$

%

Broadcasting

54,582

53.7

47,120

46.3

101,702

100.0

Television

299,188

62.7

178,030

37.3

$
49,452 22,405 26,741
410 495 200
99,703
162,310 37,443 48,971

477,218

100.0 248,724

61.4 I3 45 19.5 5 45
19.1 3 45

100.0 23 15

Country

%

$

49.6 22.5 26.8 0.4 0.5 0.2
100.0

104,034 69,525 26,741
410 495 200
201,404

65.3 461,498

15.1 215,473

19.7

48,971

100.0 725,942

59.2 24.7 16.1
100.0
Total %
51.7 34.5 13.3 0.2 0.2 0.1 100.0
63.6 29.7 6.7
100.0

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 591

Board of Accident Inquiry: Terms of Reference
(Question No. 4536)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
In view of evidence already given to the Board of Inquiry into the tragic crash of an Advance Airlines aircraft on 21 February 1980 and widespread unease at the level of supervision of safety practices in the general aviation industry, will he now extend the terms of the instrument of appointment of the inquiry to enable it to investigate and report on (a) the extent to which Advance Airlines engaged in any unapproved practices at the time of the fatal crash at Sydney Airport on 21 February 1980 and the extent to which any unapproved practices contributed to that crash, (b) the extent to which any other aviation operator within Australia has engaged in any unauthorised practices adopted by Advance Airlines, (c) the officers of the then Department of Transport who (i) were aware and (ii) should have been aware of any unapproved practices adopted by Advance Airlines, (d) the extent to which (i) the then Minister for Transport and/or (ii) the then Secretary of the Department of Transport (A) was aware and (B) should have been aware of any unapproved practices adopted by Advance Airlines, (e) the extent of ministerial and permanent head control of the Department of Aviation as it affects air safety, (f) the experience and level of competence and expertise of departmental officers employed with responsibilities relating to air safety, (g) the degree of scrutiny by the then Department of Transport of the standards of operation of Advance Airlines during the two years prior to the crash of 21 February 1980, (h) the extent of engineering surveillance by the then Department of Transport of Advance Airlines' workshop during the two years prior to the crash of 21 February 1980, (j) the measures necessary to ensure the discontinuation of any unauthorised practices adopted by Advance Airlines or other aviation operators, (k) the efficacy

and propriety of the methods of investigation and report (including any allegations of premature disclosure) by the then Air Safety Investigation Branch, (m) the staffing structure and morale within the Department of Aviation as it affects air safety issues and (n) any question of conflict of interest relating to, or affecting, the Department of Aviation in carrying out its responsibilities with respect to air safety.
Mr Fife~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Board of Accident Inquiry concerning the Advance Airlines aircraft accident at Sydney first sat on I December 1981. As at 16 June 1982 the Board had completed 77 days of hearings and further evidence is yet to be heard. Many of the items specified in the question have already been covered in the Board's hearings and I believe it is neither necessary nor desirable to change the terms of reference at this stage.
Nursing Homes: Bed Subsidy
(Question No. 4548)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) How many nursing home beds were in receipt of subsidy in each State as at 31 March 1982.
(2) How many beds have been approved but not yet established.
(3) What is the average subsidy per bed.
Mr CarIton~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Number of beds in each State and Territory as at 31 March 1982 in receipt of Commonwealth subsidy was as follows:

Government Participating

Deficitfinanced

Total

New South Wales
Victoria Queensland
South Australia Western Australia Northern Territory
Tasmania
Australian Capital Territory

3,601 5,066 2,445 1,123 1,788
40 840
280

18,394 7,723 5,293 3,111 3,581
595 71

5,916 2,752 3,086
2,505 1,148
55
770

27,911
15,541 10,824 6,739 6,517
95 2,205
351

Total

15,183

38,768

16,232

70,183

Notes: Government nursing homes are nursing homes operated by or on behalf of the Government of a State or Territory. Patients
in Government nursing homes are eligible for Commonwealth nursing home benefits.
Participating nursing homes are mainly private enterprise nursing homes. There are some charitable and benevolent nursing homes which do not wish to operate under the deficit financing arrangements in this group. Patients in participating nursing homes are eligible for Commonwealth nursing home benefits.
Deficit financed nursing homes are homes in which the approved budgeted deficit is met by the Federal Government. These homes are mainly charitable and benevolent homes. Commonwealth benefits are not payable in these homes.

(2) The number of beds that have been approved but not yet established is as follows:

New South Wales Victoria
Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory

3,061 1,626 1,570 1,191
185 180 54

Australian Capital Territory Total

60 7,927

(3) For Government and participating nursing homes the Federal Government pays nursing home benefits under Part VA of the National Health Act. The current maximum basic benefit levels in each State, from 5 November 1981, are:
NSW and ACT-$23.00 per patient per day

592 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Vic.-$31.65 per patient per day Qld-$20.40 per patient per day SA and NT-$27.60 per patient per day WA-$18.55 per patient per day Tas.-$20.65 per patient per day
Patients needing and receiving extensive nursing care as defined in the National Health Act receive an additional $6 per day extensive care benefit.
It is estimated that the Federal Government will provide some $41Om in 1981/82 by way of basic and extensive care benefits. This represents an average subsidy for the financial year of $20.82 per bed per day for the 53,951 Government and participating nursing homes as at 31 March 1982. However, as indicated above, the actual rates of benefit paid (including the $6 extensive care benefit) are higher than the overall average indicated because the average subsidy figure includes four months (June to 5 November 1981) of effective lower basic benefit rates prior to the last increase from 5 November 1981.
As indicated in the answer to Question I, patients in deficit financed nursing homes do not receive a direct per day benefit as such. Instead, the approved operating deficits of the homes are met by the Federal Government. It is estimated that the deficit financing program will cost the Federal Government $165m in 1981/82. This represents an average subsidy of $27.85 per bed per day for the 16,232 established beds as at 31 March 1982. The actual subsidy per bed would, of course, vary from home to home and State to State depending on the cost of operation of each home.
Capital Program for Homeless Persons
(Question No. 4607)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister, in his policy statement of 30 September 1980, promise to allocate $lOm for a three-year capital program for homeless young persons.
(2) If so, when, and in what form, was the promise implemented.
(3) What was the Commonwealth's appropriation and spending on this program in (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(4) How many persons were assisted.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) No. The election policy statement promised to allocate $IOm for a three-year capital program for homeless persons, with special provision for homeless young people.
(2) The $10m for capital purposes is to be committed by 30 June 1984.
(3) (a) 1980-81: Appropriation $1,000,000 and spending $840,500.
(b) 1981-82: Appropriation $3,000,000 and estimated expenditure $2,600,000.
(4) Projects funded in 1980-81 and 1981-82 assist over 700 persons per day.
Soil Consenation
(Question No. 4610)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister, in his policy statement on 30 September 1980, promise to allocate $3m to the States in 1981-82 for soil conservation purposes.

(2) If so, what was the Commonwealth's spending on the soil conservation program in each year since 1975-76, in both current prices and constant 1974-75 prices.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) A policy statement was made by my colleague, the Right Honourable J. D. Anthony, M.P., Deputy Prime Minister, on I October 1980 who said as a first step towards a national soil conservation program, we will provide an initial sum of$3m in 1981-82.
(2) For some years Commonwealth funding for soil conservation within my portfolio was provided for research and extension projects from the Commonwealth Extension Services Grants. Annual amounts since 1975-76 are set out below:

Current Constant prices prices

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

$ 616,120 711,016 652,676 396,613 198,096 159,412
nil

$ 545,360 552,977 463,373 260,301 118,016 86,809
nil

Following the Government's decision in 1981 on the Review of Commonwealth Functions the $3m, referred to above, was included in the funds allocated to the States under General Revenue Assistance Grants in 1981-82.
Parafield Airport, South Australia: Canteen Facility
(Question No. 4618)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
With reference to the former Department of Transport's advertisement in the Australian of 28 April 1982 inviting tender offers for the development and operation of a canteen facility at Parafield Airport, SA, for 15 years:
(a) Is the 15 year period for this business concession contract to become the normal period for a food and/or liquor facility at Australian airports and
(b) What are the commercial circumstances surrounding the need to grant a period of 15 years for this business concession facility.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) No.
(b) In determining an appropriate period for airport concessions due recognition is given to a number of factors, including the size and nature of the particular concession and the extent of capital investment required of the successful tenderer.
The Parafield Airport concession had been previously operated only as a limited canteen service. However, public tenders were invited when interest was shown in the commercial prospects of an upgraded facility with a longer term lease. In addition there is a long term planning need to relocate the concession. As a consequence it is anticipated that the successful tenderer will be required to invest a relatively significant amount of capital in fixed improvements.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 593

While it is hoped that the increased earning potential of an improved facility will encourage the necessary capital investment, this will be a matter for the commercial judgement of the market place. It was considered however that a term of 15 years would attract offers and be sufficient to enable the concessionaire to recover his capital investment together with a reasonable profit.
Royal Federation of Aero Clubs: Additional Estimates
(Question No. 4619)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
With reference to the original estimates of expenditure for 1981-82 which reduced the financial contribution to the Royal Federation of Aero Clubs (RFAC) by $8,000, (a) why was this amount restored in the additional estimates of expenditure for 1981-82 and (b) what additional information was tendered by the RFAC to restore the level of Commonwealth contribution.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Although the amount originally appropriated was $20,000, a decision had been taken to provide $28,000. As the timing of this decision did not allow the increased level to be included in the estimates of expenditure for 1981-82 the additional amount was included in additional estimates of expenditure for 1981-82.
(b) None.
Air Services: Port Hedland/Bali/Port Hedland Route
(Question No. 4629)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did Qantas Airways Ltd give its rights on the F28 route Port HedlandjBalijPort Hedland on charter to Garuda Airlines rather than to an Australian domestic airline; if so, why.
(2) Do Trans Australia Airlines and Ansett Airlines of Australia have suitable aircraft and personnel to serve this route.
(3) Has the former Department of Transport made an assessment of Garuda's safety record; if so, (a) what was that assessment and (b) how does its record compare with the safety records of TAA and Ansett.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Qantas has entered into arrangements with Garuda Indonesian Airlines whereby the two airlines will provide regular services between Port Hedland and Bali. Garuda aircraft and crews will operate the services on behalf of both airlines, but Qantas retains a financial interest in the services, half of which will be marketed by Qantas and will operate under Qantas flight numbers.
It was a commercial decision by Qantas to enter into arrangements with Garuda. The Government has made known in the past to interested parties that it would welcome arrangements between Qantas and Australian domestic airlines for use of the latter's aircraft on routes for which the Qantas fleet is unsuitable.
(3) The safety of Garuda operations is the responsibility of the Indonesian Government. Indonesia has been, for many years, a member of the International Civil Aviation Organisation which develops safety standards for international air

navigation. It would be neither feasible nor appropriate that Australia investigate the safety record of an airline registered in a country that is a member of ICAO and which applies relevant internationally agreed air navigation standards.
Noise Exposure Forecasting
(Question No. 4646)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Was the paper entitled 'Noise Exposure Forecasting' produced by the former Department of Transport.
(2) If so, was the table on page 9 headed The Acceptability Rating as Related to the N.E.F. Measure' compiled from the noise rating collected during the day time only or from noise readings collected during both day and night.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) Yes.
(2) The average daily distribution of aircraft movements (covering day and night) is used in the calculation of noise exposure levels as expressed in the Noise Exposure Forecast. Hence the associated acceptability rating covers both day and night time hours as well.
Aircraft Movements over Haberfield, New South Wales
(Question No. 4651)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
How many aircraft have passed over Haberfield en route to or leaving Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport, Mascot, New South Wales in each year since 1970.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
From the records available to my Department, it is not possible to determine the number and type of aircraft operating to and from Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport which have passed over Haberfield.
Commonwealth Migrant Centres
(Question No. 4658)
Dr. Theophanous asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) What is the average length of stay of refugees in Commonwealth migrant centres.
(2) Can he provide information on the type of accommodation refugees move into after leaving the migrant centre.
Mr Newman-The answer' to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Precise information on the average length of stay of refugees is not readily available. The average length of stay of non-British residents who departed in the 12 month period to 3 April 1982 was 15.82 weeks. Refugees form some 85 per cent of this group and therefore would have an average length of stay of approximately 15-16 weeks.
(2) Almost all refugees move into private rental accommodation. A small proportion enter State Housing Commission accommodation.

594 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Government Responsibility for Nuclear Activity
(Question No. 4661)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the Brisbane Courier-Mail on 6 April 1982 in which the Queensland Premier, Mr Bjelke-Petersen, is reported as saying that decisions on the development or siting of a uranium enrichment plant or nuclear power plant must remain the responsibility of the State.
(2) Has he been officially notified of the Queensland State Government's views on this matter; if so, when was he notified and what was his reply.
(3) If he was not notified, does the Federal Government's policy on the development of a nuclear industry in Australia, allow for any State Government involvements in the establishment and monitoring of safeguards.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) On 19 April 1982 the Premier forwarded to me a statement of policy on this matter set out in a document entitled 'An Initial View of the Queensland Government in Relation to the Review of the Atomic Energy Act and Related Matters'. This document was prepared as part of the State response to the Government's decision to review the Atomic Energy Act as announced by the Minister for Trade and Resources and the Minister for National Development and Energy on 5 June 1981. Subsequently discussions were held at officer level between Commonwealth officers and officers of each State. The Queensland document was intended as a further basis for discussion at a joint meeting of Commonwealth and State officers which was held in Melbourne on 27, 28 April.
The Government's policy on proposals for new legislation to cover any possible nuclear development in Australia will be formulated in the light of advice provided when all the discussions involved with the States have been completed.
(3) See (2) above.
Migrant Settlement Centres
(Question No, 4675)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) How many refugees are currently accommodated in settlement centres.
(2) What is the average time span that refugees spend in such centres.
(3) Are refugees concentrated in particular areas.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) At 17 May 1982, 3837 Indo-Chinese and 2492 Eastern European refugees.
(2) Precise information on the average length of stay of refugees is not readily available. The average length of stay of non-British residents who departed in the 12 month period to 3 April 1982 was 15.82 weeks. Refugees form some 85 per cent of this group and therefore would have an average length of stay of approximately 15-16 weeks.
(3) All migrant centres currently operating have refugee residents, although migrant centres at East Hills (NSW), Wiltona (Victoria), Mount St Canice (Tasmania) and Tamarind (Northern Territory) have only refugees.

Department of Social Security: Training of Multi-lingual Counter Staff
(Question No. 4678)
Mr Young asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Is the Minister's Department currently undertaking pilot schemes with bi-lingual counter staff; if so, what is the purpose of these studies.
(2) Will the five multi-lingual counter officers currently being trained be retained as permanent officers of the Department.
(3) Does the Minister envisage expansion of this service.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question.
(I) Yes. The purpose of the pilots is to help determine the most efficient way of providing language services to nonEnglish speaking clients of the Department.
(2) and (3) The retention of staff involved in the pilots, and the way services will be provided in the future, is dependent on the evaluation of t~e pilot schemes.
Australian Federal Police: Drug Investigators
(Question No. 3637)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 17 November 1981:
(I) How many qualified drug investigators of the Australian Federal Police were stationed in the Customs Hall at Sydney International Airport from 6.00 am to 9.00 am daily as at I January 1980.
(2) How many qualified drug investigators of the Australian Federal Police are stationed there now during the same hours.
(3) If there has been a reduction in this figure, what is the reason and how does this equate with the Government's policy of apprehending drug smugglers.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Two investigators worked the 6.00 am to 2.00 pm shift.
(2) Two.
(3) The responsibility for enforcing Commonwealth law against the importation of prohibited drugs at the Customs barrier rests with officers of the Bureau of Customs. This decision was made following a recommendation by Mr Justice Williams in his Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs and was announced in the Parliament on 6 November 1979. Upon detection of the importation of narcotic drugs at the Customs barrier, Customs officers refer the matter to Australian Federal Police officers who normally pursue the matter to finality. I am advised that the number of AFP officers stationed at Sydney International Airport is considered by the Commissioner to be sufficient for the references which occur. Should the need arise, additional AFP officers are able to be summoned readily.
Public Sector Training for Aboriginals Scheme
(Question No. 3779)
Mr Ruddock asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 595

Have any members of the Commonwealth Parliament, since the inception in 1977 of the Public Sector Training for Aboriginals scheme (NESA), applied for a trainee; if so, will he provide the details.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes. Sixty-five Commonwealth Parliamentarians had offered training positions for Aboriginals in their offices to the date of the honourable member's question. As at that date 45 of these had trained, or were then training, a total of 64 Aboriginals in their offices. Twenty offers had not then been taken up by trainees.
Fawnmac Group of Companies
(Question No. 3959)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) What was the net gain to the Government from (a) acquisition. (b) operation, (c) administration and (d) sale of the Fawnmac group of companies or any of their assets or liabilities for each year from 1975 to 1980.
(2) What were the major changes in assets and liabilities of the companies between the times of their acquisition and disposal by the Government.

(3) What operations or transactions of the companies were exempt from taxes, levies or charges by virtue of their public
ownership and what was the value of these exemptions in each of the above years.

Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a), (b), (c) The Fawnmac group of companies was purchased by the Government in 1975 for $8.735m and sold in 1980 for $4.850m. Dividends received by the Federal Govern-
ment in the intervening financial years were:

1975/76 . . . . . . . . . . 1976/77 (including $550,1 57for 1975/76) 1977/78 1978/79 1979/80 1980/81

$ nil 800.157 250,000
250,000 300,000 625,000

2,225,157

(2) The assets and liabilities for the group during the Government's ownership as reported in the groups annual re-
ports are set out below.

ASSETS AND LIABILITlES--FAWNMAC GROUP 1975-80 ($)

Year ending 30June

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

Fawns and MacAllen Pty LtdTotal assets Total liabilities Total net assets
Rotary Tableting Corporation Pty LtdTotal assets Total liabilities Total net assets
Croydon Investments Pty LtdTotal assets Total liabilities Total net assets
Baker House Pty LtdTotal assets Total liabilities Total net assets
Fawnmac GroupTotal assets Total liabilities Total net assets

4,054,089
2,655,846 1,398,243

3,579,342 1,709,297 1,870,045

3,095,310 1,103,093 1,992,217

3,114,780
944,442 2,170,338

4,651,146 2,290,479
2,360,667

5,222,245 2,171,503
3,050,742

1,458,907
863,681 595,226

1,644,703
767,443 877,260

1,836,216 894,363 941,853

2,148,943 1,127,948 1,020,995

870,995 250,000 620,995

570,995 536,995
34,000

650,175 412,330
237,845

861,955 624,110
237,845

925,115 687,370
237,845,

967,149 729,304
237,845

1,608,350 717,438 890,912

1,626,850 735,938
890,912

132,059 12,290
119,769

132,083 12,314 119,769

132,043
12,724 119,769

110,054 2,061
107,993

110,054
2,061 107,993

6,163,171 3,931,857 2,231,314

6,218,059 3,113,140 3,104,919

5,988,824 2,697,140 3,291,684

6,362,915 2,813,968 3,548,947

7,240,545
3,259,978 3,980,567

7,530,144 3,446,497 4,083,647

(3) The Group did not operate differently from other public companies in the industry. It was liable for taxes, levies and charges including those in accordance with the provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
Defence Force Pay Increases
(Question No. 4061)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1982:
(I) How is part of the Defence Force pay increase going to be absorbed into other Defence budget areas.
(2) Why are only Defence Force pay increases referred to in the recent directive to his Department released to the media on 19 February 1982.

(3) Does this mean that civilian salary increases in his Department do not have to be absorbed into the remaining Defence budget.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I refer the honourable member to the statement to Parliament by my predecessor on 29 April 1982 (Hansard, pages 2066 to 2072).
(2) and (3) Consistent with the Government's 1981-82 Budget strategy, every effort has been made to absorb the effects of all wage and salary and other cost increases.

596 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Defence Procurement Programs
(Question No. 4082)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 25 February 1982:
Have there been any cuts in overtime in his Department; if so, (a) what is the estimated delay to procurement programs caused by these cuts and (b) on what projects and programs is overtime now considered not essential.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes.
(a) and (b) No significant delays to procurement programs are expected as a result of overtime restrictions. It is possible there wiil be some limited effects as a result of rearranging priorities and work Hows within the limit of available funds.
Hearing Aids
(Question No. 4096)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 March 1982:
What would the cost be of providing hearing aids to all persons in need of them, on the same basis as existing hearing aid assistance programs.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Based on the current cost of supplying a National Acoustic Laboratories aid, it is estimated that an outlay of $21.3m would be required in the first year to supply a hearing aid to all persons in need of them. This cost comprises $16.5m to supply and fit the aids, $2.9m for maintenance and $1.9m for provision of batteries. The present scheme costs $12. 7m.
Based on current trends in demand these costs are expected to increase at an annual rate of 10 per cent.
In addition to the above, there would need to be added in the firsl year significant amounts for the provision of expanded and additional hearing centres from which the service would be provided. The cost of testing and other equipment and furnishings necessary to commission these expanded and new facilities must also be added.
Price of Petroleum Products
(Question No. 4148)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to Press reports stating that certain oil exporting countries are cutting the sale price of crude oil by as much as $2 per barrel.
(2) Has the Minister checked the price presently being paid for crude oil overseas by oil companies operating in Australia; if not, does he intend to do so.
(3) Would it be possible for oil companies in Australia to make windfall profits out of cheaper crude oil.
(4) Will the price of petroleum products on the Australian market be reduced if oil companies purchase the cheaper crude oil.
Mr Anthony-The Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) Yes.
(2) These matters are kept under review and I refer the honourable member to the Senate Hansard of 21 April 1982, page 1437, which records my reply to a somewhat similar question raised by Senator Tate.
(3) and (4) The majority of Australia's imported supplies of crude oil is procured under contractual type arrangements at official prices and very little is procured on spot markets. Moreover, if purchases of overseas crude oil supplies were made at reduced prices this factor would be taken into account by the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority when determining maximum justified wholesale prices. In these circumstances there is likely to be little scope for oil companies operating in Australia to make significant windfall profits.
Two further points are worth mentioning. First, while spot prices were generally well below official prices earlier in the year, this is no longer the case. Secondly, exchange rate movements~as well as crude oil price movements~have an impact on the price of crude oil and petroleum products in Australia; decisions by the PPPA this year to allow increases in maximum wholesale prices have included the higher costs of imported crude and products as a consequence of exchange rate movements as well as changes in the import parity price. As I indicated in my Press Statement of 24 June 1982, the most recent increase in the import parity price for indigenous crude oil is attributable mainly to the reduction in value of the Australian dollar relative to the US dollar over the 6 month period to June 1982.
Fluoridation
(Question No. 4239)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 23 Milrch 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to data from the New South Wales Health Commission (Medical Journal of Australia, II February 1978, pages 124-5) claiming that, almost certainly, the availability of Huoride both in tablet form and delivered through town water supplies has been the predominant factor in a reported increase from 8 per cent to 62 per cent of decay-free children in northern Sydney between 1961 and 1970.
(2) Is it a fact that most of the improvement occurred before 1967, and Sydney water was fluoridated only from 1968, with no evidence of significant change in the consumption of Huoride tablets.
(3) Has the Minister's Department prepared, in consultation with the National Health and Medical Research Council, a detailed scientific assessment of the public criticism by Amies and Sutton of Huoridation trials; if not, will it prepare such an assessment.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) It is a fact that the published paper referred to by the honourable member states that most of the increase in the proportion of children with caries-free teeth occurred before 1967. However, the paper also points out that '... these surveys do not represent a random selection from all children within this community, and the summary data cannot be used for detailed studies'. The material in the paper should therefore be viewed with caution.
(3) At its 57th Session in May 1964 the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH and MRC) noted advice from its Dental Health Committee on the report of an expert working group established to review the basis of the monograph 'Fluoridation~Errors and Omissions in Experimental Trials' by Dr P. N. Sutton. The Council gave as its opinion,

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 597

that the comments in the monograph in no way invalidated the claims previously made that fluoridation of water supplies is an effective public health measure for the partial control and prevention of dental caries.
There is no record of an NH and MRC review of statements by Professor Amies. No point would be served in undertaking such an assessment at this time in view of the evidence from soundly based scientific studies gathered in the twenty years since Professor Amies's comments were made.
Skeletal Fluorosis
(Question No. 4240)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 23 March 1982:
(I) Is skeletal fluorosis recognised in (a) patients on long term dialysis with water fluoridated to an officially designated optimum level. (b) consumers of drinking water with fluoride concentrations of the order of officially recommended concentrations in India, Qatar and Japan, (c) Americans with kidney damage who drink large amounts of water with near recommended levels of natural fluoride and (d) faulty fluoroapatite structure macroscopically evident in tooth enamel of about one child in lOusing recommended water fluoride levels.
(2) Is there any conclusive evidence to either sustain or refute the incidence of (a) gastro-intestinal disturbance in osteoporosis sufferers given 9 mg or more of tableted fluoride daily, (b) intolerance evident in skin, digestive and nervous systems in some patients consuming water containing I mg per litre or tablets at I mg per day of fluoride-i-on confirmed in at least one double-blind trial and (c) Down's Syndrome in areas with recommended fluoride concentrations.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) A maximum limit of 0.2 parts per million of fluoride in water used for dialysis was suggested by a joint working party set up in 1979 by the Australian Society of Nephrology and the Australian Kidney Foundation Dialysis and Transplant Committee. There is no evidence that skeletal fluorosis occurs under these conditions.
(b) Claims that skeletal fluorosis was observed in India, Qatar and Japan were reported in 1961, 1961 and 1950 respectively in areas where the fluoride content of the drinking water ranged from 0.8 to 3.4 parts per million. I am not aware of any confirmation of these findings.
In 1979, the World Health Assembly of the World Health Organisation reaffirmed its support for the fluoridation of water as being a safe and effective method for the prevention of dental caries. The World Health Organisation has recommended fluoride levels in drinking water within the range of 0.6-1.7 parts per million depending on annual average maximum daily air temperature.
(c) There is no confirmed evidence that skeletal fluorosis occurs in persons with kidney damage, whose drinking water contains the recommended levels of fluoride.
(d) No.
(2) (a) In the treatment of osteoporosis, gastro-intestinal symptoms have been reported with doses of 23 to 34 mg of fluoride per day. I am not aware of evidence of gastrointestinal symptoms in cases where daily doses of 9 mg of fluoride per day have been used.
(b) The effect of fluoridation on health has been the subject of extensive investigation. There is no substantiated evidence that fluoride, at the levels recommended for water fluoridation, affects skin, digestive or nervous systems. The matters of allergy and intolerance to fluoride were considered

by the American Academy of Allergists. In 1971 the Academy adopted the following statement:
There is no evidence of allergy or intolerance to fl uoride as used in the fluoridation of community supplies.'
(c) Claims that fluoridation of water supplies increases the risk of Down's Syndrome are based on three papers which were published in 1956, 1959 and 1963. These claims were severely criticised by the Royal Commission into the Fluoridation of Public Water Supplies in Tasmania (1968) as being unfounded.
Several other studies both before and since the Tasmanian Royal Commission have failed to demonstrate any association between fluoridation and Down's Syndrome. These studies have been reviewed in the Report of the Governor's Commission on Fluoridation in Minnesota (1979), which supported the fluoridation of water.
Telecom Australia: Employment
(Question No. 4318)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
I. How many people were employed by Telecom Australia on 30 June each year since its formation.
2. Are comparable figures available for employment by the preceding Postmaster-General's Department in areas now covered by Telecom for each of the previous 20 years; if so, what are they.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Australian Telecommunications Commission, is as follows:
I. Telecom Australia's full time staff (that is operative staff plus staff on long term leave) following vesting and for each subsequent year has been as follows:
1975 (September)-88,490 1976 (June)-87,461 1977 (June)--87,358 1978 (June)-87,444 1979 (June)-87,440 1980 (June)-88,230 1981 (June)-89,992
2. Comparable figures are readily available from 1962 only. The figures are as follows:
1962-59,595 1963-61,531 1964-63,1481965-64,604 1966-66,649 1967-69,616 1968-72, I 09 1 9 6 9 - 73,969 1 9 7 0 - 76,951 197178,860 1972-60,818 1973-84,145 1974-87,904
The figures are not precisely comparable because they are based on an estimated share of workload in relation to the common service areas such as Personnel and Finance and Accounting in the former Postmaster-General's Department, which at that time performed postal services and radio frequency management functions.

598 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Defence Budgets: Russia and United States of America
(Question No. 4319)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
Is he able to state with reference to the 1982 budget for the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (a) what sum was allocated for defence (i) in absolute terms and (ii) as a percentage of the budget, (b) whether the cost of compulsory military service is included under defence or education and (c) are percentage figures comparable with those of the United States of America in view of (i) State budgets in the United States of America, (ii) budgets for republics in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and (iii) the relative sizes of the public sectors in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) The published Soviet State Budget for 1982 acknowledges an allocation for defence of 17.05 billion rubles or 5.3 per cent of total State Budget spending. Neither Australian Defence Department analysts, nor, as far as I am aware, any other Western analysts, are able to reconcile this figure, or other specific components of the Soviet Budget, with the evident scale of the Soviet defence effort as it would be comprehended in United Nations or other international definitions of defence activity. The annual cost of the total Soviet defence effort may be estimated in different ways for different purposes. Various authorities have produced estimates ranging from three to five times the published figure.
(c) Published defence expenditure and total budget expenditure figures for the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics are not directly comparable.
Rubella Vaccinations
(Question No. 4320)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
Has any study been carried out on the percentage of failed rubella vaccinations in Australia; if so, what were the results.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am aware of one such study carried out and published in Australia. This was a five year follow-up of school-girls vaccinated for rubella, undertaken by Margaret A. Menser, Jill M. Forrest and Robyn D. Bransby in 1976-77 in New South Wales. This showed that only 5 per cent ofvaccinees were still susceptible to rubella. The results were published in the Medical Journal of Australia, 29 July 1978, page 83-88. The study was supported by the National Health and Medical Research Council.
It is understood that Dr Margaret Burgess (nee Menser) will be undertaking another survey amongst school children shortly.
Another study has been undertaken recently by Dr Barbara Francis of Melbourne. The results of this study are expected to be published shortly.
Taxation Office, Sydney: Staff Level
(Question No. 4360)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:

Further to the answer to Question No. 3866 (Hansard, 9 March 1982, page 739):
(a) is it a fact that the duties of Position No. 2506, Clerk Class 2/3, Paying Officer, Expenditure Section in the Australian Taxation Office, Sydney, consisted entirely of work relating to the cash payment of salaries and that this position is no longer required to be filled; if so, is the staff level for the Office decreased by one position; and
(b) is the Minister able to state whether similar positions to position No. 2506 in other Commonwealth Government departments and statutory authorities are no longer necessary.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following information in answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) The duties of Position No. 2506, in the Australian Taxation Office, Sydney, did consist entirely of work relating to the cash payment of salaries. The position is no longer required and has been withdrawn from the active establishment.
The staff ceiling of the Australian Taxation Office was reduced by 5 when the cash payment of salaries was discontinued, the additional reduction representing the estimated aggregate manpower usage on cash payments in other areas of the Office.
(b) Implementation of the Review of Commonwealth Functions (RCF) decision to eliminate cash pays involved small reductions in the staff ceilings of a number of departments and statutory authorities. It is a matter for the individual departments and authorities affected to decide, in the first instance, what staffing re-arrangements should be made in response to the RCF decision and those staff ceiling reductions consequent upon it.
Fees for Direct Crediting of Commonwealth Employees' Salaries
(Question No. 4361)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) What was (a) the total sum paid to savings banks and (b) the sum paid to each savings bank in the form of fees for direct crediting of Commonwealth employees' salaries in each of the last 5 years.
(2) What is the estimated sum to be paid in 1981-82.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following information in answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) The information sought is set out in the following table. It was compiled in respect of payees paid under the Department of Finance Pay System only. Data with respect to departments/agencies operating their own payroll systems, for example, Defence (for its Service Personnel payroll) and the Australian Telecommunications Commission, are not included.
Deposits to savings banks (and hence the incurring of associated transaction fees) through the Finance Pay System did not commence until February 1979. From February 1979 the savings deposit facility of the Finance Pay System was extended progressively over the ensuing six months to the various savings banks as and when their systems were developed to accept group payroll deposits.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 599

Some savings banks have recently waived payment of trans-
action fees on savings deposits. An asterisk in the table denotes those banks which no longer require payment of deposit

fees. The question of deposit fees is to be discussed with bank officials before the end of 1982.

DIRECT DEPOSITS OF COMMONWEALTH SALARIES TO SAVING BANK ACCOUNTS PROCESSED BY DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND RELATED FEES PAID BY THE GOVERNMENT

Fees

Financial year

Banks

1979-80

1981-82 1980-81 (Estimate only)

*Australia and New Zealand Savings Bank Limited
*Bank of New South Wales Savings Bank Limited The Commercial Savings Bank of Australia Limited *Commonwealth Savings Bank
CBC Savings Bank Limited The National Bank Savings Bank Limited State Bank of Victoria . . . . . .
*Savings Bank of South Australia
Rural and Industries Bank of Western Australia Savings Bank of Tasmania Launceston Bank for Savings

$
51.00 75.00
20.50 2,386.50
20.50
44.75 952.00 160.00
105.75 10.75

$ 1,064.75 2,782.00
316.75 17,215.75
812.00 1,024.50 8,075.00
794.00 562.25
44.00

$ 3,561.25 6,965.50
2,123.00 31,496.50 4,187.75
8,568.50 29,595.00
1,760.00
1,166.00
353.75 133.25

Total

3,826.75

32,691.00

89,910.50

Total Direct Deposits

18,412,368.30 61,062,360.37 263,696,500.10

*Denotes banks which have waived deposit fees.

Government-Subsidised Business Colleges
(Question No. 4364)
Mr' Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) How many business colleges in New South Wales were in receipt of Federal or State Government subsidies in 1981,
(2) How many students who were studying in Governmentsubsidised business colleges in New South Wales in 1981 were (a) in receipt of and (b) not in receipt of Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowances.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Twenty-seven colleges were in receipt of per capita grants in 1981 under the Commonwealth Government's program of assistance to non-government business colleges. I am informed that no State Government subsidies were paid to the colleges in 1981.
(2) (a) An estimated 3,030 students at non-government business colleges in new South Wales received allowances under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS) in 1981. This is a preliminary figure as the final statistics for 1981 are not yet available.
(b) There is no information readily available on the number of students not in receipt of Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowances who were studying at the Government subsidised business colleges in 1981. Apart from the subsidised secretarial courses which numbered 72 in New South Wales in 1981. the colleges provided (both as to subject and duration) a variety of courses which do not quality for Tertiary Education Assistance. Moreover there are students enrolled in the subsidised courses who also do not qualify for TEAS. The two categories of students in receipt and not in receipt of TEAS would appear therefore not to be strictly comparable.

Female Apprentices
(Question No. 4372)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
How many female apprentices were indentured and what percentage of the total apprentices did they represent, in each occupational category, for each of the years 1971 to 1982.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Precise statistics 'on the number of female apprentices in Australia are not available because some State Apprenticeship Authorities do not currently record this information. However, on the basis of the limited information available it is estimated that females account for less than 5 per cent of the total number of apprentices.
If hairdressing apprentices are excluded, females account for less than 2 per cent of total apprentices. Apart from hairdressing, the main trades in which women are in training are food trades (predominantly cooking), the printing trades and the metal trades.
In association with efforts to improve information about apprentices generally, State Labour Departments have agreed to provide information on female apprentices in respect of 1982-83.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of Defence
(Question No. 4411)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction.

600 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment'
(b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties and
(c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) On 24 February 1982 the Department of Defence issued Departmental Industrial Instruction No. 3/82 which amplified Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 which was attached as an Annex to that Instruction.
(b) There is no single percentage answer to this question. The facts are as follows:
(i) generally operators spend 85 per cent of their day on operating duties. However, these operating duties include non-keying tasks such as reading documents, work recording, liaison with supervisors and customers, etc. The time spent on these non-keying tasks varies but can be as high as 50 per cent of the time spent on operating duties.
(ii) approximately 5 per cent of operators' time is spent on 'other' duties such as completion of flextime forms, completion of training documents, etc.
(c) (i) and (ii) This varies according to the requirements of each situation. For example, Data Processing Operators in my Department achieve an average of 37,000 keystrokes each day and this is considered acceptable considering the amount of their time spent on non-keying tasks and non-operating duties as outlined above.
On the other hand, the output of Word Processing Operators is not evaluated in terms of Keystrokes because of the necessity for a great deal of interaction with the computer programs in progressively editing and correcting documents. If output standards were to be established for this work they would more appropriately relate to pages or jobs completed and would vary widely according to the great variety of types of word processing jobs offered to operators.
Pine Gap Facility
(Question No. 4441)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 22 April 1982:
(I) Do Government priorities differ from the order of priorities in Air Force Staff Objective 5163 of August 1981; if so. in what way.
(2) Is intelligence collection and surveillance of northern approaches to Australia the first priority.
(3) What part does the Pine Gap facility, Northern Territory, play in this objective.
(4) Has the Government accepted the principle that the use of bases on Australian soil should be subject to the sharing of the benefits between Australia and the United States of America with no derogation of Australian sovereignty.
(5) Does the less than equal access for Australia to information collected at Pine Gap, and analysed there and elsewhere, result in Australia having some of the disadvantages of

being a nuclear target but few of the benefits obtained by the United States from the Pine Gap base.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) An Air Force Staff Objective establishes neither policy concerning Defence capabilities nor the priorities for the satisfaction of such capabilities. A Staff Objective is merely a potential proposal, drawing on established policy for capability development, considered to be required in the long term for the effective conduct of operations.
The draft Air Force Staff Objective in question No. 5163 did not suggest that the stated capabilities were listed in an order of priority. However, I can confirm that all the listed capabilities, including intelligence collection and surveillance of northern approaches to Australia, are among those capabilities to which the Government attaches the highest priority.
(3) It is the practice of the Government neither to confirm nor deny speculation or assertion about the role or functions of the Joint Defence Space Research Facility.
(4) The fundamental principle, accepted by the Government, is that joint defence facilities in Australia should operate to the benefit of Australia and with the full knowledge and concurrence of the Australian Government.
(5) This part of the honourable member's question contains a basic misconception. The Government to Government agreement on the Joint Defence Space Research Facility at Pine Gap provides that 'information derived from the research programs at the facility shall be shared by the two Governments'. This requirement is being met.
Joint Defence Space Research Facility, Pine Gap
(Question No. 4453)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 22 April 1982:
Is he able to say whether General Edwin Black ever visited the United States of America base at Pine Gap, Northern Territory; if so, did he have a security clearance that allowed him free access to the base.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Policy requirements relating to the operation of the Joint Defence Space Research Facility at Pine Gap would normally preclude the Australian Government from revealing details of individual visitors to the facility. In this instance, however, I am prepared to advise that there is no record of General Edwin Black ever having visited the Joint Defence Space Research Facility at Pine Gap.
Land Acquisitions under States Grants (Nature Conservation) Act 1974
(Question No. 4481)
Mr West asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
(I) What land has been purchased by States for nature conservation purposes using funds provided under the States Grants (Nature Conservation) Act 1974.
(2) What financial commitments under the Act entered into between the Commonwealth and the States have still to be met.
(3) Has the Commonwealth entered into agreements with States to provide funds to acquire land under this Act in each year since 1977-78.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 601

(4) Does the Commonwealth intend to provide funding to the States under this Act in the future.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Land has been purchased for addition to national parks and reserves and other nature conservation purposes using funds provided under the States Grants (Nature Conservation) Act 1974 in the following localities.
New South WalesLimeburner's Creek Nature Reserve Violet Hill, Myall Lakes National Park
VictoriaMallacoota Inlet National Park Yellingbo Faunal Reserve
QueenslandEubenangee Swamp National Park Crows Nest Falls National Park Lamington National Park Cape Cleveland 'Taunton' near Dingo-
South AustraliaMurray's Lagoon Pike River, Gurra Gurra Lakes Coffin Bay Peninsula Deep Creek, Fleurieu Peninsula Morganvale, Canopus
Western AustraliaYalgorup National Park Benger Swamp Cape Le Grande National Park Nambung National Park Lake Chandala Leeuwin-Naturaliste National Park
TasmaniaBadger Island Lavinia Nature Reserve (King Island) Labillardiere Peninsula and Partridge Island Asbestos Range (including Badger Head-) Three Hummock Island
- Funds provided under the Environment (Financial Assistance) Act 1977.
(2) Financial commitments under the States Grants (Nature Conservation) Act 1974 which have still to be met by the Commonwealth are:
New South Wales$238,000 to finalise the purchase of Violet Hill, Myall Lakes National Park.
Victoria$40,000 to finalise the purchase of Yellingbo Fauna Reserve.
(3) No.
(4) The Environment (Financial Assistance) Act 1977 provides that financial assistance may be granted to the States in respect of projects related to the environment, including purposes connected with nature conservation. While proper consideration would be given to the Commonwealth funding of projects of national and international importance under this Act, it should be recognised that the Commonwealth provides substantial general revenue grants to the States which they may allocate to meet their own priorities.
Mineral Rights Held by Australian Government
(Question No. 4491)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 28 April 1982:

Further to his answer to Question No. 2992 (Hansard, 16 February 1982, page 207), (a) what is the status of mineral rights in Shoal water Bay Defence Training Reserve, Queensland, and (b) from whom and when were the freehold and/or mineral rights acquired.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) The land comprising the Shoalwater Bay Defence Training Area in Queensland, together with all minerals therein, was acquired from the State of Queensland by compulsory process under the Lands Acquisition Act 1955 on I July 1965. There are currently in the High Court of Australia proceedings in which Murphyores Incorporated Pty Limited claims to be entitled to the grant of a lease to extract certain minerals from parts of the Area. The claim is denied by the Commonwealth.
Radioactive Fallout, South Australia
(Question No. 4515)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 29 April 1982:
(I) What steps have been taken to implement the proposal mentioned on page 30 of the 1980-81 Annual Report of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs for a co-operative approach in medical screening and soil tests in relation to media reports of radioactive fallout in remote areas of South Australia, following atomic tests.
(2) Has any progress resulted from the proposal to signpost areas which might be contaminated, including measures to publicise the radiation hazard symbol used.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Following a meeting of Commonwealth officers with representatives of the Pitjantjatjara Council in November 1980, I wrote to the Chairman of the Council on 30 January 1981 offering a program of soil tests and personal medical tests. Since no contemporary record has been found of the 'black mist' incident, I asked the Council to provide a description of its precise location and the names of the people involved in it. There has however, been no response from the Council to my letter.
(2) Signposting was undertaken at Emu and Maralinga in 1979 in accordance with the recommendations of the Australian Ionising Radiation Advisory Council. A report entitled 'Management of Former UK Atomic Weapons Test Sites in Australia: Report of 1979 work program' describing details of work undertaken in 1979 including signposting, was tabled in Parliament on 2 December 1980.
A leaflet displaying the radiation hazard symbol, and describing restrictions applying to the atomic test sites, is made available to people travelling through the areas concerned. The Yalata and Pitjantjatjara communities have recently been asked to comment on whether they see a need for any information additional to the leaflet and existing signs.
Housing Commission Homes: Allocations to Servicemen
(Question No. 4523)
Mr Dawkins asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 29 April 1982:

602 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(I) How many State Housing Commission homes are currently being held in Western Australia for use by (a) Army, (b) Naval and (c) Air Force personnel.
(2) How many of theses homes were vacant on 30 March 1982 and for how long had each been vacant.
(3) Where were the vacant homes located.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The numbers of houses held under the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement (Servicemen) for use by Servicemen in Western Australia are: Army 260; Navy 108; RAAF 349.
(2) and (3) Records of dwellings vacant for less than two months are not readily available. Dwellings vacant for two months or longer, as at 30 March 1982, were as follows:
Navy-I house at East Fremantle vacated 8.12.81
ArmyI house at Balga vacated 8.12.81
I house at Girrawheen vacated 4.11.81
RAAF-I house at Balga vacated 14.12.81

I house at Swan vacated 29.7.81
25 houses at Bullsbrook East vacated at various times since April 1980.
Organisations in Grayndler Electorate receiving Commonwealth Funds
(Question No. 4551)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
( I) What organisations in the Electoral Division of Grayndler receive funding from the Minister's Department.
(2) What are the addresses of these organisations.
(3) What is the amount and type of funding for each organisation.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I )-(3) Five organisations within the Electoral Division of Grayndler have been identified as receiving direct funding from the Commonwealth through my Department. They are as set out in the table below. The amount of expenditure in 1980-81 and the estimated expenditure in 1981-82 have also been included.

Type of funding

Name and address of organisation

Nursing Homes Assistance Act (Deficit Financing)
Home Nursing Subsidy

Chesalon Parish Nursing Home, 63 Prospect

Road, Summer Hill

.....

Pitt Wood Nursing Home, 23 and 40

Charlotte Street, Ashfield . . .

Beth-Shean Nursing Home, 67 Floss Street,

Hurlstone Park . . . . . . . . .

Ashfield Community Mobile Nursing Service,

10 Norton Street, Ashfield . . . . .

Canterbury Municipal Council, 137 Beamish

Street, Campsie . . . . . . . . .

Federal expenditure

1980-81

1981-82

(actual) (estimated)

$

$

241,071

302,000

957,195 1,192,000

125,134

192,000

8,000

8,000

41,277

43,100

The honourable member will recognise that, although these nursing homes and home nursing organisations are located within the Electorate of Grayndler, they may provide services to persons normally resident in other electorates. In addition, residents of Grayndler may obtain services from organisations receiving direct funding from my Department but located in other electorates. Grants may be made to other organisations (for example Family Planning Association of New South Wales) on a State wide basis; such organisations may provide services within this electorate.
My Department administers a number of programs which provide financial assistance to individuals, for example medical benefits, nursing home benefits, pharmaceutical benefits, domiciliary nursing care benefits and subsidies to persons receiving private hospital treatment. Residents of the Electorate of Grayndler would receive such benefits where appropriate.
Salt Content of Drinking Water
(Question No. 4584)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 22 April 1982:
(1) What investigations have been undertaken by the National Health and Medical Research Council in each year since 1977 into the salt content of drinking water supplies in

Australian cities and rural centres, and the potential effects of high salt content on the population.
(2) What recommendations has the Council made following their investigations, to whom and when were those recommendations made, and what actions have been taken as a result.
(3) What are the current mean levels of (a) total dissolved solids and (b) sodium in the drinking water supplies of (i) Sydney, (ii) Melbourne, (iii) Brisbane, (iv) Adelaide, (v) Perth, (vi) Hobart, (vii) Darwin and (viii) Canberra.
(4) What standards for (a) total dissolved salts and (b) sodium in drinking water supplies are accepted by (i) the Commonwealth and (ii) each State.
(5) What criteria are used to determine the standards.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In September 1977 the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) directed that a Working Party be established to review available data on sodium in the Australian diet. In September 1978 the NHMRC directed that the matter of the sodium content of Australian water supplies be referred to the Working Party.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 603

Subsequently the Working Party on Sodium in the Australian Diet was established with the following terms of reference: 'To inquire into and report to the Nutrition Committee on the sodium content of the Australian diet and the public health implications thereof. The Working Party considered amongst other things, the available data on the sodium content of drinking water in Australia and the health implications of consuming water of high sodium content.
(2) The Working Party's report has still to be considered by the Committees of the NHMRC and by the full Council.
(3) Estimates of levels for mean total dissolved solids and sodium on capital city water supplies are:

Total

City

dissolved solids Sodium

Sydney Melbourne Brisbane Adelaide Perth Hobart Darwin Canberra

(mg/L)* 84-108 40-95 175-322 163-714
258-331 40-205
30-70 30-140

(mg/L) 12-29 5 14-46 74-99 58-76 5 3-6 3-8

* milligrams per litre
(4) (a) (i) No standards for total dissolved solids for water quality are recommended by the Federal Government. The joint National Health and Medical Research Council/Australian Water Resources Council guidelines 'Desirable Quality for Drinking Water in Australia' recommended a current desirable criterion for total dissolved solids of 1500 mg/L with a long term objective of 500 mg/L.
(b) (i) Neither the World Health Organisation nor the Federal Government has recommended an acceptable level for sodium in drinking water.

(a) (ii) and (b) (ii) Responsibility for water quality in the States lies with the health authorities in those States. In the Australian Capital Territory, where responsibility lies ultimately with the Minister for Health, levels of sodium and total dissolved solids are so low as not to be a matter of concern to public health.
(5) Present criteria for total dissolved solids are based on taste considerations. Waters with high total dissolved solids are not necessarily high in sodium. At present there are no widely adopted criteria for determining acceptable levels of sodium in drinking water.
Community Language Courses
(Question No. 4596)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(1) Did the Prime Minister, in his policy statement on 30 September 1980, promise funds to establish new courses in community languages in universities and/or colleges of advanced education.
(2) If so, what new courses have been established as a result of this promise.
(3) What has been the appropriation and spending on these new courses in (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Prime Minister announced that funds would be made available for these purposes in his policy statement of 30 September 1980.
(2) and (3) A total of $900,000 for each year of the 1982-84 triennium has been earmarked in the funds made available through the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission. The approved programs and the level of funding for each are set out below.

Institution

Course

New South Wales-- Macquarie University
Milperra College of Advanced Education
VictoriaUniversity of Melbourne, in conjuction with La Trobe University and Monash University Victoria College
Phillip Institute of Technology, with contractual arrangements to be made with Footscray Institute of Technology and the Institute of Catholic Education
Queensland-Brisbane College of Advanced Education
South AustraliaSouth Australian College of Advanced Education

A Slavonic Studies Section in the School of Modern Languages, to offer initially Serbian, Croatian Macedonian and Polish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
An award course in community languages to include Arabic, Turkish and Vietnamese . . . . .
An honours degree course in Modern Greek.

Croatian, Serbian and Turkish to be offered as major studies

in BA (multi-disciplinary) and strands in BA (interpreting/

translating)

.....

Vietnamese and Maltese to be included in UG3 Ethnic

Studies course.

.....

UG3 award course in Modern Greek.
Upgrading of existing course in interpreting and translating in Greek and Italian; and the introduction of Pitantjatjara as an option in existing courses . . . . . . . . . .

Annual Funding
$
200,000 80,000 110,000
120,000 100,000
50,000
60,000

604 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Institution

Course

Western AustraliaWestern Australian College of Advanced Education
A.C.T.Australian National University

Portuguese and Vietnamese to be offered as options within existing courses and proposed interpreting and translating courses, or in award course in community languages.
Vietnamese as a major study in the Faculty of Asian Studies.
TOTAL

Annual Funding
$
100,00 80,000 900,000

Export Incentives
(Question No. 4601)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister, in his policy statement of 30 September 1980, promise to continue the Government's strong support for export incentives beyond 1982.
(2) If so, what was the Commonwealth's appropriation and spending on export incentives in (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Commonwealth's appropriation and spending on export incentives in 1980/81 1981/82 was as follows:

Appropriation Expenditure

1980-81 1981-82

$

$

260m

281

260m

281

Industrial Relations Advice
(Question No. 4603)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister, in his policy statement on 30 September 1980, promise to initiate a major campaign of advice and assistance to all levels of management on the conduct and practice of industrial relations.
(2) If so, when was this promise implemented and in what form.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) A program of discussions with industry and union organisations was undertaken by the previous Minister for Industrial Relations, Mr Viner, to meet that commitment. The program of meetings included the following:
New South WalesChamber of Manufacturers New South Wales Employers Federation of New South Wales Labour Council of New South Wales
QueenslandQueensland Confederation of Industry Metal Trades Industry Association Queensland Trades and Labour Council

South AustraliaMetal Industries Association of South Australia Chamber of Commerce and Industry United Trades and Labour Council of South Australia
VictoriaAustralian Mines and Metals Association Master Builders Association of Victoria Victoria Employers' Federation
Western AustraliaVarious mining industry representatives Confederation of Western Australia Industry
Since becoming Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations I have of course met with the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the Confederation of Australian Industry. I am now pursuing an intensive program of meetings with employer and industry interests and union organisation throughout Australia to promote the widest possible mutual understanding of matters relevant to the shaping and implementation of the Government's policies affecting industrial relations.
Immigration Review Panel: Members
(Question No. 4636)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) What criteria did the Government use in appointing the members of the Immigration Review Panel.
(2) Can he provide a list of the qualifications and experience of the members of the Panel as appointed.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) At his media conference on 18 January 1982 my predecessor stated in relation to the members of the Immigration Review Panel-'Each of the persons chosen is an Australian citizen with an international outlook and a clear understanding of the role of immigration in our evolving national identity. In my discussions with them. I was impressed with their eagerness to serve Australia in this way and the clear-minded approach which they will apply to the implememtation of immgration policy. Over time. I am confident that they will make suggestions which will lead to further refinement of that policy.
(2) Those appointed to the panel by my predecessor as part-time members are, in alphabetical order:
Mr Ray Barrett-Australian born actor and television personality. Has starred in feature films, both in Australia and overseas;
Mr Victor Borg A. M.-Melbourne based solicitor of Maltese origin. Australian citizen-active in community affairs;

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 605

Mr Tony Boskovic-International soccer referee and prominent Australian of East European origin. Over 20 years resident in Australia;
Miss Joan Carden OBE.-British born renowned operatic soprano who has performed leading roles both in Australia and overseas;
Mr George Donikian-Prominent Australian of Greek origin. Well known news presenter, Channel 0/28;
Mr Ivan Durrant-Australian born innovative sculptor and artist. Has horse breeding interests;
Mr King Fong-Prominent Sydney businessman of Chinese origin-Australian citizen;
Miss Noni Hazlehurst-Australian born actress and presenter of Play School with Australian Broadcasting Commission;
Mrs Elizabeth Hoffmann-Commissioner-Aboriginal Development Commission-Prominent in Aboriginal affairs;
Mr Giancarlo Martini-Piovano-Prominent Australian of Italian origin-active in community affairs;
Miss Marlene Matthews A. M.-Former Olympic sprinter and active coach;
Mr Frederick Parslow-Australian born actor who has played leading roles both in Australia and overseas;
Miss Marilyn Rowe OBE.-Renowned Australian ballerina who has performed with considerable success both in Australia and overseas;
Sir Garfield Sobers-Former West Indian Test Cricket star-now coaching Australian youth-Australian citizen;
The Chairman Mr Brian Murray, who was also a personal ministerial appointment, was chosen because of his extensive experience in the review of adverse immigration decisions. He was, prior to this appointment responsible for the recent Regularisation of Status Program.
Proposed Nursing Home, Burton St, Concord
(Question No. 4652)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Has the Commonwealth endorsed the approval granted by the New South Wales Minister for Health in a letter dated 26 February 1982, for a 40 bed nursing home in Burton Street, Concord, New South Wales, as proposed by the St Mary's Concord Community Centre for the Frail Aged.
(2) Will the Commonwealth contribute towards the cost of building the nursing home; if so, (a) what sum will it contribute and (b) when will such payment be made.
Mr CarIton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The National Health Act and the Nursing Homes Assistance Act, both of which are administered by my Department, provide for the payment of daily rates of nursing home benefits in respect of individual patients and for the provision of financial assistance to eligible non-profit organisations in meeting approved operating deficits incurred in conducting nursing homes.
Both of these Acts require that, in considering an application for approval for the construction or acquisition of new nursing home accommodation or for the provision of any additional nursing home accommodation at an existing nursing home, regard shall be had to the adequacy of the existing accommodation available (including premises proposed to be

approved as nursing homes) in the area in which the additional accommodation is to be provided. The Acts also provide that before reaching a decision on an application for approval-in-principle my Department must consult with the State authority responsible for the administration of nursing homes. For this purpose a Commonwealth/State Coordinating Committee on Nursing Home Accommodation has been established in each State.
These co-ordinating committees consider applications for new nursing home accommodation and forward a report and recommendation in respect of each application to my Department for final decision.
A proposal was received from St Mary's Concord Community Centre for the Frail Aged for a 40 bed hostel and a 20 bed nursing home. The Commonwealth/State Co-ordinating committee examined the nursing home proposal but recommended in its report to my Department that the proposal not be granted approval-in-principle. The Co-ordinating committee's recommendation for non-approval, which was supported by the representatives of the New South Wales Health Commission and was, in fact, unanimous, was based on its assessment that there are sufficient nursing home beds in the area without the additional 20 beds sought. Based on the Committee's report my Department endorsed the recommendation for non-approval and the organisation has since been advised to that effect.
However the relevent legislation empowers me to review my Department's decision in such cases and, should the organisation request such a review, I would be pleased to do so.
I am not aware of any indication of approval for the proposal by the New South Wales Minister for Health but in any case approval-in-principle and subsequent approval in substance is, in the context of the honourable member's question, purely for the purposes of paying federal financial assistance to the nursing home. The New South Wales Government bears virtually none of the financial burdens that accrue from the approval of new, privately operated nursing homes. It would therefore not be appropriate for the New South Wales Minister for Health to indicate, unilaterally, approval for such proposals, at least insofar as such action may be taken to imply that federal financial assistance will be forthcoming.
(2) The question of capital funding of eligible nursing homes is a matter for my colleague the Minister for Social Security and his Department. However, I understand that the Department of Social Security will only consider such funding proposals when and if my Department grants approval-inprinciple for the nursing home to proceed. The question of capital funding for the 40 hostel beds mentioned is one for the Department of Social Security and such proposals are not subject to consideration by Commonwealth/State coordinating committees or by my Department.
Cost of Promotion of Government Programs
(Question No. 2658)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) What sum was spent by the Minister's Department on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services during the period (a) I January 1980 to 18 October 1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.
(2) What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.
(3) Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.
(4) Which advertising agencies or consultants were used for each campaign.
(5) What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.

606 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(6) How was each agency or consultant selected.

(7) By what percentage has the departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased each year from 1975 to 1980 and during the period I January 1981 to 17 August 1981.

(8) What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82.

Mr Howard-The following answer is provided to the honourable member's question:

Parts I to 6 are not applicable to the Royal Australian Mint and the Australian Taxation Office as no expenditure was in-
curred by these organizations on advertising and promoting Government programs and services during the period I January 1980 to 17 August 1981.

(I) Period (a) I January 1980 to 18 October 1980-(a) Treasury-$2,242,666; (b) Australian Bureau of Statistics-$3,217.

Period (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981- (a) Treasury-$3,224,054; (b) Australian Bureau of
Statistics- $1,040, I00.

(2) (a) Treasury-

Loan Fund Raisings Personal Taxation Reduction Queensland Miners' Dispute

$5,320,279 $127,553 $18,888

(b) Australian Bureau of Statistics-- 1981 Census of Population and Housing:

Public Awareness Campaign Census Pilot Test Recruitment Campaign Census Recruitment Campaign

$997,764 $852
$44,701

(3)

Item of Expenditure

Campaign

(a) Treasury

Loan Fund 8 000-26-00: Loan Fund Raisings Expenses of Flotation

(Financial Agreement Act)

2-670-02-07: Advertising Personal Taxation Re-

PA YE-removal of tax sur-

duction

charge

2 -670-02 -06: Incidental and Queensland Miners' Dis-

other expenditure

pute

(b) Australian Bureau of Statistics

Incidental and other expendi19S I Census of Population

t u r e: 2 - 6 7 8 - 0 2 - 0 9 and Housing-all cam-

(1979-80) 2-678-02-10

paigns

(1980-81 )

(4) (i) The following Commonwealth master placing/charging agencies were used for media placement, for checking and monitoring media performance and for presentation of accounts for the campaigns:
(al Treasury---Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd, Fortune (Aust) Pty Ltd, Country Press Ltd, Country Press Cooperative Ltd, S.A. Country Newspapers Ltd.
(b) Australian Bureau ofStatistics--Burton Street Advertising Co., Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd, Fortune (Aus!.) Pty Ltd, S.A. Country Newspapers Ltd, Country Press Ltd, Gordon & Gotch (Aus!.) Ltd, Neville Jeffress Advertising Pty Ltd.
(ii) The technical services of the following agencies were used to plan and produce advertisements:

(a) Treasury--Ogilvy and Mather Aus!. Pty Ltd-loan fund raisings, Murray Evans Advertising Pty Ltdpersonal taxation reduction Doyle Dane Bernbach- /Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd-Queensland Miners' dispute.

(b) Australian Bureau of Statistics-Burton Street Adver-
tising Co-1981 census of Population and Housingall campaigns.

(5)-

(a) Treasury Loan Fund Raisings-
Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd
Fortune (Aus!.) Pty Ltd
Country Press Ltd
Country Press Cooperative Ltd
S.A. Country Newspapers Ltd
Personal Taxation ReductionDoyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd
Fortune (Aus!.) Pty Ltd
Country Press Ltd
Country Press Cooperative Ltd
Queensland Miners' DisputeDoyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd . . . . . . .

$
2,536,033 2,408,560
210,222 152,610
12,854
82,999 34,974 6,380
3,200
18,888

(b) Australian Bureau of Statistics 1981 Census of

Population and Housing

Burton Street Advertising Co.

30,400

Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd

425,626

Fortune (Aus!.) Pty Ltd

477,978

S.A. Country Newspapers Ltd

11,523

Country Press Ltd

96,292

Gordon and Gotch (Aus!.) Ltd

710

Neville Jeffress Advertising Pty Ltd

788

Payments to Ogilvy and Mather Aus!. Pty Ltd and Murray Evans Advertising for technical services in the planning and production of advertisements (see 4 (ii) above) were made by the Australian Government Advertising Advisory Council.

(6) Each agency or consultant was selected by the Minister for Administrative Services in the case of the master placing/charging agencies and by the Australian Government Advertising Service in consultation with the Department in relation to selection of agencies to provide technical services to plan, create and produce advertisements.

(7) Total expenditure for all types of advertising and the percentage changes between the fiscal years concluding in the years nominated in the Question are:

Expenditure

$

(a) Treasury

(i) Financial Year-

1974-75

910,940

1975-76

890,686

1976-77

1,160,931

1977-78

1,331,754

1978-79

1,620,560

1979-80

3,015,503

Percentage change
-2.2 +30.3 + 14.7 +21.7 +86.1

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 607

Percentage

----------------------E-x-p-en-d-it-u-re------change

$

1980-81

3,102,496

+2.9

(ii) I January 1981 to 17

August 1981

2,848,282

(b) Australian Bureau of Statistics

(i) Financial Year-

1974-75

99,741

1975-76

68,209

1976-77

25,443

1977-78

25,966

1978-79

40,653

1979-80

47,275

1980-81

469,125

(ii) I January 1981 to 17

August 1981

1,125,105

-31.6 -62.7 +2.1 +56.6 + 16.3 +892.3

(c) Royal Australian Mint

Year-

1974-75

666

1975-76

336

1976-77

357

1977-78

162

1978-79

2,549

1979-80

2,445

1980-81 includes (I

January-17 August 1981)

5,430

-49.5 +6.3 +54.6 + 1473.5 -4.1
+ 122.1

(d) Australian Taxation Office

Year-

1975-76

151,922

1976-77

52,693

1977-78

42,060

1978-79

83,143

1979-80

92,860

1980-81

132,150

1981-82 (est.)

79,100

-65.3 -20.2 +97.7
+ I 1.7
+42.3 +40.1

The Australian Government Advertising Service has advised that indexes of increases in unit costs of Common-
wealth departmental advertising since 1975 are:

1975 (Base) 1976 . .
(I) and (4)--

Index of Unit Cost of Commonwealth Departmental Advertising
100 110

Index of Unit Cost of Commonwealth Departmental Advertising

1977

120

1978

128

1979

140

1980

153

1981 (I January-I 7 August)

165

(8) No expenditure is expected to be incurred on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82 by the Australian Taxation Office and the Royal Australian Mint.
The estimated cost of advertising Loan Fund Raisings by the Treasury for 1981-82 is $3,085,000. No other expenditure is expected to be incurred during 1981-82.
The estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82 by the Australian Bureau of Statistics is $850,000.

Uranium Mining Projects
(Question No_ 3669)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 18 November 1981:
(I) What is the current estimate of total development costs for each major uranium mining project in Australia.
(2) In the case of projects which have commenced, what proportion of the costs is yet to be spent.
(3) What has been the total expenditure for (a) exploration and (b) development in the uranium industry in each of the last 10 years.
(4) What is the estimated employment for the (a) construction and (b) production phase of each of the major uranium projects.
(5) What has been the total employment in the uranium mining industry in each of the last five years.
(6) What has been the public expenditure for infrastructure associated with uranium mining projects in each of the last five years.
(7) What is the estimated total public cost for infrastructure associated with each major uranium project.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is:

Project

Estimate of total development cost ($Am)*

Estimated workforce"

Construction

Production

Mary Kathleen (Qld) Ranger (N.T.) . Jabiluka (N.T.) Koongarra (N.T.) Nabarlek (N.T.) Ben Lomond (Qld) Olympic Dam
(Roxby Downs-S.A.) Honeymoon (S.A.) Beverley (SA)
Yeelirrie (WA.) Lake Way (WA.)

26 (on recommissioning in 1975) 332 (1981 dollars) 600 (1981 dollars) 70 ( 1979 dollars) 75 (1979 dollars) 50 ( 1979 dollars) 1,000 (1978 dollars)

n.a. 1,200 1,060
250 450 200 n.a.

460 350 544 150 100 170-190 2,000-3,000

15-20 (1981 dollars)

20

33-70

Medium sized deposit. Reliable information expected to be available

when EIS released

Stage 2, 300 ( 1980 dollars)

800-1,000

850

45 (1981) dollars)

250

140

- Sources--Environmental Impact Statements (EIS), Company Annual Reports and public statements. n.a.-not available.

608 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(2) The major portion of costs have been spent on the Ranger (N.T.) and Nabarlek (N.T.) projects which are in operation. A pilot plant is currently being constructed at Honeymoon at an estimated cost of$7m.
(3) The AAEC has provided the following estimates in relation to expenditure for (a) exploration and (b) development in the uranium industry in each of the last 10 years.

Year

Uranium exploration
expenditure

Expenditure on development in uranium industry

($Am)

($Am)

1971

10

1972

10

1973

II

1974

II

0.9

1975

8

15.7

1976

13

1.7

1977

17

3.2

1978

25

6.5

1979

29

125.9

1980

35

170.5

(5) Information on the total employment in the uranium mining industry in each of the last five years is not available.
(6) and (7) Public expenditure on infrastructure for mining projects is primarily a matter for the States and Northern Territory Governments and information should be sought from those sources.

Roads
(Question No. 3920)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
What measures (a) have been taken and (b) are planned, to fully implement recommendations 29 to 34, and 37 to 40 of the 4th Report of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations entitled The provision of roads: A Report on the relations among the 3 spheres of Government in Australia 1981'.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
Recommendations 29 to 34 (a) and (b). These recommendations deal with the estab-
lishment of an Australian Roads Council (which would form, to all intents and purposes, a part of ATAC) to discuss roads matters relevant to local government. Representation of the Australian Council of Local Government Associations and the Bureau of Transport Economics on the ATAC Road Group is also recommended.
Any decisions on implementing these recommendations would, therefore, need to be taken by ATAC. Before doing so State and Territory Governments would need to implement ACIR Recommendations No. 35 and 36. ATAC Ministers have noted these recommendations but, so far, have not implemented them.
. ATAC is the main forum for consultation on transport polICY matters for Commonwealth/State/Territory Governments. While Ministers responsible for roads policy originally met separately, and still do so from time to time a conscious decision was taken in 1975 to meet as ATAC. After having met separately the current practice is still to report to

ATAC-acknowledging the paramount role of this body on roads policy issues. The ACIR Report itself recognizes this.
The principal roads issue in which the Commonwealth becomes involved in ATAC is that of funding. I have urged my State and Territory counterparts in ATAC to consider the development of a global funding plan for roads which would involve a collective assessment of the total future road needs and funding requirements in Australia. My proposal is being considered.
With regard to local government representation, initially as an observer on the ATAC Road Group, this would of course require the agreement of State and Territory Ministers. To date they have not considered it appropriate to provide for such representation. As to Recommendation 34, the BTE is represented on Road Group as an observer.
Recommendation 37 (a) and (b). Current road studies being undertaken by the
BTE will lead to a series of reports on issues relevant to future road funding decisions by Government. These reports will address, inter alia, the question of the physical condition and performance of Australian roads. The BTE is also working towards developing a better understanding of non-economic factors, particularly in respect of Local Roads, relevant to road expenditure decisions.
The Government will continue to take account of assessments made by the BTE in its deliberations on road funding.
Recommendations 38 and 39 (a) and (b). The BTE has been established as a research
body within the Department of Transport and Construction to assist the Commonwealth Government in the formulation of policy in all modes of transport. Its primary function is to advise the Commonwealth Government on the economic, technical, and financial aspects of transport in Australia. The BTE has a secondary function of providing assistance to State and local governments, Commonwealth and State instrumentalities and the private sector to identify and address transport problems.
While the BTE is formally reponsible to the Commonwealth Minister for Transport and Construction, the Bureau has and does respond to ATAC requests for advice which are addressed through the Commonwealth Minister. The Bureau is represented on ATAC Road Group as an observer.
Recommendation 40 (a) and (b). The Australian Road Research Board is regis-
tered in Victoria as a company limited by guarantee. While the Commonwealth, along with the States and Northern Territory, is represented on the Board, the Commonwealth alone is unable to implement the ACIR's recommendation.
Equal Employment Opportunities: Department of Communications
(Question No. 4130)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
(I) Does the Minister's Department have an equal employment opportunities program; if so, (a) how long has the program been in existence, (b) what are the aims of the program, (c) what is the Department's assessment of the success of the program in achieving its aims, (d) how have, or are, the aims of the program been, or being, met, (e) is the program aimed at covering the whole Department, or merely a section of it, (f) what are the procedures for union consultation and involvement in the program, (g) what involvement does the Equal Employment Opportunities Bureau of the Public Service Board have in the program and (h) has the

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 609

program changed in its priority rating within the Department since its introduction.
(2) If there is no program, on what basis was this decision reached.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) There is no formal equal employment opportunity program within the Department of Communications at the present time.
(2) It was judged that in view of the small size of the Department such a deliberate program was not necessary. However, support is given by ensuring that Departmental procedures are consistent with the concept. In this context, internal Departmental instructions on the filling of vacancies include guidelines consistent with the principles outlined in the National Labour Consultative Committee guidelines and material from the Equal Employment Opportunities Bureau of the Public Service Board.
In the process of drafting Departmental procedures there has been full consultation with staff representatives. Close attention to the question of non-discrimination is given throughout the process of job advertisement, selection and recruitment, and the Department continues to be involved closely in the Public Service Board's Equal Employment Opportunity co-ordination arrangements.
Equal Employment Opportunities: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 4133)
Mrs Kelly asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
(I) Does the Minister's Department have an equal employment opportunties program; if so, (a) how long has the program been in existence, (b) what are the aims of the program, (c) what is the Department's assessment of the success of the program in achieving its aims, (d) how have, or are, the aims of the program been, or being, met, (e) is the program aimed at covering the whole Department, or merely a section of it, (f) what are the procedures for union consultation and involvement in the program, (g) what involvement does the Equal Employment Opportunities Bureau of the Public Service Board have in the program and (h) has the program changed in its priority rating within the Department since its introduction.
(2) If there is no program, on what basis was this decision reached.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Equal employment opportunities are recognised as an important objective by my Department, the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) and the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). Personnel Officers attend Equal Employment Opportunities (EEO) seminars and the publication 'Equal Employment Opportunity Selection Guidelines' is made available to all staff involved in recruitment and advancement procedures. The facilities of the Equal Employment Opportunities Bureau are availed of.
While the Treasury and the ABS do not have specific Equal Employment Opportunity programs, personnel practices are designed to preclude discrimination and are considered to provide equal employment opportunities in staff recruitment, advancement and work content. In addition, the ABS has an officer specifically nominated to liaise with the Public Service Board's Equal Employment Opportunity Bureau and to alert ABS Management to possible action needed to ensure equal employment opportunities.

The Australian Taxation Office has had an Equal Employment Opportunities program for several years which has had a growing priority and has been developed as resources permitted. The aim of the program has been to ensure that all persons able to contribute to the work of the organisation have been given the same opportunities for appointment to, and promotion within, the Office. As well, with Aborigines and disabled persons, positive support is given to Public Service Board generated programs and requests to employ and, with women, there is a deliberate policy of non-discrimination in employment. Matters concerning EEO are canvassed, with other matters, at half-yearly meetings between management and Federal Officers of staff organisations represented in the ATO. It is assessed that the Office's program has had significant success; for example the number of women in the ATO, as a percentage of all staff, is significantly higher than in the Australian Public Service as a whole and the ATO is among the APS leaders in the employment of the disabled.
Cost of'Anro Asia' Oil Pollution Incident
(Question No. 4326)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) What was the total cost attributable to the clean-up operation associated with the Anro Asia oil pollution incident.
(2) What proportion of this was financed from the National Plan to Combat Oil Pollution and which organisations financed the remainder.
(3) How much of the total cost (a) has been and (b) is expected to be recovered from the polluter.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) The total cost attributable to the pollution control and clean-up operation is $284,274.44.
(2) The proportion financed from the National Plan to Combat Pollution of the Sea by Oil is $123,092.22 at this time. The remainder has been financed by other organisations as follows:

Public Works Department of Victoria (hire of equipment)
Caboolture Shire Council, Queensland (beach clean-up)
Landsborough Shire Council, Queensland (beach clean-up)
Department of Harbours and Marine, Queensland
Port of Brisbane Authority

$ 16,462.76
2,230.71 2,387.20 77,942.10
62,159.45

Total

161,182.22

(3) (a) None of the total cost has been recovered at this stage.
(b) Legal discussions are currently being conducted between the Port of Brisbane Authority's legal advisers and the vessel's insurance company to recover the total costs of $284,274.44.

Alice Springs-Darwin Railway: Estimated U nderspending
(Question No. 4328)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:

610 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

What are the precise reasons for the estimated underspending of $800,000 from the 1981-82 appropriation of $3,000,000 for the preliminary planning of the Alice Springs-Darwin Railway under Division 655:3: 12 of Appropriation Act (No. I) 1981-82.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
The estimated underspending reflects a reduction in the amount of work, principally contract work, which it is now estimated will actually be completed by 30 June 1982. Much of the preliminary planning work being undertaken can only be done in the 'dry' and there were delays in arranging for work to be done in the first part of the financial year 1981-82. It has also taken much longer than expected to make suitable arrangements for studies related to matters of concern to Aboriginal communittees. All work is now proceeding satisfactorily.
Marine and General Services: Estimated U nderspending
(Question No. 4329)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
What are the specific reasons for the estimated underspending of $51 0,000 from the 1981-82 appropriation of $5,910,000 for marine and general services under Division 969: I:01 of Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
The specific reasons are:
(i) Protracted discussions in preparing specifications for oil pollution combat equipment acceptable to all States caused delay in placing orders; and
(ii) fluctuating local and overseas markets have delayed delivery of ordered equipment.
Australian Postal Commission: Electric-Powered Vehicles
(Question No. 4358)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) How many electric-powered vehicles are currently operated by the Australian Postal Commission.
(2) In respect of each of these vehicles, (a) where are they located, (b) what was their purchase price, (c) which company manufactured them, (d) when were they (i) purchased and (ii) put into operation, (e) for what purposes are they used and (f) what are the running and maintenance costs.
(3) Are these vehicles recharged from mains supply or from an independent generator.
(4) What is the maximum distance that can be travelled by each vehicle after a complete re-charge and how much electricity is required to re-charge each vehicle.
(5) Will more of these vehicles be purchased.
Mr N. A. Brown-The Australian Postal Commission has advised me that the answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) Three.
(2) (a) Two vans are located in Sydney and one in Melbourne.

(b) Vans located in Sydney-$12,230 each. Van located in Melbourne-$5,OOO. "
("Note: This van had previously been used for demonstration purposes and was purchased at a discounted price.)
(c) Vans located in Sydney-Silent Power Co Pty Ltd. Van located in Melbourne-Daihatsu Pty Ltd.
(d) (i) and (ii) Silent Power vans purchased in December 1981. in operation since December 1981.
Daihatsu van purchased in January 1982, after one month's trial. in operation since December 1981.
(e) Silent Power vans-collection of mail from street posting boxes in the Sydney central business district. Daihatsu van-conveyance of mail between airline depots at Tullamarine airport, Melbourne.
(f) Running and maintenance costs have not been assessed at this stage.
(3) Vehicles are recharged from mains supply.
(4) All of the vehicles have a range of 30km-60km depending on how economically they are driven. The average recharge is approximately 7 kilowatt-hours.
(5) Yes, subject to financial assistance from the National Energy Research, Development and Demonstration Council.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 4394)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) to (3) No comprehensive medical examinations have been undertaken beyond those included in the appointment process which are conducted routinely. Should the circumstances warrant it, however, medical examinations will be arranged/encouraged when officers or employees report symptoms of apparently job-related illnesses. Where appropriate, in-house assessments of the work process, tasks and work environment have been made and appropriate remedial action has been taken.
It is understood that a National Health and Medical Research Council occupatiol)al health guide will shortly be issued. When this is available my Department and the Statutory Authorities under my jurisdiction will make every effort, subject to availability of resources, to comply with the Council's recommendations.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 611

Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 4410)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction,
(a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment',
(b) what percentage of their working day,
(i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties, and
(ii) do operators spend on other duties, and
(c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day,
(i) are operators expected to complete, and
(ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
In respect of the Department of the Treasury:
(a) Public Service Board Memorandum 81/418 of 23 October, 1981 was circulated to all word processing supervisory staff on 30 October, 1981 and the need for sufficient breaks from operating visual display units is well recognised by supervisors and by operating staff.
(b) (i) No prescribed time; however, approximately 70 to 75 percent of working time is estimated to be spent by word processing operators in the operation of visual display units.
(ii) approximately 25 to 30 per cent.
(c) (i) Word Processing Operators do not have a prescribed number of keystrokes to complete in a working day.
(ii) Statistical sampling averages show 37,500 keystrokes per operator per day and 19,000 keystrokes per steno-secretary per day. However, there would be large variances to these average figures.
In respect of the Australian Taxation Office:
(a) The Taxation Office has for many years been aware of the need for data processing operators to have adequate breaks. An allowance of I hour 34 minutes is provided each day specifically for breaks.
(b) (i) 71.4 per cent, i.e. 5 hours 15 minutes in 7 hours 21 minutes.
(ii) 28.6 per cent, i.e. 2 hours 6 minutes incorporating collection and return of work and and rest breaks.
(NB) There are two types of equipment in use in the Taxation Office data entry areas. These are blind keysets for original entry of data and combined VDU /keysets for verification of data. Operators rotate on a regular basis between these equipment types. The work content is quite different on each and has the effect of providing variety of duty, albeit in the same area, and a break from continuous keying duties.

(c) (i) Data Processing operators are required to key a range of transaction types totalling around 300. No transaction type has a required keying rate of greater than 12,500 characters per hour although the majority of the major transactions are of the order of 11-12,000 characters per hour.
(ii) A day's work is allocated to groups of data processing operators at the beginning of each day on the basis of the determined keystroke rates referred to in (i). Performance is measured by the group completing or not completing the day's work. Normally groups complete their day's work which means that, on average, operators achieve the determined keystroke rate.
In respect of the Bureau of Statistics:
(a) In accordance with Public Service Board Memorandum 81/418 of 23 October, 1981, the Australian Bureau of Statistics has reviewed its procedures for staff operating screen based equipment and, in consultation with the relevant staff associations, developed a related policy. The policy provides for eye testing, rest breaks, accommodation and furniture standards and checks of radiation levels.
(b) (i) and (ii) As the Australian Bureau of Statistics operates a diverse range of screen-based equipment and individual staff usage of such equipment varies from a few minutes each day to full time operation, it is not practicable to implement a standard procedure for staff to take rest breaks. However, in areas where staff operate screen based equipment full time (e.g. word processors) the work is planned to allow for the operators to take a break of up to 30 minutes after each 2 hours of work.
(c) (i) and (ii) The nature and usage of the equipment does not necessitate the recording of keystrokes required or achieved.
In respect of the Australian Industry Development Corporation:
(a) to (c) The Corporation does not employ any full time operators of visual display units and screen-based equipment.
In respect of the Commonwealth Banking Corporation:
(a) While the Ccrporation is not bound by the provisions of the Public Service Board Instructions generally (and hence specifically Memorandum 81/418), it is conscious of the need to ensure operators of visual display equipment are provided with a working system/environment designed to minimise general fatigue, eyestrain, etc. The Corporation, through its member banks and subsidiary companies, uses a considerable number of VDUs and screen-based equipment. In some locations (e.g. accounting areas), the equipment is operated full time whilst, at the other end of the scale (e.g. in the travel service), it is in only periodical use. The Corporation, under the auspices of the Chief Medical Officer and the Central Committee on Occupational Safety and Health, has monitored the results of research, both overseas and locally, into the possible detrimental effects of the use of VDUs and related equipment, and is conducting on-going studies in this area of office machinery usage.
(b) (i) and (ii) Supervisory staff, as well as the operators, are aware of the benefits of breaks from operating screenbased and visual display equipment. Apart from morning and afternoon tea breaks, it is deliberate management policy to provide the full time operators with frequent short periods away from their keyboards, through an arrangement whereby the operators collect and deliver batches of work and assist with sorting.
The Corporation has no maximum fixed period which operators are expected to spend on keyboard duties. However, on average they would perform keyboard duties (with regular

612 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

short-period breaks) for no more than approximately 80 per cent of their working day-say, six hours per day overall.
(c) (i) and (ii) Keystroke rates vary widely due to the range of applications the operators perform. Supervisory staff monitor operations closely and constantly reassess output to ensure keystroke rates are maintained at a reasonable level. There is no specific keystroke requirement per average working day.
In respect of the Reserve Bank of Australia:
(a) The Bank has prepared a set of guidelines which incorporate the recommendations of the Public Service Board Memorandum 81/418 with respect to work breaks for operators of VDU equipment, as well as other matters such as suitable furniture, light and work environment. Supervisors are instructed to ensure that the guidelines relating to work breaks are observed.
(b) (i) and (ii) The practice varies. Few operators are employed full time as VDU operators and most perform other duties in addition to operating VDUs. All are subject to (a) above.
(c) (i) and (ii) No formal target of keystrokes is set and statistics are not available.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 4421)
In substitution for the answer which was previously supplied to the honourable member on 24 May 1982.
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen rased equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment', (b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties and (c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
Within my Department and the statutory authorities under my portfolio there are a large number of visual display units installed which are operated on a full time basis for data processing while others are used by staff on a part time or intermittent basis for inquiry or retrieval of information related to their work. Because the question of rest breaks refers particularly to full time operators I have confined my answer to that group which comprises data processing operators, word processing operators and photo-typesetters.
(a) The Public Service Board's memorandum referred to in the question has been promulgated throughout all areas of my Department.
(b) (i) Word processing operators are expected to spend most of their time on operating duties. Up to one hour per day is allowed for rest breaks which can be taken intermittently throughout the day by arrangement with the Supervisor.

Data processing operators spend between 4t and 6t hours on operating duties with rest breaks ranging between 30 minutes and 1 hour.
Photo-typesetters on day shift spend about 7t hours of their 8 hour shift keyboarding from hard copy. They have a morning tea break and a t hour lunch break. Night shift operators spend approximately 8. hours of their 10 hour shift on terminals (I t hours includes lunch, two tea breaks and personal time). (ii) Word processing operators spend between t and 1t hours per day on other duties, such as operating printers, filing and associated tasks.
Data processing operators spend between t and 2 hours on other duties such as sorting, filing and processing documentation.
Photo-typesetters-no other duties. (c) Statistics are available for the following:
(i) Australian Electoral Office (D.P.O.'s)-50,000 to 65,000 keystrokes per day. Australian Survey Office (D.P.O.'s)-25,000 keystrokes per day. Australian Government Publishing Service (D.P.O.'s)-60,000 to 65,000 keystrokes per day.
(ii) Australian Electoral Office--60,000 to 70,000 keystrokes per day. Australian Survey Office-20,000 keystrokes per day. Australian Government Publishing Service-65,000 keystrokes per day.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department ofIndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 4423)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction:
(a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and Other Screen Based Equipment'.
(b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties, and (ii) do operators spend on other duties, and
(c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(a) A Departmental circular has been issued to all staff, including operators drawing attention to the main points in the memorandum and the availability of that memorandum to officers concerned.
(b) Screen Based Equipment and Visual Display Units are used in the Department and Statutory Authorities on a casual, semi continu'll and continual basis. For those used on a continual basis (i) 80 per cent estimated (ii) 20 per cent other duties including rest breaks
(c) (i) number of keystrokes for 7 hour and 21 minute day not prescribed

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 613

(ii) not applicable.
States Grants
(Question No. 4439)
Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 22 April 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a report on page 4 of the Australian Financial Review of 14 April 1982 that the Victorian Government paid (a) over $50m to hospitals and (b) further amounts to health centres, a transport authority and others for public service salaries from overdrafts charged at probably 17t per cent interest instead of from current account funds.
(2) What conditions will be placed on grants to States to obviate procedures of this kind when they are not justified by delays in Upper House approval of supply bills.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Commonwealth Government provides tax sharing and health grants to the States on the basis that the States are free to determine their own priorities for the allocation of these funds. The Commonwealth Government does not intend to alter these arrangements.
CASA 212 Aviocar Aircraft
(Question No. 4538)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) How many (a) new and (b) usedCASA212Aviocar aircraft have been imported since January 1981 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.
(2) What was the (a) value on which customs duty was paid and (b) duty paid in each case.
(3) What is the registered Australian number of each aircraft and who was the importer in each case.
(4) What was the configuration and proposed use of each aircraft referred to in part (I ).
(5) What is the (a) country of origin and (b) name of the manufacturer of CASA 212 Aviocar aircraft.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) one (b) nil.
(2) and (3) For reasons of commercial confidentiality the Bureau of Customs does not disclose particulars of import transactions between overseas suppliers and Australian traders. Details of value for duty, duty paid, aircraft's registration number and the name of the importer therefore may not be supplied.
(4) (a) 23 to 27 passengers (b) to be used for demonstration and sales purposes.
(5) (a) Spain (b) Construcciones Aeronauticas SA of Madrid Spain.
Telephone Exchange Lines Services
(Question No. 4539)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
How many telephone exchange lines services in Australia are connected to (a) manual exchanges, (b) pre 2000 type exchange equipment, (c) 2000 type exchange equipment,

(d) crossbar exchange equipment and (e) electronic exchange equipment.

Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Australian Telecommunications Commission, is:

As at April 1982 the approximate number of telephone exchange lines services in Australia connected to the various exchanges are as follows:

(a) Manual Exchanges . . . . .

53,000

(b) Pre 2000 type exchange equipment

22,000

(c) 2000 type exchange equipment

1,096,000

(d) Crossbar exchange equipment (including

ARE-II) . . . . . . .

4,048,000

(e) Electronic exchange equipment

3,000

Total

5,222,000

Australian Government Employment of MrG.A.Lugg
(Question No. 4568)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) When did Mr G. A. Lugg (a) commence and (b) cease employment with (i) the then Department of Supply and (ii) other Government department or agencies, at any time between 1960 and 1975.
(2) For how much of this time was he employed at the Defence Standards Laboratories at Maribyrnong, Victoria and what was the official duty statement for all positions he then held.
(3) Did Mr Lugg hold any service rank during this period; if so, what are the details.
(4) What are the details of all publications authored (a) solely by Mr Lugg and (b) by him in collaboration with others during the same period.
(5) On what dates, and for what periods, did Mr Lugg travel overseas on official business while in Australian Government employment and to what countries did he travel.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) Mr Lugg's employment with organisations which have at various times been part of the Department of Supply was as follows:
July 1941-July I944-Explosives Factory Ballarat July 1944-November I945-Chemical Defence Board November 1945-July 1973-Defence Standards Labora-
tories Maribyrnong
(Mr Lugg was retired on invalidity grounds in July 1973).
(2) He was employed at the Defence Standards Laboratories from November 1945 to July 1973. The duty statements for all the positions Mr Lugg held whilst employed at the Defence Standards Laboratories are proving difficult to locate.
Further advice will be provided when inquiries are completed.
(3) Whilst on duty in Vietnam, as a memberofthe Defence Standards Laboratories, during the period November 1967 to January 1968, Mr Lugg held the honorary rank of Major.
(4) (a)
Lugg, G. A.-G6J4J8-323 Stabilized diazonium salts as analytical reagents for the determination of airborne phenols and amines. Anal. Chern., 35, June, 1963, pp. 899-904

614 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Lugg, G. A.-G6/4/8-855 A diffusion cell for the production of a constant vapour concentration. Anal. Chem., 41, November, 1969, p. 1911
Lugg, G. A.-G6/4/8-657 The diffusion coefficients of some organic and other vapours in air. Anal. Chem., 40, June, 1968, p. 1072
Lugg, G. A.-G6/4/8-308 Estimation of phosphine in air. DSL Report 258, June 1962, unclassified
Lugg, G. A.-G6/4/8-513 The Fujiwara reaction and the determination of carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, tetrachlorethana and trichlorethylene in air. Anal. Chem., 38, October,
1966, pp. 1532-36
Lugg,G. A.-G6/4/8-1354 A comparison of the M 12A I decontaminating apparatus and the allaeys piston pump for herbicide spraying. DSL Technical Note 243, May, 1972, unclassified
Lugg, G. A.-G6/4/8-604 Defoliation of tropical rain forest in the Innisfail Area, Northern Australia, during 1966. DSL Report 295, May, 1967, unclassified
Lugg, G. A.-G6/4/8-387 Defoliation of undergrowth in rain forest area. DSL Technical Note 69, March, 1964, unclassified
Lugg, G. A.-G6/4/8-101O Eradication of Nipa palm. DSL Technical Note 150, March, 1970, unclassified
Lugg, G. A.-G6/4/8735 Experimental testing of post-emergent herbicides in South Vietnam. DSL Technical Note 117, June, 1968, unclassified
Lugg, G. A.-G6/4/8-1031 Herbicide spraying at the first Australian Task Force, Nui Dat, Vietnam. DSL Report 397, August, 1970,
unclassified
Lugg, G. A.-G6/4/8-929 A pre-emergent trial for the control of secondary vegetation in the wet tropics. DSL Report 344, October, 1969, unclassified
Lugg, G. A.-G6/4/8-952 The response of tropical species to the foliar and soil application of herbicides. DSL Report 351, December, 1969, unclassified
(b)-
Lugg, G. A. and Smith, R. T.-G6/4/8-1424 Selection of an Australian cultivar of dwarf bean for picloram bio-assay. DSL Technical Note 275, October, 1972, unclassified
Lugg, G. A. and Jarvis, M. W.-G6/4/8-740 The calculation of diffusion coefficients of vapours and liquids in air. DSL Report 318, July 1968, unclassified
Lugg, G. A. and Wright, A. S.-G6/4/8-21 The determination of toxic gases in air. DSL Circular 14, June, 1953, unclassified
Lugg, G. A. and Smith, R. T.-G6/4/8-1307 Comparative effects of Bromacil and Tandex in the wet tropics. DSL Technical Note 230, January, 1972, unclassi fied
Lugg, G. A. and Roberts, S. M.-G6/4/8-1309 A comparison of Ultra-low volume and conventional spraying equipment using 2, 4-D. DSL Technical Note 234, January, 1972, unclassified
Lugg, G. A. and Smith, R. T.-G6/4/8-1348 Defoliation of some eucalypt species. DSL Technical Note 250, May, 1972, unclassified
Lugg, G. A. and Smith, R. T.-G6/4/8-1305 The effects of experimental pre-emergent herbicides on temperate vegetation at the early post-emergent stage. DSL Technical Note 231, January, 1972, unclassified

Lugg, G. A. and Smith, R. T.-G6/4/8-1068 The effects of soil and foliar acting herbicides on mature herbaceous vegetation in a temperate region. DSL Report 392, August, 1970, unclassified
Lugg, G. A. and Smith, R. T.-G6/4/8-1355 Split and single application effectiveness of some total growth control herbicides. DSL Technical Note 251, May, 1972, unclassified
Lugg, G. A. and Smith, R. T.-G6/4/8-1168 The initial response of temperate and tropical vegetation to some non-selective herbicides. DSL Technical Note 187, May, 1971, unclassified
Lugg,G. A. and Smith, R. T.-G6/4/8-1257 Laboratory screening tests of herbicides. Part I: Preand Post-emergent application of new materials on softwoods. DSL Technical Note 220, November, 1971, unclassified
Lugg, G. A. and Gillis, R. G.-G6/4/8-507 New defoliant systems. DSL Technical Note 82, February, 1966, unclassified
The above list represents all publications authored by Mr Lugg which are unclassified. Other publications held within the Department have a security classification and cannot, at this stage, be released.
(5) Mr Lugg is known to have made the following overseas visits whilst employed by the Australian Government:
February to April 1960, United Kingdom; 24 July to 30 September 1965, United States; 26 November 1967 to 19 January 1968, South Vietnam and Thailand and 24 July to 18 August 1968, United States.
Investigation of Complaints about Police Conduct
Question No. 4592)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister, in his policy statement on 30 September 1980, promise new procedures to investigate complaints about police conduct.
(2) If so, when was this promise implemented and in what form.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) New procedures to investigate complaints against members of the Australian Federal Police came into operation on I May 1982 as a result of the Proclamation of the Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 19~1.
This new legislation is based to a large extent on the recommendations of the Law Reform Commission in its Supplementary Report on Complaints against Police furnished in April 1978.
The investigation of complaints against police involves:
use of the Ombudsman
establishment of a special unit (Internal Investigation Division) in the Australian Federal Police
establishment of a Police Disciplinary Tribunal to hear charges against police officers for breaches of the disciplinary code including those arising from complaints by members of the pUblic.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 615

Regional Development Programs
(Questions 4609)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister in his policy statement on 30 September 1980, promise to continue to aid regional development programs with the advice of the Decentralisation Advisory Board.
(2) If so, what was the Commonwealth's spending on the Regional Development Program in each year since 1975-76 in both current prices and constant 1974-75 prices.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) Annual expenditures under the Commonwealth Regional Development Program in current and constant 1974-75 prices are:

Financial year

Expenditures

Constant 1974-75'
prices

1978-79*
1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

$ 10,471,850.00
10,470,150.00 7,695,515.89 3,591,400.95

$ 6,871,409.70
6,236,048.41 4,189,284.00 1,774,125.60t

* The consumer price index for the six State capital cities
has been used to derive constant 1974-75 prices. t The constant price figure for the 1981-82 financial year is
calculated using the last quarter of 1980-81 and the first three
quarters of 1981-82. * No payments were made under the Commonwealth Re-
gional Development Program prior to the 1978-79 financial year.

Assistance to the Apple and Pear Industry
(Question No. 4624)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Which Federal Government initiated a proposal for a dollar-for-dollar subsidy for the apple and pear industry and which States were advantaged by this agreement.
(2) What assistance has been provided to (a) the apple and pear industry as a whole and (b) the Tasmanian apple and pear industry for each year of operation of the scheme.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is:

( I) The proposal referred to was a scheme of supplementary assistance to apple exporters, introduced in 1974 by the then Labor Government. Initially the scheme was to operate for 1974 only and was restricted to apples.
All States were given the opportunity to participate on the same basis in the scheme of assistance which was to be funded on a dollar-for-dollar basis by the Commonwealth and the States. In the event, New South Wales did not participate and South Australia did not participate after the 1975 season.
The scheme of assistance has been progressively extended to cover all subsequent seasons up to and including 1980. Pears were included from 1979.
Following an inquiry into the apple and pear industry by the Industries Assistance Commission in 1980, the Government introduced a package of measures designed to assist the industry over the period 1981 to 1985 while at the same time changing the basis on which assistance would be paid.
Included in this package were changes to the stabilisation scheme for apple and pear exports that had been in operation since 1971. Under the new arrangements, support for pears was terminated at the close of the 1980 export season while support for apples is being phased down over the 1981 to 1984 export seasons.
In addition, a new scheme of export underwriting was introduced in 1981 to operate for five years. This scheme is designed to protect the industry against sudden sharp falls in the export returns while at the same time ensuring that the industry is made aware of changes in the market place.
The Government recognised that these changes could cause some further adjustment pressures in the industry and accepts the lAC's recommendation that supplementary assistance be made more flexible and continued for the 1981 to 1984 export seasons. In line with this recommendation, the Commonwealth made available $3m for apples and $800,000 for pears under the supplementary assistance arrangements over the period 1981 to 1984, subject to the States contributing an equal amount.
The money was to be used to assist the industry to adjust to the new levels of Commonwealth support for exports through a program of agreed reconstruction and related research projects as well as to provide supplementary price support for apple exports if States so desired. However, if supplementary assistance were to be used for price support, limits were to be put on the amount of money made available for this use jn each year so that it phased out in line with stabilisation. There was to be no further supplementary price assistance for pears.
Discussions have been held with relevant State departments and money has been made available for reconstruction/related research programs. Most of these programs are well under way and are expected to make a valuable contribution to future developments in the industry.
Discussions have been held between the Commonwealth and all participating States (that is, all States except New South Wales and South Australia) to ensure that money is spent in line with the objectives of the scheme.
(2) The following table details the information requested

SUPPLEMENTARY ASSISTANCE PRICE SUPPORT PAYMENTS (a) TO THE APPLE AND PEAR INDUSTRY 1974-1981 SEASON ($)

Apples

Pears (b)

Australia Tasmania

Australia Tasmania

1974

4,227,357 3,180,082

1975

1,820,824 1,143,813

1976

674,687

457,937

1977

110,055

77,834

616 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Apples

Pears (b)

Australia Tasmania

Australia Tasmania

1978 (c) 1979
1980 1981 (d)

454,482 1,374,058
405,730 1,412,500

178,185 873,000
93,750 1,030,500

3,395 441

1,245 441

(a) Includes Commonwealth and State Contributions.
(b) Pears were included for price support only during 1979 and 1980. (c) Excludes compensation payments to Tasmania for frost damage ($298,000) and Western Australia for cyclone damage ($397,000).
(d) During 1981-82 financial year an additional $774,800 was paid out for reconstruction and adjustment related research programs for apple growers of which $331,800 went to Tasmania. During 1981-82
no payments were made for reconstruction or adjustment related programs for pears.

Disbandment of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel Incorporated
(Question No. 4614)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(1) Did the Minister's predecessor, on 12 September 1978, give notice to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel Incorporated of his intention to disband the panel as from 30 September 1978.
(2) If so, (a) did the Minister's predecessor state in his letter so advising the Panel that funding for the year would be restricted to meeting all liabilities properly existing by the Panel at 15 August 1978 and (b) were all liabilities properly existing by the Panel at 15 August 1978 met by funding to the Panel; if not, why not.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) The then Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, the Honourable R. I. Viner, in a letter dated 15 August 1978, gave notice to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel Incorporated of his intention not to continue Commonwealth financial assistance to the Panel beyond 30 September 1978.
(2) (a) That letter indicated that further Commonwealth support would be strictly confined to meeting ongoing costs to

30 September 1978 and liabilities properly existing prior to the date of the letter.
(b) The information available to the Department indicated that the Panel should have had sufficient funds to meet liabilities properly existing prior to the date of the letter. I would point out that the extent of some liabilities was in dispute.
Australian Aid Allocations
(Question No. 4645)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) What countries have been recipients of Australian aid in the last 5 years.
(2) What were the respective amounts of aid involved.
(3) Which of the aid allocations were budgeted for.
(4) In respect of aid allocation not budgeted for, what were the Government's reasons at the time for the respective grants.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) and (2) The following countries were recipients of Australian aid from July 1977 to June 1981 and the respective amounts of aid were as shown below:

Recipient area/country
Cyprus Greece Malta Turkey Yugoslavia
North of SaharaAlgeria Egypt Tunisia
South of SaharaBotswana Cameroon Djibouti Ethiopia Gambia Ghana

Year ended 30 June

1977

1978

$'000

Europe

63

12

5

10

13

95

10

Africa

20

12

2,327

21

67

743

82

42

65

829

1,485

1979
9 3 17
100
10 2,815
(e) 83
8 1,827
38 791

1980
22 509
1
5 3,814
124 3
943 31
1,584

1981
21 287
I
105 6,120
78 15 3,845 21 518

Answers to Questions
Recipient area/country
Guinea Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Madagascar Malawi Mauritius Mozambique Niger Nigeria Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia Sudan Swaziland Tanzania Uganda Zaire Zambia Zimbabwe
North and Central-
Bahamas Barbados Bermuda Costa Rica Dominican Rep. EI Salvador Guatemala Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Trinidad and Tobago West Indies-
Antigua Cayman Islands Dominica Grenada St Lucia St Vincent Virgin Islands (Dr)
South-
Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Guyana Paraguay Peru
Middle East-
Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Lebanon Syria Yemen, Arab Rep.
South-
Afghanistan

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 617

Year ended 30 June

1977

1978

$'000

1,404 118 5 8 61 638 991
147 6
242 52 3 35 36
1,437 155
80

3 1,516
99 4
86 628
2 I 221 21 456 43 (e) 619 56 2,322 119
420

AMERICA

10

4

21

34

4

3

6

6

4

2

4

29

66

103

15

20

16

36

1979
4 1,890
101 3 I
79 781 334
199
256 15
249 1,156
18 1,938
240
456
84 3 4
129 19
18

1980
(e) 3,098
89
I 86 2,504
5 258
743 20 6
1,642 150
4,192 1,426
435 182
I 42
3 I
156 5
15

1981
"
5,465 110
27 2,173
"
244 636
20 1,638 4,601
64 6,792 2,944 1,082 4,063
20
2
"
126 8 2

25

5

2

2

6

6

18

I7

15

3

(e)

(e)

(e)

4

6

5

I

6

4

I

3

9

8

6

6

7

7

12

5

6

6

21

70

42

16

18

5

4

15

\3

15

22

ASIA

59

28

12

34

2

2

4

I

"

32

6

50

67

384

392

370

313

302

251

7

27

18

I7

10

(e)

497

914

247

79

16

618 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Year ended 30 June

Recipient area/country

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

Bangladesh Bhutan Burma India Maldives, Rep. of Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka
Far East-
Brunei China, Peoples Republic Hong Kong Indonesia Kampuchea Korea, Rep of Laos Malaysia Philippines Singapore Thailand Timor Vietnam
Cook Islands Fiji Kiribati Nauru New Caledonia Niue Island Papua New Guinea Pacific Islands (US) (c) Solomon Island Tokelau Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu (d) Western Samoa

$'000
9,088 159
2,314 7,299
169 512 4,258 2,306

11,732 81
3,387
2,388 231 703
3,250 4,658

20,296 233
8,045 3,852
303
1,026 4,719 4,368

22,894 150
8,499
2,337 472
1,095 5,976 3,783

24,504 292
9,845 3,102
675
1,505 7,470 5,127

23 22,525
III 717
1,369 3,551 6,073
1,067 6,069
250 2,522

38 28,274
30 460 1,546 5,902 6,452 922 9,723
4,394

OCEANIA

173 4,292
260
5

299 6,199 1,479
I

15 226,377
1,555 I
1,608 35
659 3,976

I 219,441
23 1,710
(e) 2,103
359 814 3,801

32 36,000
6
350 797 4,863
6,493 703
10,220

47
47
38,396 (b) 5,583
218
1,373 5,312
7,873 736
8,576

291 49 39,837 (b) 5,100 191 795 7,567 11,479 1,311 7,805

1,947

139

15

283 8,188
2,501 12
I 95 237,196
12 3,162
I 3,833
934
1,446 4,634

306 9,760 2,383
21 2
109 235,624
20 3,901
3,702 1,312 2,755 3,902

217 217
2,482 (e)
2 243 245,113 27
5,530 I
4,591 644
3,547
2,816

(a) Comprising the Cape Verde Islands, Chad, Gambia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal and Upper Volta. (b) Includes humanitarian relief for Kampucheans in refugee camps in Thailand. (c) Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands: Caroline Islands, Marshall Islands and Marina Islands (except Guam). (d) Formerly the New Hebrides. (e) Amounts of$500or less have not been shown.
(3) and (4) All of the country allocations above were budgeted for with the exception of the amounts shown below for which additional appropriations were sought.

Year

Country

1976-77 Papua New Guinea

Lebanon

Item and explanation
Payments to overseas officers of former administrations and Australian Staffing Assistance Group (ASAG): The additional amount was required for the payment of salaries, accrued leave and furlough, mainly due to adjustment of entitlements following the winding up of the ASAG on 30 June 1976, pension payments under Papua New Guinea Superannuation Schemes and termination benefits to former contract officers of ASAG, including compensation for loss of salary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Emergency relief: The Australian Government announced on I November 1976 a gift of food aid for relief operations amongst the refugee population of Lebanon to be administered through the International Committee of the Red Cross, and Caritas . . . . . . . . . . . : . . . .

Amount $
2,000,000 302,000

Answers to Questions

Year

Country Turkey

Vietnam Cyprus

Timor Solomon Islands 1977-78 1978-79 Papua New Guinea

Burma/Lebanon/Indonesia 1979-80 Papua New Guinea

Papua New Guinea 1979 80 Tanzania/Uganda
Bangladesh Kampuchea

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 619

Item and explanation

Amount

Emergency relief: The Minister for Fotign Affairs on 30 November 1976 announced a cash contribution to assist victims of the earthquake in eastern Turkey to be administered through the United Nations Disaster Relief Office and Turkish Red Crescent Society
Freight for food aid: The Australian Government agreed to pay the freight costs on the gift of 1,600 tonnes of flour to meet emergency food needs in Vietnam
Emergency relief: The Minister for Foreign Affairs on 5 December 1976 announced a gift of food aid to the Government of Cyprus, for assistance to meet the need for food among displaced persons, to be administered through the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Emergency relief: On 7 September 1976, the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs announced that the Government had decided to provide aid to East Timor through the Indonesian Red Cross
Emergency relief: Following a series of severe earthquakes which struck the Solomon Islands on 20/21 April 1977 arrangements were made for the provision of emergency relief in the form of aircraft and crews, medical supplies and tents
(No additional appropriations were sought for bilateral aid except as noted below in the explanation at the end of this table).
The additional funds were required to enable the in-Australia training program to meet the Papua New Guinea Government's request for manpower training which exceeded the previous year's request and to meet the New Guinea Government's express wish for more emphasis on support for training programs in Papua New Guinea
Disaster relief: Additional funds required for (i) increases in freight costs for consignment of relief aid for refugees ($35,000); and (ii) flood relief in Indonesia ($\0,000)
Overseas officers of former administration and Australian Staffing Assistance Group (ASAG) termination payments and retirement benefits: Provisions of the Papua New Guinea (Staffing Assistance) (Termination of Employment) Regulatins, allowed for variations in the timing and amount of termination benefits which were payable in some cases up to June 1981. The additional funds were required to cover a statutory increase in the rates of superannuation pensions payable effective from I July 1979; and to meet higher compensation instalments for people taking alternative employment, and lump sum payments to the estates of former ASAG employees, than was originally estimated
Construction of runways and related civil aviation works at Port Moresby and Nadzab: The additional funds were required to cover two projects which had been held up by land acquisition problems, and to pay a contractor for a claim held over from 1977 by the PNG Department of Housing and Industry pending resolution of outstanding contract issues
Bilateral projects, technical assistance and disaster relief: The Australian Government decided to provide $2m in assistance to Tanzania and Uganda because of current difficulties and urgent need to reconstruct in both countries after the end of the Amin administration, as announced by the Prime Minister on 7 August 1979 in Lusaka at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
Wheat sale to Bangladesh: This item provided funds to cover the expenses incurred in 1979-80 by the Australian Wheat Board in the sale of 300,000 tonnes of wheat to Bangladesh on soft commercial terms. Funds were not provided in the original appropriations as the food crisis in Bangladesh emerged after the Australian Budget was brought down
Emergency relief: The Government decided to provide funds for the purchase and delivery of essential food stuffs and medicines as Australia's contribution to Kampuchea's humanitarian needs

$ 95,000 144,000 302,000 250,000 93,217
200,000 45,000
845,000 205,000
2,000,000 220,000
5,583,000

620 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Year

Country

Item and explanation

Amount

Indonesia (East Timor) Yugoslavia Fiji Jamaica Thailand Indonesia Philippines
1980-81 Bangladesh Kampuchea
1980-81 Indonesia (East Timor)

Humanitarian Relief: In November 1979 the Australian Government decided to contribute $2m for food and distri-
bution costs, to the $7m program mounted by the Indonesian Red Cross and the International Committee of the Red Cross for the six month period to April 1980. . . . . . . .
Disaster Relief: The Prime Minister announced on 17 April 1979 the Government's decision to make a contribution towards disaster relief in the Southern Adriatic region which
had been devastated by earthquakes. . . . . . . . . Disaster Relief: The Minister for Foreign Affairs announced on
18 Aril 1979 that the Government would provide urgent as-
sistance in the form of blankets, food, and support to the Australian Red Cross in supplying tents, following the devastation caused by Cyclone Meli on the Island of Nayau in the
Kadavu Group. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Emergency Relief: It was decided on 22 June 1979 to provide
$20,000 for emergency assistance following disastrous floods
in Jamaica over the ten days prior to 17 June 1979. Indo-China Refugees: The Government decided on 12 June
1979 that Australia would make available a further $4.5m for
assistance to Indo-China refugees. After discussions with
governments in the region the following contributions were made to these countries:
Thailand, $1 m;
Indonesia, $1 m; Philippines, $300,000. (A further contribution of $2,200,000 was made to the
UNHCR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Wheat Sale to Bangladesh: Funds were required to cover ad-
ditional expenses incurred by the Australian Wheat Board in
softening the credit terms on the commercial sale of wheat referred to above. The original estimate was for $780,000. In the event actual costs were $785,000. . . . . . . . ,
Emergency Humanitarian Relief: The Government decided on 28 February 1981 that Australian aid to Kampuchea in the 1980-81 financial year would be increased by $3m. $1 m of
this increase was provided from the funds budgeted for the bilateral food aid program. . . . . . . . . . . . . Emergency Humanitarian Relief: Australian contribution to an
International Committee of the Red Cross appeal for further funds for relief activities in East Timor. These funds were to enable the completion of relief operations in fourteen villages, including intensive health projects and the building up of food stocks, and for three special agricultural programs in
villages covered by the joint operation. . . . . . . .

$ 2,000,000
100,000 33,000 20,000
2,300,000 5,000
2,000,000
300,000

Note: In addition to the above additional appropriations, additional funds were sought for bilateral food aid to cover significant increases in wheat and flour prices and freight costs. These amounts were distributed amongst recipient countries in proportion to the food aid contributions to those countries. ihe amounts in each were as follows:

Financial year

Amount

1976-77
1977-78 1978-79
1979-80 1980-81

$
1,590,000
2,010,00 8,280,000

Burwood Post Office
(Question No. 4648)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
What action will be taken by Australia Post to improve facilities for the public and to increase the availability of private boxes at Burwood Post Office, N.S.W.

Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is based on advice from the Australian Postal Commission in these terms:
Counter facilities for the public in the Burwood Post Office are considered to be adequate but there is a waiting list for private boxes at the Office.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 621

Restraints on capital expenditure and the existence of higher works makes it unlikely that any alterations to accommodate additional box facilities could be undertaken at the Burwood Post Office before the 1984-85 financial year.
In the meantime, applicants for a private box service at Burwood are informed that boxes are available at both the Strathfield and Enfield Post Offices, located 1.2km and 2km respectively from the Burwood Post Office.
Appointment of Harry M. Miller to the Board of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation
(Question No. 4653)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) What was the specific process of assessment of the suitabilities and capabilities carried out by the Government, which his predecessor referred to on 17 November 1978, that led to the appointment of Mr Harry M. Miller to the board of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation?
(2) What were the special qualifications as a person that Mr Miller held and which were mentioned by his predecessor?
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The appointment of Mr Harry M. Miller to the board of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation was made in accordance with normal Government procedures for selecting appointees to statutory bodies. A collective decision was taken in the matter.
(2) Mr Miller possessed significant entrepreneurial and promotional experience which was judged to be of value to the Corporation.
Telex Messages
Mr N. A. Brown-On 21 April 1982 (Hansard, page 1631) Mr Les McMahon asked me as the Minister for Communications, without notice:
Is the Minister for Communications aware of an article in the Sydney Morning Herald of 25 March this year relating to identical telex messages concerning a Sydney Labor member of parliament and sent to the Sydney offices of the Sydney Morning Herald and the Australian Financial Review from the Newcastle television station NBN3 and Phillip Short Public Relations Pty Ltd respectively? Is the Minister able to inform the House whether it is possible. to tap into telex lines and send bogus messages? Is the Minister able to inform the House also whether it is possible to send telex messages using another subscriber's telex number? If not, would it be correct to say that the telexes in question sent with the telex numbers leased by NBN Channel 3 and Phillip Short Public Relations were sent by these organisations? The Sydney Morning Herald reported that I could be the sender, which I denied. Will the Minister make inquiries through his Department as to who did send these bogus telexes?
The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from Telecom Australia, is:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes, but this could be done only by a person with a detailed technical knowledge of the operation of the telex system and the particular telex circuit involved.
(3) Yes, but such a person would always run the risk of the deception being detected by the called party operating the !"echanism which causes the calling party's machine to return Its telell number and unique "answer back" code.

Intensive investigations into this matter have failed to reveal the originating service for the messages in question. It is considered unlikely that it would be possible to establish precisely the point from which the messages were sent.
Proposed Sale of Belconnen Mall
(Question No. 3968)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) What is the estimated total cost of the consultancy to advise on the proposed sale of the Belconnen Mall, Australian Capital Territory.
(2) What is the estimated commission on the sale of the Mall.
Mr Hodgman-This answer replaces the answer previously supplied to the honourable member on 6 May 1982.
(I) The consultancy for the sale of Belconnen Mall is divided into two discrete stages. The fee for the first stage, which requires the consultant to advise on the most appropriate method to sell the Mall, is $8,000.
Stage 2 requires the consultant to assist in the arrangements for the offer for sale of the Mall and the provision of advice on purchase proposals received, including a recommendation on the preferred purchaser, price and terms and conditions. It is anticipated stage 2 will be completed within five months. Under this arrangement the fee for stage 2 will be $212,000. In addition, the Commonwealth would be liable for expenses related to the marketing of the Mall up to a maximum of $54,627.
(2) No commission will be paid on the sale of the Mall.
Health: Disadvantaged Patients
(Question No. 2491)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
(I) Has the Minister received representations from community organisations and medical practitioners requesting the retention of the discretionary power of the practitioner to treat patients as disadvantaged.
(2) Is it a fact that chronicity and multiplicity of medical conditions in a family make comparisons of ability to pay, based solely on income, unjust.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) In the early stages of the current health insurance arrangements, there were representations from community organisations and medical practitioners requesting that doctors continue to have the discretionary power to treat patients as disadvantaged. However, as the new arrangements have developed, there appears to be a general acceptance of the current system whereby Health Care cards are issued to identified groups.
(2) People on high incomes bear a larger burden of the cost of Government assistance in the health area than people on lower incomes. This is because the significant Government subsidies provided for health are financed through the taxation system.
Up to three million people-that is, in excess of 20 per cent of the population-are entitled to 'free' public hospital accommodation and treatment, and medical services paid by the Federal Government at 85 per cent of the Schedule fee with a maximum payment by the patient of $5 where the Schedule

622 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

fee is charged. Where the doctor bulk bills there is no residual cost to the patient.
The income limits for people in special need are regarded as generous. For example, as from I May 1982, the cut-off point for a married couple ($172) is close to 57 per cent of average weekly earnings (December quarter 1981). This figure increases by $20 for each child, so that a married couple with three children receive $232 or 77 per cent of average weekly earnings and qualify for 'free' care. Health Care card holders are able to exceed their income limits by up to 25 per cent within a 4 week period before becoming ineligible for benefits.
People outside these limits are encouraged to take out heavily subsidised basic medical and hospital insurance cover whereby families experiencing much illness are further protected by the community rating principle under which healthy insured people subsidise the sick.
Aids to Blind Persons
(Question No. 3746)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
Will the Minister consult with the Ministers for Social Security and Veterans' Affairs with a view to providing on free loan to the visually handicapped, as in Britain, (a) the Optacon, which turns print into tactile images, (b) talking computer terminals and word processors, (c) braille shorthand machines, (d) tactile switchboards and (e) white walking sticks with clear sections that light up when a button is pressed, giving an audible signal when the light is working.
Mr CarIton-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
My colleague, the Minister for Social Security, has advised:
The Department of Social Security, through the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service, can provide a wide range of aids and appliances to disabled people who are eligible under the Social Services Act and who are accepted for comprehensive rehabilitation treatment and training programs. An aid may be provided if it is an essential factor in the person's achieving his rehabilitation goal.
Aids which have been provided by the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service include the Optacon and the braille shorthand machine. The Service has also sponsored switchboard modifications to assist blind people in obtaining a job. Talking computer terminals, word processors and bionic laser canes have not as yet been prescribed for persons referred to the Service for assistance.
The provision through the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service of new designs and concepts of aids for blind people is subject to evidence that the equipment is an effective advance over existing proven equipment. Expert evaluation is sought and notice taken of user opinion. [n this regard comments by several blind people who have used the aid described at (e) express limited enthusiam for the electronic cane as an advance over the long cane and the separate electronic sensors currently available in Australia.
It is also considered that its high cost and lack of servicing facilities in Australia will limit its use for some time in this country.

The Department is currently reviewing its total aids policy to ensure that its provision of aids and appliances is to the greatest benefit of those eligible for its services.
My colleague, the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, has advised:
There are no limitations on the type or range of aids which may be provided to eligible Repatriation beneficiaries. An aid is issued where medical opinion establishes that it would contribute to the maintenance of the beneficiary'S customary pattern of living with maximum independence, consistent with practical and economic considerations.
Each case is individually assessed and issue of the particular aids referred to by the honourable member would therefore depend on medical necessity, appropriateness to the beneficiary's requirements, and an assessment of all practical options to ensure that economic factors are considered in meeting the beneficiary's needs. The Department does not have material on the performance of the equipment referred to in the question, but it was established that, if the items would assist the veteran, and there were no more economic alternatives, they would be issued.
The Department of Health administers the Program of Aids for Disabled People (PADP) under which certain aids to daily living may be provided to eligible persons. The range of aids available initially under PADP has been determined and does not include any of the aids referred to in the honourable member's question.
However, given the current economic climate, and the unwillingness of taxpayers to pay more tax, it is unlikely that PADP will be extended to include additional aids in the immediate future; nevertheless, the opportunity will be taken to review the aids available at an appropriate time.
Defence: Budget Allocations
(Question No. 3839)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) What have been the total Budget allocations for defence in each of the years from 1971 to 1981.
(2) What has been the allocation to the permanent forces of the (a) Australian Army, (b) Royal Australian Air Force and (c) Royal Australian Navy from the Defence Budget allocations in each of the years from 1971 to 1981.
(3) What sum has been spent on recruitment advertising for the permanent forces of the (a) Army, (b) RAAF and (c) RAN in each of the years from 1971 to 1981.
Mr Sinc\air-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Expenditures for the defence function together with those for each Service are shown in the following table. Figures in column (2) reflect expenditures on the total defence function, including those for DFRDB and other Departments.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 623

DEFENCE EXPENDITURES

Year (I)

Total defence
function (2)

Services
Navy (3)

Army (4)

Air Force (5)

1971-72 1972-73 1973-74
1974-75 1975-76 1976-77
1977-78 1978-79 1979-80
1980-81 1981-82

$m
1,205.549 1,273.874 1,407.033 1,790.544 1,943.257 2,254.656 2,471.029 2,696.484 3,107.325 3,645.615 4,244.811

$m
270.243 293.094 329.oI 1 401.788 439.483 514.582 558.240 703.648 929.261 1,010.238 1,048.018

$m
465.792 445.061 472.669 543.855 609.636 695.167 744.200 777.388 852.670 1,008.729 1,275.866

$m
303.239 352.185 358.274 408.558 505.173 599.491 669.897 689.149 722.767 918.212 1,112.027

Notes: (I) The above figures do not include any amounts for revenues attributable to the defence function.
(2) The figures for the financial years 1974-75 to 1981-82 include direct expenditures for each of the Services but exclude some amounts for departmental and administrative support such as computer services. Prior to 1974-75 funds had been appropriated on a single Service basis.
(3) Figures for 1981-82 are preliminary and do not reflect recent organisational changes.
(4) Expenditures for the Services in the above table include amounts in respect of part time personnel. It is not possible to isolate fully expenditures between regular and reserve forces.

(3) Actual expenditures on recruitment advertising for the
Permanent Forces are shown below. Most recruitment advertising is conducted to meet single Service requirements. The cost of advertising covering more than one Service is ap-
portioned between those Services on an equal basis.

Navy

Army Air Force

(3) How much money has been spent on recruitment advertising for the reserve forces of the (a) Army, (b) RAAF and (c) RAN in each of the years from 1971 to 1981.
(4) What subsidies are paid to employers of reserve force members.
(5) How much has been paid to employers in each of the years from 1971 to 1981.

1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82(p)

$ 507.526 445.872 363.456 583.148 583.448 685.707 716.196 760.043 755.411 966,672 1,135.583

$ 501.061 643.517 585.529 901.338 787.818 986.997 860.531 859.961 1,172.019 1,632,740 1,544.982

$ 273.645 254.661 275.688 666.254 551.808 509.277 508.883 542.542 719.137 1,205,524 1,207.097

(p) preliminary figures.

Defence: Budget Allocations
(Question No. 3840)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 17 February 1982 the following question:
(I) What was the total strength of the reserve forces of the (a) Australian Army, (b) Royal Australian Air Force and (c) Royal Australian Navy in each of the years from 1971 to 1981.
(2) What has been the allocation to the reserve forces of the (a) Army, (b) RAAF and (c) RAN from the Defence Budget allocations in each of the years from 1971 to 1981.

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
I (a), (b) and (c) Reserve Force strengths as at 30 June each year were:

1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

Navy
2,120 1,935 1,593 1,302 1,025
970 917 1,037 1,039 1,021

Army
28,009 23,119 20,000 20,374 21,183 21,641 23,164 22,978 23,986 31,125

Air Force
1,399 1,191
748 554 458 473 490 498 502 591

Notes: (i) Reserves with training obligations, including: Naval Emergency Reserve Forces, Royal Australian Naval Reserve (Part), Regular Army Emergency Reserve, Active Citizen Military Force. Excludes those members who are serving full-time in the Permanent Defence Force but includes all other listed Reserve members.
(ii) Army figures include National Service obligatees before 7 December 1972 and Non-Effectives.
2 (a), (b) and (c). The Defence Budget does not generally contain specific allocations for Reserve Forces nor are actual Reserve expenditures recorded except for pay and allowances

624 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

during the course of the financial year. Reserve Force expenditures for pay and allowances from the Defence allocations have been:

Navy

Army Air Force

1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75
1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

$m 0.919 0.872 0.892 0.787
0.817 0.924 1.065 1.071 1.346 1.505

$m 11.127 10.547 9.006 9.582 13.133 17.075
19.171 18.414 21.629 30.831

$m 0.600 0.608 0.647 0.474 0.504 0.599 0.631 0.754 0.868 1.281

Note: Figures in respect of years prior to 1974-75 include expenditures on Reserve Cadets.

3 (a), (b) and (c). While information is available for Army Reserves, specific cost information has not been maintained
for the smaller amounts associated with Naval and Air Force Reserves; in 1980-81 the amounts for these were $10,919 and $1,600. The amounts spent on Army Reserve advertising have
been:

1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

$ 48,371 122,522 148,376 160,104 158,990 103,612 195,676 44,627 17,399 . *3090479

* Associated with the expansion of the Army Reserve to 30,000.

(4) and (5) There are no subsidies paid to employers of Reserve Force members. It might be noted that certain reservist
medical categories are entitled to an allowance to compensate them for the cost of a replacement practitioner should this be considered necessary.

Commonwealth Rolls-Royce Motor Cars
(Question No. 3850)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
Further to his answer to question No. 3054 (Hansard, 16 February, pages 140-1), (a) where are each of the II RollsRoyce motor cars in the Commonwealth Government car fleet located, (b) over the last 12 months (i) for what purpose has each of the vehicles been used, (ii) on how many occasions have each of the vehicles been used and (iii) who has used each of the vehicles, (c) what was the initial purchase price of each of the vehicles, (d) what is the annual maintenance cost for each of the vehicles and (e) does each vehicle have its own exclusive driver or is there a group of drivers.
Mr Newman~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Brisbane one, Silver Wraith Limousine; Sydney three, Silver Wraith Limousine, Phantom V Limousine, Silver Wraith Tourer; Melbourne two, Phantom V Limousine, Silver Wraith Tourer; Adelaide one, Silver Cloud Cabriolet; Perth

two, Silver Wraith Limousine, Silver Cloud Cabriolet; Canberra two, Phantom VI Limousine, Phantom V Limousine.
(b) (i) Vehicles have been used for Royal Visits, the Governor-General, visiting Heads of State and visiting Heads of Government.
(ii) and (iii) In Brisbane the Rolls-Royce limousine was used on nine occasions for the transportation of:
Governor-General (five times) Governor-General of Solomon Islands Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea Prime Minister of Fiji and loaned to the New Zealand Government for use by Her Majesty during the Royal Visit to that country.
In Sydney there are no separate records available on the usage of each Rolls-Royce but the three vehicles were used on 87 occasions for the transportation of:
Governor-General (78 times) H.R.H. Prince of Wales H.R.H. Prince Michael of Kent President of Cyprus President of the Commission of the Economic
Communities Governor-General of Solomon Islands Prime Minister of Fiji (twice) Prime Minister of New Zealand Prime Minister of Samoa
A Rolls-Royce limousine was also loaned to the New Zealand Government for use by Her Majesty during the Royal Visit to that country.
In Melbourne the Rolls-Royce limousine was used on 33 occasions for the transportation of:
Governor-General (30 times) Her Majesty The Queen H.R.H. Prince of Wales Prime Minister of Thailand and the Rolls-Royce tourer was used on two occasions for the transportation of: Her Majesty the Queen Governor-General
In Adelaide the Rolls-Royce Cabriolet was used on five occasions for the transportation of:
Her Majesty The Queen H.R.H. Prince of Wales South Australia Governor (three times)
In Perth the Rolls-Royce limousine was used on four occasions for the transportation of:
Her Majesty The Queen Governor-General President of the Commission of the Economic
Communities Former Prime Minister of Malaysia and the Rolls-Royce Cabriolet was used once for the transportation of Her Majesty The Queen.
The two Rolls-Royce limousines located in Canberra are under the control of the Governor-General and no records are maintained by my Department on their usage. Apart from usage by the Governor-General they have been made available to my Department on several occasions to meet requirements in Canberra for Royal and specified visits.
(c) and (d) The initial purchase price and maintenance cost of each vehicle is:

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 625

Vehicle

Purchase price

Average annual
maintenance cost over
past 3 years

1959 Silver Wraith Limousine 1959 Silver Wraith Limousine 1967 Phantom V Limousine 1959 Silver Wraith Tourer 1967 Phantom V Limousine 1959 Silver Wraith Tourer 1962 Silver Cloud Cabriolet 1959 Silver Wraith Limousine 1962 Silver Cloud Cabriolet
*1970 Phantom VI Limousine *1966 Phantom V Limousine

$ 17,742 17,658 24,349 17,458 25,497 17,408 18,472 17,410 18,196 26,295 22,866

$ 2,626 2,475 2,107
702 2,374
271 2,015
557 203

* These vehicles are under the control of Government House
and there are no individual records kept of repairs and maintenance. However, in 1981 the Rolls-Royce Phantom V Limousine was completely overhauled and refurbished, both interior and exterior, at a cost of $42, 145.
(e) There is a group of drivers.

Announcement ofInitiatives: Government Departments
(Question Nos 3889-3894, 3896-3909, 3911-3913)
Mrs Darling asked the Ministers listed, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) Is it the normal procedure of the Minister's Department that announcements of actions being taken within certain electoral divisions which are likely to influence the livelihood of people within those divisions (such as the structural changes to government works, grants made to schools, announcements affecting administration, staffing or funding of organisations) are made (a) by the Minister; or (b) where the approved project concerned is located in a Government-held electoral division, by the local Liberal or National Country Party Members.
(2) What is the Department's practice regarding the announcement of such initiatives by Opposition Members.
(3) Has any attempt been made by (a) the Minister; or (b) any member of the Department to deny to Opposition Members the same courtesy and right of a democratically elected representative as that accorded to a Government Member.
Mr Newman-The following answer to the honourable member's question is provided with the concurrence of all Ministers as indicated by the above question numbers:
(I) to (3) As the Minister having general responsibilities in relation to Government information services, I advise the honourable member that it is normal for Ministers to decide, as required for particular aspects of their responsibilities and/or as the need arises on particular occasions, the manner of any announcements of Government actions or initiatives whether or not they impact on particular electoral divisions or are of wider relevance.
For example, the honourable member will already be aware, from the answers given to her Question Nos 2810 and 3354, of a practice followed in the Department of Social Security.

Where an announcement is made by the Minister concerned in relation to a matter affecting an electoral division represented by a member of the Opposition it is, of course, the right of that representative-and, in any case, the right of Opposition senators and other representatives of the Opposition-to make whatever public comments they may wish on their perceptions of the merit or otherwise of the particular Government action or initiative and their views in likely effects on the livelihood of people within that division.
As a further example of particular practices I might add that it is my general practice to write to honourable members advising them of significant property transactions within, or adjacent to, their electorates and which may be of interest to them. Similar advice is normally sent to senators in respect of transactions in the towns or cities in which they reside.

Bankruptcies
(Question No. 3981)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 18 February 1982:

How many (a) business (b) non-business bankruptcies occurred in each State and Territory during 1980-81.

Mr N. A. Brown-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Statistics of business and non-business bankruptcies for the whole of Australia for the year ended 30 June 1981 are as
follows:

Business bankruptcies Non-business bankruptcies

2,408 2,746

5,154

Statistics for bankrupt.cies under Part IV of the Bankruptcy Act 1966 taken on their own are not readily available on a State by State basis and could not be produced without a significant commitment of staff resources.
However, combined statistics are maintained on a State by State basis for bankruptcies, estates of deceased persons and debtors who enter into arrangements under Part X of the Act. The statistics are as follows:

Business

Nonbusiness

New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory

Victoria

Southern Queensland

401

Central Queensland

8

Northern Queensland

85

South Australia

Northern Territory

Western Australia

Tasmania

655

675

678

836

325

4

494 54 383

402-- 610

24

6

368

359

108

185

2,729

3,054

Full details of all available bankruptcy statistics for 1980-81 are in the schedules to the Fourteenth Annual Report on the
Operation of the Bankruptcy Act 1966.

626 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Expenditure Deferrals
(Question No. 4059)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1982:
(I) For which major equipment programs is expenditure to be deferred for short periods as a result of recent directives to his Department to cut unnecessary costs.
(2) What is the estimated additional costs of these programs resulting from the deferrals.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) and (2) The temporary expenditure restraints referred to by the honourable member did not affect expenditure under contractual arrangements; consequently additional costs did not arise.
Defence Force Pay Increases
(Question No. 4062)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1982;
(I) Was the sum of $100m in the 1981-82 Budget for additional pay and salary costs in his Department estimated to be sufficient to cover all increases in pay and conditions for the financial year.
(2) Did the Budget estimate a 13.5 per cent increase in general wage levels.
(3) If so, what was the basis for the expectation that Defence Force and his Department's salary levels would only increase by approximately 6 per cent.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) Provisions for Defence manpower costs in Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1981-82 were based on rates of pay applying at the time the Defence Estimates for the year were finalised (i.e. early June). They included the full-year effects of increases in rates of pay granted up to that time. In addition, an amount of $100 million was included by my colleague the Minister for Finance in the Budget estimates (but not in the Appropriation Bill) to bring into account prospective additional costs in 1981-82, which could result from possible future increases in rates of pay after the estimates in the Bill were prepared. The assumptions employed in deriving this allowance were consistent with those used in estimating the 13.5 per cent increase in average weekly earnings used in the Budget.
(2) Taking 1981-82 as a whole compared with 1980-81 as a whole, average weekly earnings were forecast in the Budget to rise by 13.5 per cent.
(3) This was not the expectation.
Roads Funding
(Question No. 4237)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 23 March 1982:
(I) What funds for road purposes have been provided or are planned for (a) each (i) State and Territory and (ii)

category, and (b) in total for each year from 1971-72 to 1984-85.
(2) Using the Bureau of Transport Economics road construction price index, 1981, published in the Bureau's Report, Road Construction Price Indexes 1969-70 to 1980-81 and using 1971-72 as a base year (a) what is the comparison in real terms of each of the items referred to in part (I), (b) what was the percentage real change in Commonwealth road grants to the States, excluding Territories for purposes of consistency, for each year total from 1972-73 to 1982-83 and (c) using 1980-81 as a base year, what is the cumulative real total change in road funds provided to States from 1975-76 up to 1980-81 and similarly up to 1981-82.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) (a) and (b) Details of Commonwealth funding for road works provided or proposed for allocation to the States over the period 1971-72 to 1984-85 and to the Northern Territory over the period 1979-80 to 1984-85 are set out in Tables I to 14 below. The proposed allocations shown in Tables 12 to 14 reflect the amounts contained in the Schedules to the Roads Grants Amendment Bill 1982. The Government will be examining in the Budget context the scope for the provision of additional road funds ilJ relation to the period 1982-83 to 1984-85.
Questions relating to the level of Commonwealth expenditure on roads in the Australian Capital Territory should be directed to the Minister for the Capital Territory.
Questions relating to the level of Commonwealth expenditure on roads in the Northern Territory over the period 1971-72 to 1978-79 should be directed to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment.
(2) (a) Estimates of Commonwealth road grants in real terms provided over the period 1972-73 to 1980-81, using the Bureau of Transport Economics road construction price index, are set out in Tables 15 to 23. The Bureau's index does not cover the period 1981-82 to 1984-85 as it is an historical index.
(b) The percentage real change in Commonwealth grants for roads provided to the States over the period 1972-73 to 1980-81, using the Bureau of Transport Economics road construction price index, is set out in Table 24. The Bureau's index does not cover the years 1981-82 and 1982-83.
(c) The cumulative real total change in Commonwealth grants for roads provided to the States over the period 1975-76 to 1980-81, using the Bureau of Transport Economics' road construction price index, is set out in Table 25. The Bureau's index does not cover the year 1981-82.
It should also be noted that over the period 1971-72 to 1981-82 the Commonwealth has provided substantial annual increases, in real terms, in general purpose assistance to the States and, since 1977-78, to the Northern Territory. These grants totalled over $44,000m for the period. Similarly, the Commonwealth has provided annual increases, in real terms, in general purpose assistance to local government under the personal income tax sharing arrangements introduced in 1976-77. Over $1,350m has been allocated to local governments under this scheme to 1981-82. The States/Northern Territory and local governments are free to spend their shares of Commonwealth general purpose grants on road works to the extent that this accords with their priorities.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 627

Table 1 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1971-72 (current prices) ($'000)

Category

New South
Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

Total

Principal grantsUrban arterial roads
Rural arterial roads Rural roads other than arterial
roads
Planning and research

39,060 12,410
21,910 1,120

30,300 3,440
15,330 750

19,270 11,010
14,400 680

11,500 2,650
9,000 350

12,030 4,610
14,140 470

4,370 2,100
3,940 160

116,530 36,220
78,720 3,530

Total of principal grants

74,500

49,820

45,360

23,500

31,250

10,570 235,000

Supplementary grant

2,000

8,000

250

10,250

Total Commonwealth Aid Roads Act 1969

74,500

49,820

45,360

25,500

39,250

10,820 245,250

Other assistance-

8,214

375

1,625

10,214

Total

74,500

49,820

53,574

25,875

40,875

10,820 255,464

- Includes funds provided under beef roads assistance legislation, funds provided for sealing of Eyre Highway and maintenance of the Eyre and Barkly Highways.
Table 2 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1972-73 (current prices) ($'000)

Category

New South Wales

SouthWestern Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

Total

Principal grantsUrban arterial roads
Rural arterial roads Rural roads other than arterial
roads Planning and research

46,520 14,780
23,010 1,280

36,170 4,110
16,100 860

23,040 13,170
15,120 780

13,940 3,210
9,450 400

14,830 5,690
14,850 540

5,290 2,550
4,130 180

139,790 43,510
82,660 4,040

Total of principal grants

85,590

57,240

52,110

27,000

35,910

12,150 270,000

Supplementary grant

1,000

8,000

9,000

Total Commonwealth Aid Roads Act 1969

85,590

57,240

52,110

28,000

43,910

12,150 279,000

Other assistance-

5,514

1,000

1,925

8,439

Total

85,590

57,240

57,624

29,000

45,835

12,150 287,439

- Includes funds provided under beef roads assistance legislation, funds provided for sealing of Eyre Highway and maintenance of the Eyre and Barkly Highways.
Table 3 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1973-74 (current prices) ($'000)

Category

Now South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

Total

Principal GrantsUrban arterial roads
Rural arterial roads

55,120 17,520

42,950 4,870

27,400 15,650

16,760 3,850

18,090 6,930

6,340 3,060

166,660 51,880

628 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Category
Rural roads other than arterial roads
Planning and research

Now South Wales
24,160 1,470

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

16,910 990

15,880 900

9,920 470

15,590 620

4,340 210

Total
86,800 4,660

Total of principal grants

98,270

65,720

59,830

31,000

41,230

13,950 310,000

Supplementary grant

6,800

6,800

Total Commonwealth Aid Roads Act 1969

98,270

65,720

59,830

31,000

48,030

13,950 316,800

Other assistance"

1,080

840

4,636

950

1,261

90

8,857

Total

99,350

66,560

64,466

31,950

49,291

14,040 325,657

" Includes funds provided under beef roads asistance legislation, funds provided for sealing of Eyre Highway and maintenance of the Eyre and Barkly Highways, and funds for Traffic Engineering for Road Safety Improvements (TERSIPS) Program.
Table 4 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1974-75 (current prices) ($'000)

Category
National Roads Act~ National highways construction National highways maintenance Export and major comercial
roads

New South wales
28,330 7,270

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

17,290 1,630

17,520 4,940
15

14,926 1,310
253

7,363 2,060
1,000

5,330 440
220

Total
90,759 17,650
1,488

Sub-total

35,600

.18,920

22,475

16,489

10,423

5,990 109,897

Roads Grants ActRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads Miters Beef roads

12,190 16,870 46,590
1,809 883

4,150 13,160 35,890 1,670
870

14,740 14,200 16,090
967 978 5,459"

1,200 4,790 7,510
483 1,314

12,040 9,915 18,386
467 419

2,940 4,720 4,140
12 200

47,260 63,655 128,606
5,408 4,664 5,459

Sub-total

78,342

55,740

52,434

15,297

41,227

12,012 255,052

Total

113,942

74,660

74,909

31,786

51,650

18,002 364,949

" In addition to the above amount, an amount of $279,000 was paid in 1974-75 under States Grants (Beef Cattle Roads) Act 1968.

TableS COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1975-76 (current prices) ($.'000.)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia

National Roads Act~ National highways construction
National highways maintenance

38,351 7,306

16,800 1,600

22,100 5,900

18,775 2,110

10,782 2,845

Tasmania
6,983 679

Total
113,791 20,440

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 629

Category
Export and major commercial roads
Sub-total
Roads Grants ActRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads Miters Beef roads
Sub-total
Total

New South Wales
489
46,146
15,430 16,094 44,260 4,251 2,867
82,902
129,048

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

4,800 23,200

1,429 29,429

1,076 21,961

900 14,527

511 8,173

5,660 11,750 42,590 3,200 2,456
65,656
88,856

11,700 16,340 16,313 1,960 2,522 9,540
58,375
87,804

1,770 5,300 8,290
997 1,706
18,063
40,024

9,180 10,860 22,179 1,061
1,581
44,861
59,388

2,600 4,230 4,020
338 900
12,088
20,261

Total
9,205
143,436
46,340 64,574 137,652 11,807 12,032 9,540
281,945
425,381

Table 6 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1976-77 (current prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia

National Roads ActNational highways construction
National highways maintenence Export and major commercial
roads

48,954 8,600
4,300

23,450 2,150
5,200

26,600 7,200
2,776

17,300 1,400
1,300

10,875 2,135
1,290

Sub-total

61,854

30,800

36,576

20,000

14,300

Roads Grants ActRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads
Urban local roads Miters Beef roads

15,430 18,556 36,600 4,600 4,780

4,300 10,700 39,600 3,100 2,875

11,900 14,100 15,300 2,200 2,700 9,000

3,300 5,300 7,600 1,100 1,500

8,010 12,128 20,890
1,434 1,600

Sub-total

79,966

60,575

55,200

18,800

44,062

Total

141,820

91,375

91,776

38,800

58,362

Tasmania
8,747 580 700
10,027
2,500 4,100 3,000
310 600
10,510 20,537

Table 7 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1977-78 (current prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

States Grants (Roads) Act National roads-
National highways construction National highways maintenance National commerce roads

56,222 8,076 6,302

26,000
3,000 3,800

29,800 8,300 2,800

15,000 1,900
1,300

15,230
4,200 1,590

7,860
900 700

Sub-total
Other RoadsRural arterial roads RurallocaI roads Urban arterial roads

70,600
18,000 25,800 28,700

32,800
11,100 19,000 28,900

40,900
23,000 18,800 10,900

18,200
7,000 6,700 4,600

21,020
9,410 14,400 11,200

9,460
3,040 4,900 2,700

Total
135,926 22,065 15,566 173,557
45,440 64,884 122,990 12,744 14,055 9,000 269,113 442,670
Total
150,112 26,376 16,492 192,980
71,550 89,600 87,000

630 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Category Urban local roads Miters
Sub-total
Total

New South Wales
7,400 3,300
83,200
153,800

Victoria Queensland

3,600 3,233

3,800 2,600

65,833

59,100

98,633

100,000

South Australia
2,200 1,700
22,200
40,400

Western Australia Tasmania

2,370 1,800

1,000 600

39,180

12,240

60,200

21,700

Total 20,370 13,233
281,753
474,733

Table 8 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1978-79 (current prices) ($,000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

States Grants (Roads) Act National roads-
National highways construction National highways maintenance
National commerce roads

55,787 9,855 9,863

27,806 3,209 3,341

30,414 10,332 2,995

16,133 2,032
689

16,980 4,200 1,300

8,149 962 749

Sub-total

75,505

34,356

43,741

18,854

22,480

9,860

Other RoadsRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads
Urban local roads Miters

19,251 27,592 30,694
7,914 3,529

11,871 20,321 30,852
3,977 4,010

24,598 20,106 11,838 4,064 2,600

8,086 7,165 4,920 2,353 1,818

10,064 15,400 11,978 2,535 1,925

3,508 5,241 2,888 1,069
642

Sub-total

88,980

71,031

63,206

24,342

41,902

13,348

Total

164,485 105,387 106,947

43,196

64,382

23,208

Total
155,269 30,590 18,937
204,796
77,378 95,825 93,170 21,912 14,524
302,809
507,605

Table 9 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1979/80 (current prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

Total

National RoadsNational highways construction
National highways maintenance
National commerce roads

64,666 10,257 6,230

States Grants (Roads) Act

29,886 3,449 5,977

33,334 10,460 3,219

17,340 2,184 1,408

18,218 4,828 1,115

8,981 1,134
805

172,425 32,312 18,754

Sub-total

81,153

39,312

47,013

20,932

24,161

10,920 223,491

Other RoadsRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads Miters

20,691 29,656 32,990 8,506
3,793

12,759 21,841 31,548 4,851 4,023

26,438 21,610 12,918 4,368 2,600

8,046 7,701 5,288 2,529 1,954

10,817 16,552 12,874 2,725 2,069

3,448 5,633 3,104 1,149
690

82,199 102,993 98,722 24,128
15,129

Sub-total

95,636

75,022

67,934

25,518

45,037

14,024 323,171

Total

176,789 114,334 114,947

46,450

69,198

24,944 546,662

Under the financial arrangements with the Northern Territory which came into effect on I July 1979, an amount of $19 million was made available to the Northern Territory in 1979/80 by way of a Commonwealth specific purpose payment for roads. This amount was not apportioned between road categories by the Commonwealth.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 631

Table 10 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES AND NORTHERN TERRITORY FOR ROADS
1980/81 (current prices) ($'000)

Category

New South
Wales

South Western

Northern

Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Territory

Total

Roads Grants Act 1980National roads
Rural arterial roads
Urhan arterial roads
Local roads

94,948 22,998 36,138 42,417

48,469 14,182 34,040 29,668

54,909 29,386 14,594 28,875

24,973 8,943 6,330 I1,371

29,126 12,023 14,338 21,427

12,820 3,833 3,535 7,538

12,284 1,010
954 6,871

277,529 92,375 109,929 148,167

Total

196,501 126,359 127,764

51,617

76,914

27,726

21,119 628,000

Table 11 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES AND NORTHERN TERRITORY FOR ROADS
1981/82 (current prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western

Northern

Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Territory

Total

Roads Grants Act 1981National roads
Arterial Roads
Local roads

103,566 64,503 46,267

52,868 52,599 32,361

59,893 47,972 31,496

27,240 16,659 12,403

31,769 28,754 23,372

13,984 8,037 8,222

13,399 2,142 7,494

302,719 220,666 161,615

Total

214,336 137,828 139,361

56,302

83,895

30,243

23,035 685,000

Table 12 PROPOSED COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES AND NORTHERN TERRITORY FOR ROADS
1982-83 (current prices) ($'000)

Category

New South Wales

South Western

Northern

Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Territory

Total

National roads Arterial roads Local roads

II 0,989 69,110 49,576

56,645 56,362 34,664

64,204 51,397 33,747

29,198 17,849 13,280

34,032 30,805 25,037

14,988 8,605 8,813

14,372 2,293 8,034

324,428 236,421 173,151

Total

229,675 147,671 149,349

60,327

89,874

32,406

24,699 734,000

Table 13 PROPOSED COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES AND NORTHERN TERRITORY FOR ROADS
1983-84 (current prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western

Northern

Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Territory

Total

National roads Arterial roads Local roads

II 7,643 73,252 52,549

60,040 59,741 36,742

68,053 54,479 35,769

30,948 18,919 14,076

36,072 32,653 26,538

15,887 9,121 9,341

15,233 2,430 8,515

343,876 250,594 183,530

Total

243,444 156,523 158,301

63,943

95,262

34,349

26,178 778,000

632 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Table 14 PROPOSED COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES AND NORTHERN TERRITORY FOR ROADS
1984-85 (current prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western

Northern

Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Territory

Total

National roads Arterial roads Local roads

124,750 77,677 55,721

63,667 63,350 38,962

72,164 57,770 37,931

32,818 20,062 14,927

38,251 34,625 28,141

16,846 9,672 9,906

16,153 2,577 9,030

364,649 265,733 194,618

Total

258,148 165,979 167,865

67,807 101,017

36,424

27,760 825,000

Table 15 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1972-73 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

Total

Principal Grants-
Urban arterial roads Rural arterial roads Rural roads other than arterial
roads Planning and research

43,477 13,813
21,505 1,196

33,804 3,841
15,047 804

21,533 12,308
14,131 729

13,028 3,000
8,832 374

13,860 5,318
13,879 505

4,944 2,383
3,860 168

130,646 40,663
77,254 3,776

Total of principal grants

79,991

53,496

48,701

25,234

33,562

11,355 252,339

Supplementary grant

935

7,477

8,412

Total Commonwealth Aid Roads Act 1969

79,991

53,496

48,701

26,169

41,039

11,355 260,751

Other assistance'

5,153

935

1,799

7,887

Total

79,991

53,496

53,854

27,\04

42,838

11,355 268,638

, Includes funds provided under beef roads assistance legislation, funds provided for sealing of Eyre Highway and maintenance of the Eyre and Barkly Highways.
Table 16
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1973-74 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

Total

Principal Grants-
Urban arterial roads Rural arterial roads Rural roads other than arterial
roads Planning and research

45,441 14,444
19,918 1,212

35,408 4,015
13,941 816

22,589 12,902
13,092 742

13,817 3,174
8,178 387

14,913 5,713
12,852 511

5,227 2,523
3,578 173

137,395 42,771
71,559 3,841

Total of principal grants

81,015

54,180

49,325

25,556

33,989

11,501

255,566

Supplementary grant

5,606

5,606

Total Commonwealth Aid Roads Act 1969

81,015

54,180

49,325

25,556

39,595

11,501

261,172

Other assistance (a) Total

890 81,905

692 54,872

3,822 53,147

783 26,339

1,040 40,635

74 11,575

7,301 268,473

(a) Includes funds provided under beef roads assistance legislation, funds provided for sealing of Eyre Highway and maintenance of the Eyre and Barkly Highways, and funds for Traffic Engineering for Road Safety Improvements (TERSIPS) Program.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 633

Table 17 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1974-75 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia

National Roads Act~ National highways construction
National highways maintenance
Export and major commerical roads

18,172 4,663

11,090 1,046

11,238 3,169
10

9,574 840
162

4,723 1,321
641

Tasmania
3,419 282 141

Total
58,216 11,321
954

Sub-total

22,835

12,136

14,417

10,576

6,685

3,842

70,491

Roads Grants Act~ Rural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads Miters Beef roads

7,819 10,821 29,885
1,160 566

2,662 8,441 23,021 1,071
558

9,455 9,108 10,321
620 627 *3,502

770 3,072 4,817
310 843

7,723 6,360 11,793
300 269

1,886 3,028 2,656
8 128

30,315 40,830 82,493
3,469 2,991 3,502

Sub-total

50,251

35,753

33,633

9,812

26,445

7,706 163,600

Total

73,086

47,889

48,050

20,388

33,130

11,548 234,091

* In addition to the above amount, an amount of $279,000 ($179,000 in 1971-72 prices) was paid in 1974-75 under States Grants (Beef Cattle Roads) Act 1968.

Table 18 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1975-76 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New South
Wales

Victoria Queensland

South Australia

Western Australia

National Roads Act ~ National highways construction
National highways maintenance
Export and major commerical roads

21,271 4,052
271

9,318 887
2,662

12,257 3,272
793

10,413 1,170
597

5,980 1,578
499

Tasmania
3,873 377 283

Sub-total

25,594

12,867

16,322

12,180

8,057

4,533

Roads Grants Act ~ Rural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads Miters Beef roads

8,558 8,926 24,548 2,358 1,590

3,139 6,517 23,622 1,775 1,362

6,489 9,063 9,048 1,087 1,399 5,291

982 2,940 4,598
553 946

5,092 6,025 12,301
588 877

1,442 2,346 2,230
187 499

Sub-total

45,980

36,415

32,377

10,019

24,881

6,704

Total

71,574

49,282

48,699

22,199

32,938

11,237

Total
63,112 11,336
5,105
79,553
25,702 35,815 76,347 6,548 6,673 5,291
156,376
235,929

634 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Table 19 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1976-77 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

National Roads Act-National highways construction
National highways maintenance
Export and major commercial roads

23,950 4,207
2,104

11,473 1,052
2,544

13,014 3,523
1,358

8,464 685
636

5,320 1,045
631

4,279 284
342

Sub-total

30,261

15,069

17,895

9,785

6,996

4,905

Roads Grants Act ~ Rural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads
Urban local roads MITERS Beef roads

7,549 9,078 17,906 2,250 2,339

2,104 5,235 19,374 1,517 1,407

5,822 6,898 7,485 1,076 1,321 4,403

1,614 2,593 3,718
538 734

3,919 5,933 10,220
702 783

1,223 2,006 1,468
152 294

Sub-total

39,122

29,637

27,005

9,197

21,557

5,143

Total

69,383

44,706

44,900

18,982

28,553

10,048

Table 20 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1977-78 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

National Roads~ National highways construction National highways maintenance National commerce roads

25,088 3,604 2,812

States Grants (Roads) Act

11,602 1,339 1,696

13,298 3,704 1,249

6,693 848 580

6,796 1,874
710

3,507 402 312

Sub-total

31,504

14,637

18,251

8,121

9,380

4,221

Other Roads Rural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads MITERS

8,032 11,513 12,807 3,302
1,473

4,953 8,478 12,896 1,606 1,443

10,263 8,389 4,864 1,696 1,160

3,124 2,990 2,053
982 759

4,199 6,426 4,998 1,058
803

1,357 2,187 1,205
446 268

Sub-total

37,127

29,376

26,372

9,908

17,484

5,463

Total

68,631

44,013

44,623

18,029

26,864

9,684

Table 21 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1978-79 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia

National Roads-National highways construction
National highway maintenance

23,043 4,071

States Grants (Roads) Act

11,485 1,325

12,563 4,268

6,664 839

7,014 1,735

Tasmania
3,366 397

Total
66,500 10,796 7,615 84,911
22,231 31,743 60,171
6,235 6,878 4,403 131,661 216,572
Total
66,984 11,771 7,359 86,114
31,928 39,983 38,823
9,090 5,906 125,730 211,844
Total
64,135 12,635

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 635

Category
National commerce roads
Sub-total
Other roadsRural arterial roads Rural local roads Urban arterial roads Urban local roads Miters
Sub-total
Total

New South Wales
4,074
31,188

Victoria Queensland

1,380

1,237

14,190

18,068

South Australia
285
7,788

Western Australia
537
9,286

Tasmania 309
4,072

Total 7,822 84,592

7,952 11,397 12,678 3,269 1,458
36,754
67,942

4,903 8,394 12,743 1,643 1,656
29,339
43,529

10,160 8,305 4,890 1,679 1,074
26,108
44,176

3,340 2,960 2,032
972 751
10,055
17,843

4,157 6,361 4,948 1,047
795
17,308
26,594

1,449 2,165 1,193
442 265
5,514
9,586

31,961 39,582 38,484 9,052
5,999
125,078
209,670

Table 22 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS
1979-80 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania

Total

National roadsNational highways construction National highways maintenance
National commerce roads

23,037 3,654 2,219

States Grants (Roads) Act

10,647 1,229 2,129

11,875 3,726 1,147

6,177 778 502

6,490 1,720
397

3,200 404 287

61,426 11,511 6,681

Sub-total

28,910

14,005

26,748

7,457

8,607

3,891

79,618

Other RoadsRural arterial roads Rural local roads
Urban arterial roads
Urban local roads Miters

7,371 10,565 11,753 3,030 1,351

4,545 7,781 11,239 1,728 1,433

9,419 7,699 4,602 1,556
926

2,866 2,743 1,884
901 696

3,854 5,897 4,586
971 737

1,228 2,007 1,106
409 246

29,283 36,692 35,170
8,595 5,389

Sub-total

34,070

26,726

24,202

9,090

16,045

4,996 115,129

Total

62,980

40,731

40,950

16,547

24,652

8,887 194,747

Under the financial arrangements with the Northern Territory which came into effect on I July 1979, an amount of $19
million ($6.769 million in 1971-72 prices) was made available to the Northern Territory in 1979-80 by way of a Commonwealth specific purpose payment for roads. This amount was not apportioned between road categories by the Commonwealth.

Table 23 COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES AND NORTHERN TERRITORY FOR ROADS
1980-81 (1971-72 prices) ($'000)

Category

New
South Wales

South Western

Northern

Victoria Queensland Australia Australia Tasmania Territory

Total

Roads Grants Act 1980National roads
Rural arterial roads Urban arterial roads
Local roads

29,341 7,107 11,167 13,108

14,978 4,383 10,519 9,168

16968 9,081 4,510 8,923

7,717 2,764 1,956 3,514

9,001 3,715 4,431 6,621

3,962 1,184 1,092 2,329

3,796 312 295
2,123

85,763 28,546 33,970 45,786

Total

60,723

39,048

39,482

15,951

23,768

8,567

6,526 194,065

636 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Table 24
ANNUAL PERCENTAGE REAL CHANGE IN COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO THE
STATES FOR ROADS
I972-73TO 1980-81
(Using the BTE Road Construction Price Index)

Year

Percentage change

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75
1975~76
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

+5.2
~.I
-12.8 +0.8 -8.2 -2.2 -1.0 -7.1 -3.7

Note: Northern Territory excluded for comparative purposes.
Table 25 CUMULATIVE SHORTFALL IN COMMONWEALTH
GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR ROADS 1975-76 TO 1980-81
(Using the BTE Road Construction Price Index)

Year

Cumulative
shortfall (1980-81
prices)

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

$m
63.273 141.933 227.017 360.196 517.01 5

Note: Northern Territory excluded for comparative purposes.

Review of Commonwealth Functions: Implementation of Decisions
(Question No. 4289)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
(I) Did he say in a speech to the Australian Society of Accountants, Australian Capital Territory, on 19 March 1982 that, as at the end of February 1982, some 90 per cent of the originally announced Review of Commonwealth Functions decisions have been implemented or are very close to final implementation and that implementation of the remaining decisions is being vigorously pursued by the RCF Committee of Cabinet and Ministers responsible.
(2) If so, which decisions (a) have been implemented, (b) are very close to final implementation, (c) are being vigorously pursued and (d) have been abandoned, and what were the relevant dates of action taken.
(3) Which decisions have resulted in (a) transfer of functions to the private sector, (b) transfer of functions to the States and (c) abolition of functions, and what were the relevant dates of action taken.
(4) What is the expected reduction in Commonwealth Government expenditure, or increase in Commonwealth Government revenue. including the effects in Commonwealth

statutory authorities and business enterprises. for each decision in (a) 1981-82 and (b) 1982-83.
(5) What is the expected reduction in the number of Commonwealth Government employees, including the effects in Commonwealth statutory authorities and business enterprises,for each decision in (a) 1981-82 and (b) 1982-83.
(6) What is the total number of Commonwealth Government employees, including those in Commonwealth statutory authorities and business enterprises, expected to be (a) redeployed and (b) retrenched as a result of the implementation ofRCF decisions in (i) 1981-82 and (ii) 1982-83.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) Yes. The implementation of the decisions announced by the Prime Minister in his statement to the Parliament of 30 April 1981 has been and continues to be the responsibility of individual Ministers under the general oversight of the Review of Commonwealth Functions Committee of the Cabinet.
(2)-(6) Details of decisions taken as a result of the Review were listed in the Prime Minister's statement, which also indicated those decisions involving the transfer or abolition of functions. As has been stated before, the Review was not primarily an exercise in cost cutting. The focus was on streamlining and fining down Commonwealth operations by withdraw. ing from areas more appropriately handled by the States and private enterprise, and rationalising a number of Commonwealth activities.
Financial and staff savings have been and will continue to be made as a result of the Review, both directly and also indirectly arising from those measures designed to contribute over time to efficiency of government. In answering questions asked in another place about the expenditure implications of the Review (see the reply to Senate Question Nos 1257-1282 in the Senate Hansard for 23 February 1982, pages 297-8) it was explained why precise figuring of the type sought on savings cannot be provided. The effects of Review decisions on Budget outlays are combined with those of other government decisions and with variations in other factors affecting expenditures. It is not practicable to separate out the financial effects of each of the many interacting influences on the financial estimates.
Similar considerations apply in respect of questions seeking to identify the staffing effects of Review decisions.
Finally, I am bound to say to the honourable member that any,attempt to provide a detailed reply to omnibus questions seeking information in respect of each of the decisions taken as a result of the Review would involve an unjustifiable commitment of resources.
Telecom and Television Services: Wittenoom, Western Australia
(Question No. 4334)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
Has he, had representations from the Western Australian Government to expedite the provision of STD and national television services to the town of Wittenoom; if so, what was his response to this request.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
According to departmental records for the last twelve months, I have received no representations from the Western Australian Government requesting that I expedite the provision of STD and national television services to the town of Wittenoom.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 637

Tenosynovitis: Department of Education
(Question No. 4390)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (2) and (3) My Department and the statutory authorities within my jurisdiction are monitoring reported incidence of repetitious strain injury, and are awaiting the occupational health guide which is being prepared by the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). Consistent with the availability of resources the Department will seek to comply with' the recommendations in the guide, when it is available.
No comprehensive medical examinations are carried out within my portfolio. Staff are required to undertake a medical examination for permanent appointment and may be referred for medical examination where an illness or injury is such as to affect work performance and warrant possible redeployment or retirement on medical grounds. Staff reporting possible health problems associated with work are encouraged to seek medical attention and appropriate treatment. The relatively small number of diagnosed cases of tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome identified among staff within the portfolio has meant that any full-scale ergonomic assessment of work processes, tasks, and environments had not been considered justified on both economic and resource grounds.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Transport and Construction
(Question No. 4401)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) (a) The Department of Transport and Construction, the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation, the Australian National Railways Commission and the Australian

Shipping Commission encourage/arrange medical examinations for officers or employees who report symptoms of apparently job-related illness. Apart from these, there are no comprehensive medical examinations routinely conducted beyond those included in the appointment process.
(b) The wide range of occupations in which repetition strain injuries are reported would make a program of ergonomic assessment impractical on economic and resource grounds. The Department of Transport and Construction together with Departments of Health and Science and Technology offers advice on suitable working environments for operations where the possible existence of health hazards is suspected.
The significance of repetition strain injury as an occupational health problem has only recently been recognised. The Department of Health has reacted promptly in researching the problem and it is expected that the National Health and Medical Research Council Occupational Health Guide will be issued in June 1982 or shortly thereafter.
Concerted efforts will be made to comply with the National Health and Medical Research Council recommendations subject to the availability of resources. Existing work places have been designed, fitted out and equipped having regard to Local Government and State Safety Regulations and relevant standards and guidelines issued by such bodies as the Standards Association of Australia, the National Health and Medical Research Council and the Department of Science and Technology.
(2) and (3) Not applicable.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 4407)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screenbased equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment, (b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties and (c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) The Department of National Development and Energy issued to operators of screen based equipment a statement of Departmental policy based on Public Service Board Memorandum 81/418. Supervisors are aware of the need for such operators to have a sufficient break having regard to the nature of the task and the need for substantially different activities during the break. The latter would normally take the form of operating ancillary equipment.
Statutory Authorities within my jurisdiction involved in screen based equipment operations on a regular basis, have made operators aware of the need for sufficient breaks.

638 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(b) (i) and (ii) Due to the diverse nature of the operation undertaken using screen based equipment, the time that individual operlltors actually operate this equipment varies considerably. Word and data processing operators generally spend up to 80 per cent of the day operating the equipment. Computer systems officers and professional and technical staff make use of screen based equipment as their need demands. Their rate of usage would vary from day to day.
(c) (i) and (ii) Because of the varied nature of the work being undertaken and of operational requirements, no keystrokes rate has been prescribed. The Department and Authorities do not monitor actual operator rates.
Special Youth Employment Training Program
(Question No. 4467)
Mr Hawke asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 22 April 1982:
(I) How many young persons had been employed by private employers under the Special Youth Employment Training Program (SYETP) during 1981-82 as at the end of March 1982.
(2) How many of the persons referred to in part (I) had been (a) under the standard SYETP program and (b) under the extended SYETP program.
(3) In what occupational categories have these persons been employed.
(4) What is the current number of young persons in jobs attracting (a) standard SYETP subsidies and (b) extended SYETP subsidies.
(5) What percentage of all current SYETP trainees are females and in what occupational categories have female trainees been employed.
(6) What is the average period of retention of trainees employed under the 2 SYETP schemes during 1981-82.
(7) What measures are currently in place to ensure that adequate training and work experience are imparted to subsidised trainees.
(8) What sum has so far been spent on SYETP subsidisation during 1981-82.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 33,069.
(2) (a) 24,653
(b) 8,416.
(3) These persons have been employed in a total of over 480 occupational categories. The major occupational categories were: retail sales, factory hand, tradesman's assistant, clerk, typist, office assistant, storeman, farm hand, machinist, driveway attendant, kitchen, checkout operator, packer, waiter, receptionist and assembler.
(4) At the end of March the number of young people in training was: (a) Standard SYETP-4,652 and (b) Extended SYETP-3,796.
(5) 54 per cent of all current SYETP trainees are female. The major occupations in which female trainees were employed are: retail sales, typist, office assistant, clerk, machinist, factory hand, checkout operator, receptionist, waitress and kitchen hand.
(6) Recent surveys undertaken by the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations indicate that the average period of subsidised training for Standard SYETP was 13.4 weeks and for Extended SYETP 22.6 weeks. This does not

take account of those trainees who were retained beyond the subsidised training period.
(7) A training plan is agreed to by both employer and the Commonwealth Employment Service (CES) at the beginning of the training period and incorporated in a training agreement which is signed by both parties and becomes the basis for subsidy payment. This agreement includes provision for the employer to notify the CES should he/she propose to alter the training plan. The CES is required to make two supervisory visits to the employer to ensure adherence to the training
agreement. Where it IS established that an employer has
breached the training agreement, payment of subsidy may be suspended. Where the breach is not remedied, provision exists for the subsidy to be recovered.
(8) To the end of March 1982, expenditure on SYETP (including SYETP in Commonwealth Departments and Instrumentalities) was $42.92m.
Growth Centre Funding
(Question No. 4489)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 28 April 1982:
( I) Has the Government waived loan debts due from New South Wales and Victoria for the Albury-Wodonga growth centre.
(2) How do special grants to Queensland compare per capita with growth centre funding to other States in respect of (a) population growth, (b) growth of infrastructure needs, (c) decentralisation incentives and rewards and (d) other needs.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes. Early in 1981 it was agreed between New South Wales, Victoria and the Commonwealth that the States would be relieved of their obligations to repay loans and to pay interest on the loans provided by the Commonwealth. In lieu of these recoveries, it was agreed that the Commonwealth would have access to funds generated from development activities. The financial agreement which will implement these arrangements has yet to be finalised by the three governments.
(2) Queensland has not received special purpose payments for growth centre funding.
Storage of Radioactive Material, Derrimut, Victoria
(Question No. 4506)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 28 April 1982:
(I) Further to the Minister's answer to Question No. 4171 ( Hansard, 22 April 1982, page 1844) about radioactive material having been stored at Derrimut, Victoria from the late 1950's to 1979, was the material stored (a) above ground, (b) underground, or (c) in containers.
(2) If it was stored in containers, what type of containers.
(3) Who made the decision to store these materials at Derrimut, and on what basis was the decision made.
(4) On what basis was a decision made to take the material away from Derrimut, and who made the decision.
(5) Where is the material now and under what conditions is it stored.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 639

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The material at Derrimut was stored above ground in an isolated, locked, brick building and was packaged according to the nature of the radioactive materials. Radiation levels were reqularly monitored and access strictly controlled.
(2) The containers for sealed radiography sources, other sealed sources and miscellaneous, contaminated components were, respectively, approved sealed metal cans, the appropriate service packs and plastic bags.
(3) At the time responsibility for the disposal of surplus Commonwealth property was vested in the then Department of Supply. The decision to store the material at Derrimut was taken in the light of the need to provide a safe isolated storage site pending a better long term storage arrangement.
(4) The mat~rial was removed from Derrimut to St Marys in New South Wales in June 1979. The decision to do this was taken by the Controller Munitions Supply in the then Department of Productivity (under whom both establishments came) for reasons of consolidating holdings in one location. The health authorities of the two States involved (Victoria and New South Wales) were fully aware of this action.
(5) The material is now stored at Munitions Filling Factory, St Marys, New South Wales in a secure area within the complex, in an isolated building which has thick reinforced concrete walls and roof with fire proof doors. The material is still in its original containers and the building is securely locked with access strictly controlled. Radiation levels outside the building, which are monitored regularly, are such that there is no danger to employees or local residents.
Proposals are being developed by the Department of National Development and Energy, in consultation with the States, for the co-ordinated management and disposal of radioactive wastes. Materials such as those currently secured at St Marys will receive more permanent treatment as soon as detailed requirements have been agreed with State Governmens, and the necessary facilities developed.
Defence Force Personnel: Occupation of Rental Dwellings in Grayndler Electorate
(Question No. 4540)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) How many (a) rental dwellings are occupied by and (b) dwellings are reserved for Defence personnel in the electoral division ofGrayndler.
(2) How many of these dwellings are located in State Housing Commission complexes.
(3) What are the addresses of the dwellings referred to in part (I).
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) (a) As at 14 July 1982, two Commonwealth-owned and one New South Wales Housing Commission flat were known to be occupied by Defence Force personnel in the electoral division of Grayndler. Information is not readily available, however, regarding the number of servicemen occupying privately rented accommodation in the area.
(b) At 14 July 1982, there were four Defence-controlled dwellings in the electorate. Action is being taken to return one vacant dwelling to the New South Wales Housing Commission.
(2) Two.

(3) The addresses of the dwellings referred to in (I) (b) are:
(a) Commonwealth-owned:
700 Canterbury Road, Belmore.
19 Harp Street, Belmore.
(b) Dwellings provided under the Commonwealth/State Housing Agreement (Servicemen):
38/7 Cahill Place, Marrickville.
47/7 Cahill Place, Marrickville.
Transport of Toxic Pesticides
(Question No. 4570)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to an article in the Age of 3 May 1982, page 4, entitled 'After Spraying, a Shroud of Secrecy'.
(2) At the time of the registration of telodrin, (a) what arrangements existed and what orders were in force for the transport of toxic pesticides and other chemicals and (b) on what basis were those arrangements and orders established.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) Yes.
(2) I understand that telodrin is no longer registered for agricultural use by the Australian States and Territories and that the substance was withdrawn from sale in the early 1960's.
The current Australian Code for the Transport of Dangerous Goods by Road and Rail (Commonwealth Gazette No.2 of 24 February 1982) which is being used by the States and Territories as the basis for uniform dangerous goods transport legislation was not available when telodrin was last used.
Registration of Pesticides
(Question No. 4579)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to articles in the Age of 3 May 1982, page 4, entitled 'After Spraying, a Shroud of Secrecy' and 'State Study Being Planned'.
(2) Has the Minister ordered any investigation of claims made in those articles which relate to health matters; if not, will he do so; if not, why not.
(3) Is he able to say when telodrin was registered as a pesticide in Australia.
(4) What arrangements existed at that time for the registration of pesticides and what was the Department of Health's role in those arrangements.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) Yes.
(2) No investigation at the federal level is proposed into the claims concerning telodrin in the article 'After Spraying, a Shroud of Secrecy' or into the matters under investigation by the Victorian authorities and reported in the article 'State Study Being Planned'. Legislation relating to the registration, including availability and use, of pesticides is a State responsibility. The unforeseen problems associated with the use of telodrin were quickly identified by the Victorian authorities and the product was withdrawn from sale. The illnesses

640 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

reported at the time among people were mild, transient and not wide-spread. The incident was reported in the Report of the Commission of Public Health, Victoria, for the year ended 30 June 1964 and was also referred to in the Report of the Commission for the year ended 30 June 1965.
The article 'State Study Being Planned' refers to the Federal Government's epidemiological studies into the health of Australian Vietnam veterans and their offspring. These studies are proceeding. The honourable member will be aware of the Inquiry being conducted by the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment. This Inquiry will also be looking into the use of pesticides, particularly phenoxy chemicals and chemicals containing dioxin. The Committee is dealing first with the possible effects on Vietnam veterans of exposure to herbicides including 2, 4-D and 2, 4, 5-T which are phenoxyacetic acid derivatives.
(3) Pesticide registration is a matter for the individual State authorities and the date of registration can vary between States. In all Australian States legislation introduced since 1945 requires that agricultural chemicals are registered prior to sale. I understand that telodrin was first registered in 1961.
(4) At the time of the incident my Department was not directly involved in the arrangements for registering pesticides, the States being responsible~as they still are~for these. The National Health and Medical Research Council (NH and MRC) in 1952 and again in 1963 made recommendations to the States on setting tolerances for residues of pesticides in food for human consumption. Since 1969 the NH and MRC has become more closely associated with the registration of pesticides and agricultural chemicals through its representation on Technical Committees, convened by the Department of Primary Industry, which advise State authorities concerned with registration. My Department provides technical and secretarial staff to committees of the NH and MRC concerned with the evaluation of the health aspects of pesticides and agricultural chemicals prior to their registration and other related matters. It must be remembered that during the early 1960s the evaluation of pesticides prior to registration was less stringent than it is today because the co-ordinated approach to the assessment of toxicology, efficacy and safety, through the NH and MRC and the Australian Agricultural Council, was still being developed. Moreover, the science of toxicology was far less predictive of possible adverse health effects as compared .to the present day situation when more extensive toxicological assessments are requi.red for all new agricultural chemicals.
Trade Training System: Reform
(Question No. 4602)
Mr Hayden asked th~ Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister, in his policy statement on 30 September 1980, promise a reform of the trade training system to increase the supply of tradesmen trained in Australia.
(2) If so, when was this promise implemented and in what form.
Mr MacpheeThe answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) The Prime Minister's policy statement on 30 September 1980 said that 'new features of job programmes will include reform of the trade training system to increase the supply of tradesmen trained in Australia'.
(2) The blueprint for reform has been the Departments of Labour Advisory Committee (DOLAC) Report 'Prospective Demand for and Supply of Skilled Labour 1980-1983 with Particular Reference to Major Development Projects', which

was accepted by Commonwealth and State Ministers for Labour on 19 September 1980. The report contained 27 recommendations designed to promote a more flexible and responsive trade training system.
The Government, in co-operation with the States, has acted to implement the report's recommendations. Many have been implemented. Progress in implementing the recommendations is documented in the publication 'Improveme"nts in Skills Training' which was released by Commonwealth and State Ministers for Labour in March 1982. Copies were circulated to all Members.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel Inc.: Payment of Creditors
(Question No. 4615)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did a Mr R. T. Dobb, writing for the Secretary, Department of Aboriginal Affairs, advise the Credit Manager of Chatzman Investments Pty Ltd, Mr Shatzman, that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel Incorporated may have advised that the Department of Aboriginal Affairs would be making payment direct to Chatzman Investments Pty Ltd, in respect of the debt incurred by the Panel.
(2) Did the letter state that legal liability for payment of all creditors accounts rests with the Panel to which they should address any further relevant correspondence and that the Department of Aboriginal Affairs had funded the Panel to the extent of its financial commitments; if so what were the specific reasons for this variation from the advice previously provided to Mr K. F. Shatzman by the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel in a letter dated 12 September 1978.
(3) Did Mr Dobb also advise the Credit Manager of Chatzman Investments Pty Ltd, in his letter of 2 March 1979, that the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs had advised the Panel of the information referred to in parts (I) and (2) fo this question by a letter dated 26 February 1979; if so, will the Minister make available a copy of the letter forwarded by the then Minister for Aboriginal Affairs to the Panel, dated 26 February 1979.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes. The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has no responsibility in relation to advice provided by the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Panel to one of its creditors. The only letter of 12 September 1978 from the Director of the Panel to Mr Shatzman of which my Department has a record did not deal with the question of whether creditors would be paid by the Department or the Panel.
(3) Yes. A copy of the letter ref~rred to and of a later letter which fully sets out the Department's position will be made available to the honourable member.
Telecom: Social Welfare Action Group Request for Additional Telephone Lines
(Question No. 4623)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
Did the Social Welfare Action Group apply for additional telephone lines to cope with calls received during a phone-in on abuse of the elderly in Sydney on the weekend of 6-7 March 1982; ifso, was this request refused; ifso, why.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 641

Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Australian Telecommunications Commission, is:
The Social Welfare Action Group requested assistance from Telecom in the form of free incoming calls and additional telephone lines at no cost. Telecom advised the Group that it regretted it was not in a position to accede to the request. Telecom's view is that it is wrong in principle for its customers rather than the community at large to bear the cost of such concessions.
The Group was advised that additional lines would be reserved in anticipation of a request being received. However, no further advice was received from the Group on this matter.
Hobart Bridge Funding
(Question No. 4626)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Which Federal Government committed Commonwealth funds to the repair of the damaged Tasman Bridge at Hobart.
(2) Which Federal Government made an agreement with the Tasmanian Government relating to the construction of a second Hobart bridge and what Budget appropriations did that Government make towards the planning and construction of the new bridge.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
( I) The Whitlam Government committed Commonwealth funds for the restoration of the Tasman Bridge in July 1975. The commitment was continued by the present Government in November 1975, until its completion in October 1977.
(2) On 20 June 1975 the Whitlam Government agreed to Commonwealth funds being provided for investigation, studies and design of a second bridge crossing of the Derwent River at Hobart.
In early 1976 the present Government committed Commonwealth funds for the investigation, studies and design of the bridge. In November 1978, the present Government formally agreed to the Commonwealth fully funding the construction stage of the second Hobart bridge.
Family Allowance
(Question No. 4669)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Government decide in 1979 not to pay normal family allowance entitlements to families with student children receiving Commonwealth tertiary education allowances.
(2) Was it decided instead to pay a fixed sum of $21 per month to the student as a supplementary payment with his or her Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme cheque.
(3) Do family allowance payments for second or subsequent children exceed $21; if so, do families with 2 or more dependent children now receive less by way of the family allowance than other families with 2 or more children.
(4) Did the family allowance replace both the child endowment and a tax deduction for dependent children when it was introduced in 1976.
(5) Does this mean that those families with 2 or more dependent children who receive less than full family allowance are being denied their proper tax concession entitlement once

granted equally to all families regardless of their financial position or status.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) As from I January 1979 the parents of children receiving student allowances under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS), and prescribed related schemes, ceased to be eligible for family allowance for such children.
(2) The relevant rates of student assistance living allowances were concurrently increased by $22.75 a month ($5.25 a week).
(3) The monthly rates of family allowance for children in families are:
First child-$15.20.
Second child-$21. 70.
Third and fourth child-$39.00.
Fifth and subsequent children-$45.55.
Family allowance is payable in respect of children under the age of 16 and dependent full-time students aged 16-24 years, subject to the exclusion noted under ( I ) above.
(4) Family allowance replaced child endowment and tax rebates for dependent children from July 1976.
(5) Families did not benefit equally under the tax rebate arrangements existing immediately prior to the introduction of family allowance in 1976. Some 300,000 low income families with children were advantaged by the change.
-Student children in receipt of TEAS or similar allowance were compensated for the withdrawal of family allowance in 1979 by an increase in the rate of student assistance living allowance.
For the great majority of families that include a student in receipt of TEAS, total assistance to the family is higher than if the student child were to qualify for family allowance. In the small number of cases where entitlement to TEAS would be lower than the family allowance rate otherwise available, the student child is able to qualify for family allowance rather than receive a payment under TEAS.
Industries Assistance
(Question No. 4673)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Is it a fact that the Industries Assistance Commission has understated assistance given to primary industry by $1,043m; if so, is the actual amount of assistance to primary industry three times greater than the amount accounted for in the Industries Assistance Commission report.
(2) Under what terms of reference does the Industries Assistance Commission account for assistance to Australian industries.
(3) What other industries receive assistance in the form of tax concessions, subsidies, research and general finance that are not included in the Industries Assistance Commission report.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I have been advised as follows:
(I) No. The above claim was made in a study by the Metal Trades Industry Association (MTlA) and uses as a base the Industries Assistance Commission (lAC) estimates of assistance to agricultural industries included in its 1979-80 Annl.1al

642 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Report. In its 1980-81 Annual Report the lAC updated these figures.
The revised figures included taxation concessions of $\03m which were specifically excluded from its earlier figures. Further, assistance to non-metropolitan residents and consumers is not considered by the lAC to be assistance to agricultural industries but is included in the MTIA estimate of assistance to 'rural commercial producers'. This amounts to some $506m. Measures to aid non-metropolitan residents and consumers are of assistance to a range of activities in rural areas including manufacturing and service industries. The MTIA estimates also include as assistance a range of measures of which the purpose and incidence for agricultural industries is either incidental or highly debatable. Such measures include the exemption from sales tax of goods used by agricultural industries. However, with few exceptions such as certain four wheel drive motor vehicles and some motorcycles, comparable exemptions generally apply to goods used in manufacturing activities.
The remaining differences between lAC and MTIA figures arise because the MTIA equates the value of assistance to primary producers with the cost to the Budget in terms of revenue forgone. This leads to significant overestimation in several important cases. For example, revenue forgone resulting from the immediate deductibility for tax purposes of certain expenditures which would otherwise be depreciable does not represent the value of assistance, because the measure provides a deferral rather than an elimination of the tax liability. In this instance, the assistance derived takes the form of an interest-free loan arising from the deferral oftax payments.
(2) The Commission's powers and functions are defined in the Industries Assistance Commission Act 1973. Under Section 45 of the lAC Act the Commission is required to report annually on, among other matters, 'the assistance provided to industries by the Commonwealth Government and the effect of that assistance on the development of those industries'.
(3) Most industrial activities receive some assistance in the form of tax concessions, subsidies, government supported research and development, and government regulations in the capital market and other areas. Details of the scope and coverage of the estimates of assistance afforded to both rural and manufacturing activities, which were published in the Commission's 1980-81 annual report, are provided in Appendices 1.2 and 1.3 of that report. The Commission has not, as yet, presented estimates for activities in the mining and services sectors.
Pineapple Industry
Mr Nixon-On 21 April 1982 (Hansard, page 1631) Mr Adermann asked me the following question without notice:
Is the Minister for Primary Industry conversant with the severe concern of the pineapple industry about pineapple products being imported into Australia under conditions which often closely approximate dumping? Has an agreement for processing of pineapple products involving China and the IXL company been contemplated or concluded? If so, what is the nature of that agreement? Will the product be marketed in Australia? What effect, if any, will that have on the domestic pineapple industry in Australia or on Australian markets?
Further to my comments of 21 April 1982 I have now further details of the agreement between Henry Jones (IXL) and the Government of China. Those details are:

A joint venture agreement for growing, processing and marketing pineapples was concluded in September last year between Henry Jones (IXL) Ltd of Melbourne and the Nanning Agricultural, Industrial and Commercial Complex of Nanning City, China.
The agreement was made possible through a Protocol to the Australia-China Trade Agreement on Commercial and Industrial Co-operation. The agreement is initially for 20 years with provision for extensions of \0 year periods. The joint venture company is known as Nanning Jones Co. Ltd and has registered capital of US$460,000. The objective of Nanning Jones is to initially establish pineapple plantations on an 3,300 hectare agricultural farm, and then at a later stage assess the feasibility of establishing a canning factory. This feasibility study will be completed in the fifth year.
Henry Jones (IXL) expects that ninety per cent of the fresh and canned pineapples produced will be sold to the Chinese domestic market, Europe, North America and Japan. However, firm marketing strategies have yet to be established.
The Australian industry's concern about the level of imports of canned pineapple into Australia, is currently under consideration by the Industries Assistance Commission which is due to report by 31 August 1982. The Commission found no evidence to justify a case for interim assistance to the pineapple industry for the 1982 season.
Postal Charges
Mr N. A. Brown-On 21 April 1982 (Hansard, page 1630) Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Communications the following question without notice:
Is the Minister for Communications aware of anomalies that have arisen following the recent introduction by Australia Post of new parcel rates, in particular the large increase in the charges for residents of Eyre Peninsula who are faced with an increase of 125 per cent in the charge for a parcel of up to two kilograms forwarded to Adelaide; that is, an increase from $1.60 to $3.60? Is he aware also that if the same parcel is sent to Mount Gambier, a further 350 kilometres, the charge is only $2? Will the Minister take steps to have these anomalies examined and rectified?
The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Australian Postal Commission, is:
Yes. Australia Post advises that it is aware of the anomalous nature of the increase in parcel charges for the Eyre Peninsula area of South Australia. A revised proposal for charges in that area is to be considered by the Australian Postal Commission shortly.
Australian Capital Territory Motor Vehicle Testing Centres
(Question No. 2097)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
In relation to the Australian Capital Territory Motor Vehicle Testing Centres, (a) what is the total value of capital works and equipment, (b) will these Centres be utilised in the future, (c) will Canberra motorists have to pay fees to have their vehicles inspected; if so, (i) what will be the level of the fees and when will they be applied, (ii) will these fees be regulated; if so, how, (iii) which body will be responsible for setting standards of vehicle maintenance, (iv) will taxis, fleet owners, commercial vehicles, caravans and trailers all be tested by motor dealers and garages; if not, how will they be tested, (d) which body will administer the new scheme and

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 643

how many staff will be required, (e) will the testing stations be leased; if so, (i) will commercial rentals be applied and (ii) what profit margin will the Government set, (f) will the testing stations be auctioned, if so, (i) what will be the reserve price and (ii) how will this price be determined, (g) how many staff will be retrenched from the existing vehicle testing stations and will these staff be offered positions elsewhere in his Department and (h) what compensation will be payable to those businesses currently dependent on the vehicle testing stations, whose livelihood is now jeopardised.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
As the honourable member will be aware, the Government has agreed to the retention of the present system of motor vehicle inspection by the Department.
Australian Capital Territory Motor Vehicle Testing Centres
(Question No. 2154)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(I) Is it anticipated that standards of motor vehicle testing will decline as a result of the closure of the Australian Capital Territory Motor Vehicle Testing Centres (Hansard, 30 April 1981,page 1841).
(2) Does the Australian Capital Territory have a reputation as having the highest standard of motor vehicle testing in Australia.
(3) Is he able to say whether private testing fees will be at least lOOper cent higher than the charges currently levied by his Department for this service.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) As the honourable member will be aware, the Government has agreed to the retention of the present system of motor vehicle inspection by the Department.
Australian Capital Territory Motor Vehicle Testing Centres
(Question No. 2307)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 26 May 1981:
(I) What sum will the Government save by closing the motor vehicle testing stations, for the registration of motor vehic\es in the Australian Capital Territory (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1841 ).

(2) How will a uniform level of motor vehicle safety be guaranteed after the testing stations have been closed.
(3) What will be the estimated cost to police the new system.
(4) Will garages suffer penalties if they do not conform to a desired level of competence when certifying vehicles as being fit for re-registration; if so, what penalties.
(5) What will be the expected additional cost to the vehicle owner of the proposed scheme, or does he expect that, in future, it will be less expensive to register motor vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
(6) Have garage owners been consulted about the viability of the new system.
(7) Is it a fact that the exisiting system of vehicle testing in the Australian Capital Territory is the envy of the States.
(8) Can he predict the likely relationship between the cost savings achieved by implementing the new scheme and an increased accident risk on the roads.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (8) As the honourable member will be aware, the Government has agreed to the retention of the present system of motor vehicle inspection by the Department.
Overseas Borrowings
(Question No. 3641)
Mr Hayden asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 17 November 1981:
With respect to overseas borrowings by the Commonwealth Government between 1970-71 and 1980-81: (a) when was each loan arranged and drawn and for what sum; (b) which person or organisation acted as Commonwealth Government agent in the loan raising; and (c) what was the commission arrangement, including the sum paid to the agent.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) (b) and (c) The following table contains the required information on overseas borrowings by the Commonwealth Government during the period 1970-71 and I980-8 \.
With respect to part (b) of the question, the Commonwealth Government negotiates directly with the lead underwriter or lead manager specified in column (5).
With respect to part (c), commissions for underwriting/ selling and managing a loan, which are payable to the lead underwriter/manager are set out in column (6).

Commonwealth Government overseas borrowings 1970-71 to 1980-81

Date of signing loan agreement

Date of drawdown (i)

Amount in currency
of issue ($A
approximate equivalent)
(ii) millions

Market (type ofloan)

Management

selling

and/or

underwriting

Lead commission

underwriter /

(percent

manager of principal

(I) 1970-71 24 Aug.
24 Aug.
\0 Dec.
\0 Dec.

(2) by31 Dec. 1971 . by 30 Sept. 1970 by 31 Dec. 1974 by 30 June 1972

(3)
$US5.0 (4.5)
$US\,O (0.9)
$USI23.0 (110.3)
$US29.6

(4)

(5)

(6)

United States (Trade Credit)
United States (Trade Credit)
United States (Trade Credit)
United States

Export-Import
Bank of the United States Export-Import
Bank of the United States Export-Import
Bank of the United States Export-Import

644 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Date of signing loan agreement (I)
SJan. I Feb.
I Feb.

Date of drawdown (i)
(2)
2 Feb.
by 31 May 1972
by 31 May 1972

1971-72 4Aug. SDec. SDec. 20 Jan.

13 Aug. by 31 Dec. 1972 by 31 Dec. 1975
27 Jan.

1972-73 14July

20 July

14July

25 July

20 Nov.

by 31 Dec. 1974

27 Nov.

29 Nov.

7 Feb.

by 31 Dec. 1973

1973-74 No overseas borrowings 1974-75 26 Sept.

I Oct.

5 Dec.

16 Dec.

6 Dec.

17 Dec.

23 Jan.

31 Jan.

12 Mar.

I Apr.

27 Mar.

Apr.-July 1975

15Apr.

17 Apr.

15 Apr.

30 Apr.

16May

by 30 June 1976

12 June

24June

1975-76 30 Oct.
19 Nov.
3 Mar.

3 Nov. by 30 June 1976
10 Mar.

Amount in currency
of issue ($A approximate equivalent) (ii) millions
(3) (26.4) DF60.0 (14.S) $US25.0 (22.3) $US30.0 (26.S)
EUAI5.0 ( 13.4)
$USI1.3 (10.1 )
$US90.0 (75.6)
DMlOO.O (26.1)
SF50.0 (10.9) YIO,OOO.O (27.9) $-OSI6.1 ( 13.4) SF50.0 (10.9 $USIO.7 (7.6)
DM200.0 (57.1 ) SFS5.0 (24.5) SF50.3 (14.6)
DMlOO.O (32.0) SF60.0 (17.S4)
DM40.0 (12.5)
DM50.0 (15.6)
DM50.0 (15.6)
$US4.1 (3.1 )
$US50.0 (37.15)
$US50.0 (37.15)
SF41.5 (12.2) $USIO.O (7.0) DMlOO.O (31.2)

Market (type ofloan)
(4) (Trade Credit
Netherlands (Private Placement)
United States (Trade Credit)
United States (Trade Credit)

Management selling
and/or underwriting Lead commission underwriter/ (per cent manager of principal

(5)

(6)

Bank of the United States

Amsterdam-Rotterdam

1.50

BankNV

Chase Manhattan

Bank

Chase Manhattan

Bank

European Units of

Banque Lambert

2.5

Account (Public)

United States

Export-Import

(Trade Credit) Bank of the United States

United States

Export-Import

(Trade Credit) Bank of the United States

Germany

Deutsche

2.5

(Public)

BankAG

Switzerland (Private Placement)
Japan (Public) United States (Trade Credit) Switzerland (Private Placement) United States (Trade Credit)

Swiss Bank Corporation The Nomura Securities Co, Ltd Export-Import Bank of the United States
Swiss Bank Corporation Export-Import Bank of the United States

1.625 I.4S
1.625

Germany (Public)
Switzerland (Private Placement)
Switzerland (Bank)
Germany (Public)
Switzerland (Public) Germany
(Schuldscheindarlehen) Germany
(Private Placement) Germany
(Private Placement) United States
(Trade Credit) United States (Public) United States (Public)

Deutsche Bank AG
Swiss Bank Corporation Union Bank of Switzerland Deutsche Bank AG
Union Bank of Switzerland
Deutsche Bank AG
Deutsche Bank AG
Deutsche Bank AG
Private Export Funding Corporation Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc.
Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc.

Switzerland
(Private Placement) United States
(Trade Credit)
Germany (Public)

Credit Suisse
Export-Import Bank of the United States
Deutsche Bank AG

I.S75 2.0
2.25 3.50
2.0 1.5 1.5
1.0 0.S5
1.75
2.25

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 645

Date of signing , loan agreement (I) 23 Mar. 10May 20 May
1976-77 20 Sept.
16 Nov.
30 May 1977-78 I Sep
27Sep 27Sep 7 Oct 20 Oct 22 Nov
13 Feb 22 Mar 20 Apr 24 May
29 May
1978-79 27 July 25 Aug 5Sep

Date of drawdown (i)
(2) 15Apr. 4June 2June
30 Sept
29 Nov.
I June
14Sep
29Sep 29Sep 13 Oct 26 Oct I Dec
24 Feb 22 Mar 20 Apr
6Jun
31 May
31 July 29 Aug 13Sep

Amount in currency
of issue ($A approximate equivalent) (ii) millions
(3) SF 100.00
(31.8) DFlOO.O
(29.7) $US75.0
(61.2) $US50.0
(40.8) $US75.0
(61.2)
$USI20.0 (96.9)
$USI20.0 (96.9)
$US60.0 (48.5)
$USI25.0 (122.8)
$US75.0 (73.7)
$US21.0 (19.0)
$USlOO.O (90.6)
$USI50.0 (135.9)
DM250.0 (96.9)
DM500.0 (193.9)
DM250.0 (97.3)
DM250.0 (98.4)
$USI25.0 (110.8)
$USlOO.O (88.7)
Y50,OOO.00 (184.0)
$US350.0 (306.1) SF50.0 (23.2)
$US175.0 (154.4)
$US75.0 (66.2)
DF300.0 (117.3)
SF400.0 (194.0) DF300.0 (119.6) DM250.0

Market (type of loan)
(4) Switzerland
(Public) Netherlands (Private Placement) United States
(Public) United States
(Public) United States
(Public)

Management
selling
and/or underwriting Lead commission underwriter/ (percent manager of principal

(5)

(6)

Credit Suisse

3.5

Amsterdam-Rotterdam

1.5

RankNV

Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc.

0.85

Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc.

1.10

Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc.

1.35

Eurodollar (Public)
Eurodollar (Public)
Eurodollar (Public)
United States (Public)
United States (Public)
Eurodollar (Private Placement)

Deutsche Bank AG Deutsche Bank AG Deutsche Bank AG Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc. Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc.
Swiss Bank Corporation

1.875 2.125 2.25
0.9
1.5

Eurodollar (Public)
Eurodollar (Public) Germany
(Schuldscheindarlehen) Germany (Bank) Germany
(Private Placement) Germany (Public)
United States (Public)
United States (Public) Japan (Public)
Eurodollar (Public)
Switzerland (Bank)
United States (Public)
United States (Public)
Netherlands (Bank)

Deutsche Bank AG
Deutsche Bank AG
Deutsche Bank AG
Deutsche Bank AG
Deutsche Bank AG
Deutsche Bank AG
Morgan Stanley & Co Inc
Morgan Stanley & Co Inc
The Nomura Securities Co,Ltd
Deutsche Bank AG
Swiss Bank Corporation Morgan Stanley & Co Inc
Morgan Stanley & Co Inc
Amsterdam-Rotterdam Bank NV and Cooperative
Centrale Raiff'eisenBoerenleenbank BA

1.875 2.25
1.0 2.25 0.9 1.25 2.05
1.5
0.8 1.15 0.625

Switzerland Bank
Netherlands (Bank)
Germany

Credit Suisse
Algemene Bank Nederland NV Deutsche Bank AG

-(iii) 0.25 2.25

646 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Date of signing loan agreement (I) 5Sep 180ct 23 Oct
22 Nov
25Jan 22 Feb 22 Feb 19 Mar 1979-80 26 Oct
22 Nov 13 Feb 20 Feb
1980-81 25 Sep 26 May

Date of drawdown (i)
(2) 13 Sep 23 Oct 15Nov
5 Dec
30Jan 26 Feb 26 Feb 4Apr

Amount in currency
of issue ($A approximate equivalent) (ii) millions
(3) (108.2) DM50.0 (21.6) Y40,OOO.O (186.2) Y40,OOO.0 (184.2)
Y30,OOO.0 (131.8)
Y20,OOO.0 (87.9)
DF300.0 (132.2) SF250.0 (131.9) SF250.0 (131.9) SF250.0 (131.8)

Market (type of loan)

Management selling
and/or underwriting Lead commission
underwriter/ (percent manager of principal

(4)

(5)

(6)

(Public)

Germany

Deutsche Bank AG

(Schuldscheindarlehen)

Japan

Long-Term Credit

0.25

(Institutional)

Bank of Japan, Ltd

Japan

Mitsubishi Trust and

0.5

(Institutional) Banking Corp/Nippon Life

Insurance Co

Japan

The Nomura Securities

1.73

(Public)

Co,Ltd

Japan

The Nomura Securities

2.05

(Public)

CO,Ltd

Netherlands

Algemene Bank

0.5

(Bank)

Nederland NV

Switzerland

Union Bank of

(Bank)

Switzerland

Switzerland

Credit Suisse

1.75

(Private Placement)

Switzerland

Swiss Bank

2.9

(Public)

Corporation

30 Oct
5 Dec 20 Feb 28 Feb

Y40,OOO.0 (154.6)
Y30,OOO.0 (109.7)
DM250.0 (130.0)
DM150.0 (77.6)

Japan (Institutional)
Japan (Public) Germany (Public) Germany (Private Placement)

Industrial Bank of Japan, Ltd, Mitsubishi Trust
and Banking Corp and Nippon Life Insurance Corp
The Nomura Securities Co, Ltd
Deutsche Bank AG
Deutsche Bank AG

0.375
2.05 2.25 1.625

30Sep 2June

DM200.0
(95.1) Y20,OOO.0
(78.5)

Germany (Private Placement)
Japan
(Public)

Deutsche Bank AG
The Nomura Securities CO,Ltd

1.625 2.05

(i) In the case of trade credits, most of which were on-lent to other bodies and some of which were drawndown over a period
of time as equipment was delivered, only the expiring date of the drawdown period is shown. (ii) Approximate Australian dollar equivalent is as at the time of borrowing.
(iii) Borrowing disbursed at 99 per cent.

Radiation Damage
(Question No. 3676)

would be properly compensated for such damage; if not, what action does he propose to take.

Mr Uren asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 18 November 1981:
(I) Can he say whether there are any provIsions for companies to insure against liability for radiation damage resulting from accidents in the uranium industry or in the transport of radioactive materials.
(2) Is the Commonwealth Government or to his knowledge, any State government, liable, in any way, to meet costs resulting from such damage.
(3) Is the Government satisfied that adequate measures exist to ensure that any person or body who suffered radiation-related damage as a consequence of accidents in the uranium industry or in the transport or radioactive materials

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Subject to the comments outlined below regarding workers' compensation legislation, I am not aware of any Commonwealth or State legislation which contains provisions requiring companies to insure against liability for radiation damage resulting from accidents in the uranium industry or in the transport of radioactive materials. In the case of workers' compensation legislation, inquiries by my officers indicate that, even if not specifically mentioned in the relevant enactments, radiation damage is normally covered by the provisions of that legislation and that workers' compensation cover in the nuclear industry is identical to that available to other

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 647

workers. These inquiries also indicate that insurers do underwrite nuclear risks associated with normal commercial operations (such as the use of radioactive isotopes and the handling and transport of yellow cake).
(2) Whether the Commonwealth or any State Government would be liable to meet the costs resulting from nuclear damage would depend on the facts of each particular case. Any liability of Government would depend on principles which would apply equally to private persons or corporations. Where Commonwealth or State Governments use radioactive materials, or are directly responsible for their use, they could be liable for any consequent damage under general principles ofliability.
(3) In the absence of any legislative provision (apart from workers' compensation legislation), the question of liability and compensation for nuclear damage is governed by common law. The adequacy of the financial protection thus afforded to persons who sustain radiation damage is at present under consideration as a result of Commonwealth action. Pursuant to a Commonwealth initiative, the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General is currently considering the state of the law relating to liability and compensation for nuclear damage. The Standing Committee has not yet reached a decision thereon. In addition, a Commonwealth Interdepartmental Committee (chaired by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet) is undertaking a review of the Atomic Energy Act and related matters in accordance with arrangements announced by the Government in June 1981. That review has not yet been completed. It is intended that the results of the Standing Committee's deliberations will be taken into account in the review being undertaken by the Interdepartmental Committee.
Ministerial Stationery Requirements: Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations
(Question No. 3804)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
What are the details, including (a) quantities and (b) costs, of ministerial stationery requirements for his ministerial office since the 1980 general elections.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Details of stationery requirements for the offices of the former Ministers for Employment and Youth Affairs from the

1980 general elections to 7 May 1982 when the Department was abolished are listed below.

Item

Quantity

Cost

Letterhead Compliment Slips Business Cards Envelopes

85 reams 10,600 250 34,075

($)
6,106.62 890.46 40.00
3,351.52

Total

10,388.60

(See also the answer to Question No. 3795, Hansard of 29 April 1982, page 2136).
Superannuation
(Question No. 3817)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
(I) What percentage of (a) male and (b) female (i) full time members of the private work force and (ii) government employees is estimated to be covered by a superannuation scheme.
(2) Is there a clear relationship between coverage and earnings.
(3) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to an article by Daniel J. Beller in the Social Security Bulletin of July 1981, published in the United States of America; if so, will he arrange with the Minister for Social Security to have similar information made available for Australia.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The most recent information available relates to a survey conducted by the Australian Bureau of Statistics in 1979 which revealed that 55.8 per cent of male employees and 28.0 per cent of female employees, who usually worked 20 hours or more per week, were members of a superannuation or retirement benefits scheme. Separate figures for members of the private work force and government employees are not available.
(2) The relationship between coverage and earnings is shown in the following table which has been furnished by the Australian Bureau of Statistics and is based on information published by it in 'Employment Benefits Australia February to May 1979' and 'Working Conditions Australia February to May 1979' (Catalogue Nos 6334.0 and 6335.0 refer):

EMPLOYEES WHO USUALLY WORKED 20 HOURS OR MORE PER WEEK COVERED BY SUPERANNUATION OR RETIREMENT BENEFIT SCHEMES:. USUAL WEEKLY EARNINGS, FEBRUARY
TO MAY 1979
(per cent)

Employees whose coverage was provided or arranged by their current employer

Usual weekly earnings ($)

120 and l40and 160and 180and 200 and 250 and 300 and

Under under under under under under under under 350 and

120

140

160

180

200

250

300

350 over

Total

All employees
(a)

Males

18.7 28.0 33.3 41.5 47.8 56.0 69.3 72.3 75.4 50.0

55.8

Females Persons

12.3 14.6 18.4 32.9 34.3 43.6 48.7

63.3

26.3

28.0

15.1 20.2 26.2 38.3 44.2 53.4 65.7 71.4 75.0 42.2

46.6

(a) Includes employees whose coverage was arranged through other sources (or by the employees themselves) and in respect of whom details on the relationship between coverage and earnings have not been published.

648 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(3) I am aware of the article to which the honourable member refers. The question of publishing data of the kind contained in that article is a matter of relevance to the functions of the Australian Bureau of Statistics and the article has been drawn to the Bureau's attention. The Bureau has in the past published some statistics in the same general area. In this regard I refer to the Survey of Superannuation, February 1974 (Reference No. 6.42), and to the two publications referred to in (2) above. I am advised that the Bureau is currently working on proposals with a view to providing a basis for publishing improved statistics in this area in the future.
Aborigines: Australian Capital Territory Legislation
(Question No. 3822)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
Further to the answer to Question No. 2833 (Hansard. 18 November 1981, pages 3106-7) can he say (a) whether the 1977 review by the Department of Industrial Relations in effect revealed inconsistencies between International Labour Organisation Convention No. 65-Penal Sanctions (Indigenous Workers) 1939 and legislation of the Australian Capital Territory; if so, have any steps been taken to repeal the relevant provisions of the legislation and (b) in respect of the examination of the question of whether the Aboriginal population of the Australian Capital Territory is an indigenous population within the meaning of the Convention (i) when the decision was made to examine the question, (ii) who is examining the question and (iii) when is it anticipated the examination will be completed.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable memb,er's question is as follows:
The 1977 review did, as the honourable member suggests, identify certain questions concerning the application of Convention No. 65 to Australia. However, the existence of obligations which might be applicable to Australia under the Convention depends on there being a 'dependent indigenous population' in Australia within the meaning of that term as used in the Convention. A more recent review by the then Department of Industrial Relations has shown that there is agreement in both the State and Commonwealth jurisdiction

that while Aboriginals are 'indigenous' they do not as a group constitute a 'dependent indigenous population' within the meaning of the Convention as opined by the appropriate supervisory body within the International Labour Organisation. Given the above, the question of penal sanctions in Australia does not arise.
Commonwealth Employment Service Statistics
(Question No. 3854)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) How many (a) adult male, (b) junior male, (c) adult female and (d) junior female unemployed persons were registered with the Commonwealth Employment Service as seeking (i) skilled, (ii) unskilled manual and (iii) professional and semi-professional employment in each month since January 1980.
(2) What was the proportion in each of the above categories to the total number of unemployed people seeking employment with the Commonwealth Employment Service.
(3) What was the proportion in each of the above categories to the total workforce.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Data are available on a quarterly collection basis for February, May and August 1980.
National data for November 1980 and February 1981 are not available due to industrial disputes which affected the collection of the statistics in a number of offices of the CES in those months.
Data for subsequent quarters are not available, following the Government's decision in April 1981 to terminate the collection of statistics of the number of persons who were registered with the CES as unemployed and awaiting placement.
The number of (a) adult male, (b) junior male, (c) adult female and (d) junior female unemployed persons registered for full-time work with the CES as seeking (i) skilled, (ii) unskilled manual and (iii) professional and semi-professional employment were as follows:

Adult

Junior

Feb. 1980 May 1980 Aug. 1980 Feb. 1980 May 1980 Aug. 1980

Skilled
Unskilled Manual Professional and Semiprofessional

25,107 46,963
10,671

Males 24,676 47,828
8,974

23,772 47,487
7,830

17,770 23,575
982

10,047 23,461
560

8,181 23,002
432

Females

Skilled . . . . . Unskilled Manual Professional and Semiprofessional

682

601

578

926

614

509

431

517

441

523

537

489

9,093

7,130

5,728

1,627

979

695

(2) The proportion of each category to the total number of unemployed people seeking employment through the CES was, in percentage terms:

Skilled Unskilled Manual

Males

5.4

5.7

5.7

3.8

2.3

2.3

10.1

11.1

11.5

5.1

5.4

5.6

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 649

Adult

Junior

Feb. 1980 May 1980 Aug. 1980 Feb. 1980 May 1980 Aug. 1980

Professional and Semiprofessional

2.3

2.1

1.9

0.2

0.1

0.1

Females

Skilled
Unskilled Manual Professional and Semi-
professional

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

2.0

I.7

1.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

(3) The proportion of each category to the total labour force (a) was, in percentage terms:

Skilled Unskilled Manual
Professional and Semiprofessional

Males

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.7

0.7

0.7

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.1

(b)

(b)

(b)

Skilled Unskilled Manual Professional and Semi-
professional

Females

(b)

(b)

(b)

(b)

(b)

(b)

(b)

(b)

(b)

(b)

(b)

(b)

0.1

0.1

0.1

(b)

(b)

(b)

< (a) The total labour force data used for these calculations are published by the Australian Bureau of Statistics in its monthly Labour Force Survey (Catalogue No. 6203.0).
(b) Less than 0.1 per cent.

Telephone Services in Queensland
(Question No. 3926)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) Does he envisage shortfalls in the availability of Telecom Australia telephone services in Queensland.
(2) Will Telecom be able to cope in the long term with the increasing demand for telephones in places such as Gladstone, the Gold Coast and Brisbane that are experiencing a population explosion.
(3) What strain is being placed on Telecom due to new highrise complexes and the increased number of companies in the State of Queensland.
(4) Are inadequacies in the Telecom telephone network to be eliminated in the near future.
(5) Does Telecom require extra finance.
(6) Are funds available to Telecom over the next financial year below the amount required for Telecom to keep pace with growing demands.
(7) Do staff ceilings apply to Telecom; if so, are staff ceilings causing delays in servicing, accounting and sorting account complaints from subscribers.
(8) What was the expenditure for public relations and advertising for Telecom in each financial year from 1977-78.
(9) Will he provide details of:
a. current funding for Telecom; and b. all Telecom loans.
(10) What is the projected extra expenditure caused to Telecom by increased interest rates on existing loans in 1980-81.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the

Australian Telecommunications Commission, IS as follows:
(I) The Telecom Capital Projects Programme for Queensland is based on a continuation of the present high levels of both demand and connections.
Within this broad plan, from time to time shortfalls may occur at particular locations within the State as a result of local factors.
(2) Yes. Telecom actively monitors the growth pattern in these fast developing areas and is planning its network to accommodate it.
(3) Telecom tries to be aware as much in advance as possible of these changes and acts to meet them. The increased number of companies in the State is presenting no particular problem except, of course, that it is contributing to the overall growth rates in demand for telephone services.
(4) See answers to (I) and (2) above.
(5) Additional capital funds could be used by Telecom, but see answer to (6) below.
(6) Most of the finance for capital works is internally funded by Telecom, that is, from income received from telecommunications charges. The remaining 20% approximately, is financed by borrowing on the public loan market. The extent of these borrowings is a matter for consideration in Loan Council.
(7) Staff ceilings no longer apply to Telecom. Telecom has a comprehensive manpower planning system which closely relates staff levels and needs in all its areas of activity, including the accounting function.
(8) Expenditure for Public Relations in each financial year from 1977-78 was:

650 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

1977-78 1978-19 1979-80 1980-81

$ 373,500 215,800 219,500 190,800

Expenditure for advertising in each financial year from 1977-78 was:

$m

1977-78

1.75

1978-79

2.43

1979-80

2.95

1980-81

4.13

(9) (a)-

Sources of Funds

Borrowings . . . . . . . . .

220

Less Secondary Market Operations

(3)

Retained Superannuation

96

Internal Funds . . . . . . .

923

1,236

Application Fixed Assets & Stores Current Assets

1,285 (49)

1,236

(b) Details of all Telecom Loans:

Loan No.

Amount raised

Interest rates

Balance outstanding I Mar. 1982

$m

%

$m

I

200

9.7-10.6

127.4

2

160

10.5-10.9

117.3

3

50

9.3-9.4

50.0

4

50

9.3-9.575

50.0

5

60 9.275-9.375

60.0

6

40

9.1

40.0

7

40

10.0-10.1

40.0

8

35

10.4-10.5

35.0

9

60

10.4-10.5

60.0

10

85

10.4-10.5

85.0

II

30 12.15-12.25

30.0

12

85

12.1-12.3

85.0

13

110

12.0-12.2

110.0

14

97.6

13.3-13.5

97.6

15

95

13.4-13.6

95.0

16

85

15.5-15.7

85.0

17

109.5

15.4-15.7

109.5

1,392.1

1,276.8

(10) This decision by the Commonwealth Government to increase interest rates on pre-I975 advances does not affect
Telecom for the 1980-81 year.

Defence Equipment Purchases in United States Dollars
(Question No. 3966)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
Have any payments for equipment purchases been made in United States dollars in the period I July 1981 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question; if so (a) what are the details and (b) what are the details of any increases or decreases in the real cost as a result of changed currency values.

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes. (a) and (b). Payments for Equipment and Stores made in United States dollars during the financial year 1981-82 totalled $A294.6m. This amount includes an estimated $A 14.0m for exchange rate variations, calculated on the basis of what individual payments would have been had they been made at the exchange rate prevailing at the time of preparation of the 1981-82 Budget.
Defence: Capital Facilities Programs
(Question No. 4064)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1982:
(I) Which capital facilities programs have been temporarily deferred as a result of directives to his Department that commitments are not to be entered into in respect of major capital facilities.
(2) Will the (a) upgrading of Derby Air Base, Western Australia, (b) patrol boat base at Darwin, (c) approved works at Garden Island, New South Wales, (d) continued works at Cockburn Sound, Western Australia, (e) Williamstown Naval Dockyard, Victoria, and (f) works associated with housing the FI8 squadron in Darwin be affected.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Commencements of the following capital facilities planned in 1981-82 were deferred following the review of defence priorities as outlined in Mr Killen's statement to the House on 29 April 1982:
Navy HMAS Watson: domestic boiler Jervis Bay: communications building
Army Enoggera: building for Military Police Puckapunyal: Armoured Centre Queenscliff: Staff College Watsonia: living and working facilities
Air Force Edinburgh: Base security control centre Fuel storage at Amberley, Richmond, Tindal and Williamstown
(2) Those works referred to in the question which are already in progress «b), (c), (d) and (e» will proceed. The planned rate of expenditure on the modernisation of Garden Island Dockyard during 1981-82 and 1982-83 has been reduced, but no elements of the work have been cancelled.
Proposed works «a) and (f) are planned to commence following Public Works Committee examination and Parliamentary approval. It is now intended that the new airfield at Derby be completed in 1987. Facilities for the FI8s in Darwin are planned to be ready by 1986, when these aircraft are due to be deployed there.
Fire and General Insurance
(Question No. 4124)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to comments by Mr G. M. Niall of the National Mutual Life Association, reported in the Australian Financial Review of 24 February 1982, to the effect that the ease with which fire and general insurance premiums can be exported from Australia to purchase insurance and reinsurance in overseas markets is one factor contributing

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 651

to unsatisfactory conditions in the general insurance industry; if so, is there any substance in this claim.
(2) Is it a fact, as claimed by Mr Niall, that the official figures of premiums flowing overseas to non-resident companies fail to capture the true magnitude of these outflows.
(3) Are there any deficiencies in the statistics available on the role of Australia's general insurance industry in our balance of payments account.
(4) Can he say whether large overseas countries are increasingly addressing themselves to the gathering of such information.
(5) Can he also say whether European Economic Community markets, of which the United Kingdom is a member, do not allow the free flow of direct-writing premiums for certain classes of business across international borders but that, as there is discussion of this under EEC directives, a procedure is being drafted for the collection of such statistics should any flows be considered; if so, will this mean that the United Kingdom will have to observe. the EECs requirements, whereas it enjoys complete freedom in respect of the Australian market.
(6) Can he state whether the increasing role of off-shore based tax havens is making the collection of insurance statistics even more complicated with the recent creation of the Isle of Man tax haven by the United Kingdom in November 1981, reportedly designed to serve the European areas.
(7) Does the Government accept Mr Niall's conclusion that there is a case for an official review of the current and prospective levels of premium outflow so that its implications, for the economy and for Australian insurers, may be fully assessed; if so, what action will he take and when; if not, why not.
(8) It is a fact that sub-section 113 (4) of the Insurance Act 1973, which provides for collection of statistics showing the volume of insurance premiums which are sent directly out of the country, hao not been proclaimed by the Government, if so, when will it be proclaimed, and what is the reason for it not having been proclaimed.
(9) It is also a fact, as claimed in the latest report of the Australian Insurance Association, which represents insurance companies which are at least 70 per cent Australian owned, that local control of the Australian private insurance market slipped by 3 per cent to 34 per cent in the year to June.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am aware of the Press article mentioned by the honourable member. It is true that purchasers of insurance and reinsurance have available to them the choice to purchase their cover from the local or overseas markets. The Governmtnt does not believe it should deny purchasers of insurance access to the overseas insurance markets if they so wish. It is, of course, particularly relevant that the spreading of risks through reinsurance is an inherent part of a sound insurance operation and that Australian insurers could be adversely affected if they were denied ready access to the reinsurance facilities available from the overseas markets.
(2) and (3) I am advised that while statistics on Australia's general insurance industry may not record all overseas flows with respect to insurance, this is not considered to affect significantly the overall accuracy of the measurement of Australia's balance of payments position.
(4) No. The information currently available to me is not sufficiently detailed or authoritative to enable me to make a statement of this kind.
(5) I am aware that some countries place restrictions on the levels of insurance premiums that may flow outside their

borders. However, I am not in a position to provide information on the implications with regard to premium flows of possible future measures that might be taken by the United Kingdom and other member countries of the European Economic Community.
(6) I am not aware of any additional complications that have arisen in Australia with regard to existing collections of insurance statistics by the Commonwealth that could be directly attributed to the role of offshore tax havens such as that in the Isle of Man.
(7) See (I) and (2) above. I should add that as a result of work carried out by officials in accordance with decisions taken by the Government in the context of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, certain statistical collections in the general insurance area are being reviewed with a view to exploring the possibility of savings in this area and rationalisation as between collections of the Office of the Insurance Commissioner and those of the Australian Bureau of Statistics. The review will take into consideration the provisions of sub-section I I3 (4).
(8) I refer the honourable member to part (8) of my answer to his Question No. 415 of 24 February 1981 (Hansard of 5 June 1981, page 3308). See also (7) above.
(9) There are no official statistics available that would enable me to confirm the figures referred to by the honourable member.
Gundillion Automatic Telephone Exchange
(Question No. 4154)
Mr Sainsbury asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:
(I) What has been the cost to date of maintaining and repairing, including travel and overtime, the Gundillion automatic telephone exchange following its removal from Cobbity, NSW and its installation at Gundillion, in the electoral division of Eden-Monaro.
(2) Have the subscribers on the Gundi1lion exchange enjoyed a satisfactory telephone service following the expenditure of these moneys.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice furnished by the Australian Telecommunications Commission, is as follows:
(I) The total estimated expenditure on Gundillion exchange for the period 27 March 79 to 24 March 82manhours, incidentals and material-is $12,618.
(2) The Gundillion exchange is in an area subject to interference from lightning, affecting the performance of the exchange and causing some customer dissatisfaction.
Special attention has been directed to maintaining and repairing the exchange, improvements being made to lightning protection in an effort to ensure that an efficient service is available.
At present the service from Gundillion is considered to be satisfactory.
Nursing Homes
(Question No. 4162)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 11 March 1982:
(I) How many registered nursing homes were there in the electoral Division of Sydney in each year since 1979.

652 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(2) What has been the (a) number of beds provided, (b) staff levels, by skills, (c) charges for beds and services, (d) occupation rates of beds and (e) the extent of supervision by his Department in each of the nursing homes in each year since 1979.
(3) Who have been the owners of and what have been the (a) names and occupations of the board of management and (b) gross and net profits of each of the nursing homes in each year since 1979.
Mr CaritoD-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There are three categories of registered nursing homes, namely:
Non-government nursing homes approved under the National Health Act for purposes of receipt of Commonwealth nursing home benefits for approved patients. These homes are conducted by private enterprises and by benevolent organisations. Such homes are known as 'participating' nursing homes;
State Government nursing homes approved under the National Health Act for purposes of receipt of Commonwealth nursing home benefits for patients accommodated;
Nursing homes which are approved under the Nursing Homes Assistance Act for purposes of deficit funding by the Federal Government. These homes are conducted by charitable and benevolent organisations, or local government bodies.
The numbers of registered nursing homes in the electoral Division of Sydney in each year since 1979 are:

1979-80 1980-81 Currently

Participating nursing

homes . .

6

6

6

State Government nursing

homes . . .

Deficit financed nursing

homes . . . . .

5

6

7

(2) The information requested is contained in Table A
below. In relation to 2 (c) the fees charged in deficit financed nursing homes are prescribed in the Regulations to the Nursing Homes Assistance Act and are as follows:

Prescribed Fee

Insured Patients (to 1.9.81) Workers' Compensation and Third
Party Patients

As at 1.7.79 From 8.11. 79 From 8.5.80
From 6.11.80 From 7.5.81 From 5.11.81
From 11.2.82 From 6.5.82

$a week 50.90 54.95 57.75 60.20
62.65 65.\0 67.90
71.75

$a week 146.45
162.05 164.85 186.90
189.35 226.10 228.90
232.75

In the case of deficit financed nursing homes the raising of a fee (equivalent to Commonwealth benefits) for insured patients above the prescribed fee ceased as from I September 1981, as the Federal Government assumed responsibility for those payments from that time.
(3) (a) The names and occupations of persons owning and operating participating nursing homes are not known except to the extent of the names of the proprietors which in many cases are private companies. Generally only the person acting as director of the company is known and not shareholders. Similarly only the name of the administrator or secretary of a deficit financed nursing home in required by the Department. The information available is set out in Table A below.
(b) The Department is not in a position to assess accurately profit levels in view of the cost based nature of the fees control scheme and Departmental cost figures that are available could be considered by proprietors to be commercially confidential.
In the case of deficit financed nursing homes, approved operating costs, less income from patients, are met by the Federal Government. In theory each home operates on a breakeven basis as far as profits are concerned. However deficit financed nursing homes may acquire additional funds by way of donations in traditional fund raising activities which are not regarded as income for the purposes of the deficit financing arrangements. The question of profit levels for State Government nursing homes is a matter for the State Governments. The Federal Government's role in this area is limited to the payment of nursing home benefits.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 653

Nursing home

Beds provided

Current staffing

Hours worked
(per week)

TABLE A
Charges (all bed ree)

Occupancy rates (Mar. 1982) Inspections

Proprietor

Participating Annandale Nursing Home. 76 Johnston St. Annandale. NSW

100 (79-80) 100 (80-81) 100 (current)

Trained 14
Untrained 24
Domestic 24

Ardrossan Nursing Home. 50 Audley St. Petersham. NSW

85 (79-80) 85 (80-81) 85 (current)

Trained 12
Untrained 29
Domestic 16
Other 2

Armon Nursing Home. 42 Croydon
St. Petersham. NSW

74 (79-80) 74 (80-81) 74 (current)

Trained 13
Untrained 25
Domestic 17

436

15.3.79-20.30

100 per cent Medical

15.5.79-22.27

Jan. 1979

912

15.7.79-19.55

Oct. 1979

15.9.79-22.32

Mar. 1980

462

15.3.80-22.60

Jan. 1981

15.6.80-23.05

Aug. 1981

15.11.80-24.45

Feb. 1982

15.5.81-25.70 15.7.81-27.29 15.10.81-28.15 15.12.81--30.20
15.2.82-31.30 (current)

Financial Oct. 1979 Jan. 1980 July 1980
April 1981

June 1981

Premises Feb. 1980

395

15.1.79-17.55

99 percent Medical

15.8.79-18.15

Sept. 1979

678

15.2.80-18.50

Feb. 1980

15.4.80-19.80

Oct. 1980

409

15.9.80-21.35

Apr. 1981

15.12.80-22.20

Oct. 1981

28

15.6.81-23.10

15.8.81-24.30

15.9.81-24.85

15.10.81-26.95

15.12.81-29.35 (current)

Financial Feb. 1979
Jan. 1980 Oct. 1980 Jan. 1981

July 1981

Feb. 1982

Premises Feb. 1979
Sept. 1980 Feb. 1982

326

15.5.79-21.31

100 per cent Medical

15.7.79-18.65

Aug. 1979

646

15.9.79-20.55

Jan. 1980

15.10.79-20.92

Sept. 1980

398

15.2.80-21.30

May 1981

15.4.80-22.25

Oct. 1981

15.6.80-22.70 15.10.80-23.05 15.11.80-23.60 15.12.80-24.75 15.3.81-25.35
15.5.81-25.45 15.7.81-27.95 15.10.81-28.89
15.12.81-31.15 15.2.82-32.60 (current)

Financial Jan. 1979 Nov. 1979 July 1980 Apr. 1981 July 1981
Premises Jan. 1979 Jan. 1981

Cumberland Holdings Ltd (Mr J. Barrington, General Manager)
MrG.Hardy
Cumberland Holdings Ltd (Mr J. Barrington, General Manager)

654 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Nursing home Participating

Beds provided

Current staffing

Hours
worked (per
week)

Charges

Occupancy

rates

Single bed Multi bed (Mar. 1982) Inspections

Proprietor

Crest Nursing Home. II Johnston St. Annandale. NSW

74 (79-80) 74 (80-81) 74 (current)

Trained II
Untrained 23
Domestic 16

Otama Nursing Home. 31 Fort St. Petersham, NSW

20 (79-80) 20 (80-81) 20 (current)

Trained 10
Domestic 9

344 682 394
269t 155t

15.3. 79-22.18 15.5.79-22.97 15.7.79-21.73 15.9.79-23.34 15.3.80-24.02 15.5.80-24.24 15.6.80-24.47 15.10.80-26.14 15.11.80-25.30 15.3.81-25.55 15.4.81-27.12 15.7.81-27.37 15.9.81-27.81 15.10.81-29.41 15.12.81-31.70 15.2.82-32.53
1.4.79-23.36 1.10.79-23.97 1.1.80-24.11 1.4.80-25.28 1.5.80-25.34
1.7.80-25.55 1.10.80-26.67 1.2.81-26.65 1.6.81-28.05 1.7.81-30.51 1.8.81-31.65 1.12.81-34.23 1.1.82-35.30

19;80 100 percent 20.55 19.35 20.92 21.60 21.85 22.05 23.72 22.85 23.15 24.70 24.95 25.40 27.00 29.25 30.15
(current)

21.01 21.62
21.80 22.95 23.00 23.20 24.32 24.30 25.70 28.16 29.30
31.90 33.00
(current)

100 percent

Medical Feb. 1979 Oct. 1979 Mar. 1980 Feb. 1981 Aug. 1981 Feb. 1982
Financial Mar. 1979 Nov. 1979 July 1980 Apr. 1981 July 1981 Oct. 1981
Premises Nov. 1979 Oct. 1981 Medical Apr. 1979 Dec. 1979 July 1980 Feb. 1981 July 1981 Feb. 1982
Financial Feb. 1979 Dec. 1979 May 1980 Jan. 1981 June 1981 Nov. 1981
Premises Oct. 1979 Jan. 1981

Cumberland Holdings Ltd (Mr J. Barrington, General Manager)
Mrs J. McDonald

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 655

Nursing home

Beds provided

Participating Stanmore Nursing Home. 66 Cambridge
St. Stanmore, NSW

85 (79-80) 85 (80-81) 85 (current)

Current staffing
Trained 13
Untrained 28
Domestic 17

State Government Glebe Annex. Balmain Hospital.2A
Bereford St. Glebe. NSW

38 (current)

Trained 10
Untrained !3

Deficit Financed Aldersgate House
Nursing Home. I Wharf Rd. Leichhardt. NSW

110 (79-80) 110 (80-81) 110 (current)

Trained !3
Untrained 31
Domestic
19 Other
3

Audrey Hawkins Nursing Home. 1-3
Glover St. Leichhardt. NSW

64 (79-80) 64 (80-81) 64 (current)

Trained 9
Untrained 21
Domestic 13
Other 2

Bethesda Nursing
Home. 80 Victoria Rd. Marrickville. NSW

46 (79-80) 46 (80-81) 46 (current)

Trained
6 Untrained
14 Domestic
15 Other
3

Hours worked
(per week)

Charges (all bed fee)

Occupancy rates (Mar.
1982)

Inspections Proprietor

379 1.04.79-$20.45

100 per cent Medical

1.05.79-$21.08

Apr. 1979

765 1.07.79-$19.65

Dec. 1979

1.09.79- $20.25

May 1980

387 1.10.79-$22.36

Dec. 1980

1.04.80-$22.60

Aug. 1981

1.06.80-$23.00

Mar. 1982

1.10.80-$23.85 1.04.81-$24.00 1.06.81-$25.15 1.07.81-$26.75 1.11.81-$27.90 1.02.82-$32.30

(current)

Financial May 1979 Mar. 1980 July 1980 Feb. 1981 Aug. 1981

Premises May 1979 Dee. 1979 Sept. 1980 Nov. 1981

Cumberland Holdings Ltd (Mr J. Barrington,
General Manager)

208 2/30[pension + 4/5
Supplementary assistance
520 Fees set by the Health Commission
of NSW and are not controlled by the Commonwealth

98 per cent

Medical Apr. 1979 Oct. 1979 Apr. 1980 Dec. 1980 July 1981 Feb. 1982

474 Refer to Part (2) of the answer
1.218 720 120
306 (see above) 700 496 60
192 (see above) 384 402 80

99 per cent 96 per cent 97 per cent

Medical Sept. 1979 Mar. 1980 Oct. 1980 July 1981 Nov. 1981
Financial Jan. 1980 Dec. 1980Jan. 1981
Premises Apr. 1980
Medical Aug. 1979 Jan. 1980 July 1980 July 1981 Nov. 1981
Financial Jan. 1980 Jan. 80-Dec.
1981
Premises July 1979 July 1981
Medical Feb. 1979 Oct. 1979 Mar. 1980 Dec. 1980 July 1981 Feb. 1982
Financial Feb. 1980 July 1980
Premises Sept. 1980

Health Commission of NSW (Chief Executive Officer, Balmain Hospital)
Uniting Church in i.ustralia Property Trust (Mr N. Robinson, Administrator)
Uniting Church in Australia Property Trust (Mr N. Robinson, Administrator)
Salvation Army Property Trust (Lt. Col. P. Stephens. Territorial Social Services Secretary)

656 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Nursing home

Oeds provided

Current staffing

Hours
worked (per
week)

Charges (all bed fee)

Occupancy rates (Mar.
1982)

Inspections Proprietor

Deficit FinancedUttle Company of Mary Nursing Home,
West Street. Lewisham, NSW

47 (80/81) 47 (current)

Lonsdale Nursing Home. Harrow
Road. Stanmore. NSW

14 (79/80) 14(80/81) 14 (current)

Trained 9
Untrained 25
Domestic 20
Other 5
Trained 4
Untrained 6
Domestic and Other
Provided by
contractors

262 Refer to Part (2) of the answer
666
473
86
112 (see above)
180

Polding Villa, 2
Avenue Road. Glebe Point,NSW

12 (79/80)
12 (80/81) 12 (current)

Trained 4
Untrained 6
Domestic 7
Other
I

88 (see above)
132
64 16

Weroona Nursing Home. 39 Mary
Street. Leichhardt. NSW

58 (79/80) 58 (80/81 58 (current)

Trained
10 Untrained
23 Domestic
16 Other per
cent of Central Administrative
Office

314 (see above) 575 450

96 per cent

Financial Jan. 1981
Premises Aug. 1980 Jan. 1982

Little Company of Mary (Sr. M. Dinon, Administrator)

95 percent
92 per cent (A Home only faT Aged Nuns)
99 per cent

Medical Sept. 1979 Feb. 1980 Sept. 1980 Mar. 1981 Oct. 1981
Financial May 1980 Feb. 1981
Premises May 1980
Medical Sept. 1979 Feb. 1980 July 1981 Feb. 82
Financial July 1979 Apr. 1980 Mar. 1981
Premises July 1980
Medical Aug. 1979 Jan. 1980 Aug. 1980 July 1981 Nov. 1981
Financial Jan. 1980 Jan. 1981
Premises Aug. 1979 June 1981

Adult DeafSociety of NSW (Mr R. Quayle Administrator)
Sisters of the Good Samaritan (Sf. M. Ellsmore, Administrator)
Uniting Church in Australia Property Trust (Mr N. Robinson, Administrator)

Notes to Table A
(a) Only current staff levels and occupancy rates are given. Approved levels of staff are related to bed capacities and extensive care ratios. Bed capacities have not varied for any of the homes. Department resources and priorities have precluded the significant task of extracting equivalent information for the whole period since 1979.
(b) The fees shown in all cases are the fees for Ordinary Care patients. In the case of an approved Extensive Care patient an additional $6.00 a day is charged. but is wholly covered by Commonwealth nursing home benefits of the equivalent amount.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 657

Road Safety Promotion and Research
(Question No. 4203)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 17 March 1982:
(I) When may I expect an answer to question No. 3590 which first appeared in the Notice Paper on 29 October 1981.
(2) What are the reasons for the five-month delay in answering this question.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The answer to question No. 3590 appeared in Hansard of 20 April 1982, page 1600.
Liability of Airlines
(Question No. 4221)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 18 March 1982:
(I) Do the provisions of the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959 limit liability of airlines in respect of the
(a) death of or injury to a passenger to $45,000, and
(b) loss of registered baggage to $300 and non-registered baggage to $30.
(2) If so, when were the liability limitations last determined.
(3) Are these liability limitations at realistic levels in terms of current standards.
(4) Can he say how these liability limitations compare with those prevailing in other countries.
(5) Is any action contemplated to raise the level of these liability limitations.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Part IV of the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959 applies the principles embodied in the Warsaw Convention to domestic aviation and non convention traffic and sets liability limits at $45,000 for death or injury to passengers, $300 for loss or damage to registered baggage and $30 for loss or damage to unregistered baggage.
(2) Amendments to the passenger limits were in the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1976 and the baggage limits in the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1970.
(3) and (5) On 24 March 1982 Mr Hunt introduced into the House of Representatives legislation aimed at increasing the domestic and non convention limits of liability prescribed under Part IV of the Act to $100,000 for death or injury to passengers, $900 for loss or damage to registered baggage and $90 for loss or damage to unregistered baggage.
(4) This information is not provided to my Department on a regular basis. I am, however, able to provide the following limits for death or injury, which I understand are the latest available.
Federal Republic of Germany-Deutsche Marks 320,000 (approx. $128,000).

United Kingdom-IOO,OOO I.M.F. Special Drawing Rights (approx. £62,000 or $A 106,000).
France-Franc 500,000 (approx. $A72,OOO) Legislation was proclaimed on 6 May 1982 increasing limit from Franc 300,000 (approx. $A43,000). The carrier is presumed responsible up to this limit, but beyond it fault or negligence must be proven.
United States of America-No federal legislation effecting a domestic interstate liability regime exists within the United States of America. I understand certain States have imposed limitations in the case of death, not injury, and amounts differ from State to State.
Canada-There is no legislated upper limit on domestic passenger liability. However, there is normally a contractual limit established by the carrier. Interpretation of the extent of this contractual liability varies from Province to Province depending on whether civil law or common law is the prevailing legal system.
Community Youth Support Scheme, Tasmania
(Question No. 4233)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 23 March 1982:
(I) Has the Government refused funding for the Circular Head, Tasmania, Community Youth Support Scheme.
(2) If so, has the Government communicated to Circular Head CYSS its reasons for refusing to fund that particular scheme; if not, why not.
(3) What other Federal Government employment training and support schemes are available for youth in the area.
(4) What proportion of persons under 25 years of age are looking for (a) full and (b) part time work in the area.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Circular Head CYSS Committee was advised on 24 February 1982 that their project was not considered to be viable, and therefore would not be receiving a further grant. For a project to be considered viable it must meet the minimum requirements for funding set out in the CYSS Guidelines.
(3) The Commonwealth under its school to work transition program, has provided funds for a pre-vocational trades-based course at Burnie Technical College. Transition allowances are available for eligible unemployed young people who enrol in these courses.
The Commonwealth also provides subsidies under the Special Youth Employment Training Program to provide work experience for young unemployed people.
(4) Data on unemployment for small geographical areas can be obtained from the quinquennial population censuses but data from the 1981 census for the Circular Head area of Tasmania are not yet available.
Water Fluoridation
(Question No. 4241)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 23 March 1982:

658 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(I) Is the Minister able to say whether water fluoridation has been discontinued in (a) West Germany, (b) Holland and (c) Sweden for medical and/or ethical reasons.
(2) Are published reasons for these decisions available in Australia; if so, is the Minister able to indicate where these may be seen.
Mr CarIton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I am advised that the Federal Republic of Germany has not proceeded with any project of fluoridation of water. and that fluoridation was discontinued in Holland in 1977 and in Sweden in 1962.
A statement concerning the decision in Sweden was published in the British Dental Journal volume 132 pages 5 and 6, 1972. I am not aware of published material with regard to the position either in the Federal Republic of Germany or in Holland.
I am advised that as fluoridation of water supplies is still contested both on political and technical grounds in the Federal Republic of Germany, the Government is endeavouring to develop and promote other measures to prevent dental disease.
I understand that fluoridation of water was discontinued in Holland because of a decision that it denied individual people the freedom of choice. The decision was not based on alleged deleterious effects of fluoridation.
Aircraft Noise
(Question No. 4277)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
Has the survey by the National Acoustic Laboratories on the social consequences of aircraft noise been completed; if so, when will the report be made public.
Mr CarIton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The survey has been completed and the report entitled 'Aircraft noise in Australia: A survey of community reaction' is available for purchase from Australian Government Bookshops.
Bell Group of Companies: Tax Free Profits
(Question No. 4278)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
(I) With reference to the judgements of Gibbs, C. J., Mason, J. and Murphy, J. in the case of the Commissioner of Taxation v. Whitford's Beach Pty Ltd, is it a fact that the requirement of identity of property that has dogged the application of paragraph 26 (a) of the Income Tax Assessment Act to many transactions does not apply to the second limb of this section, dealing with the profit from profit-making undertakings and schemes.
(2) Will he ensure the Commissioner of Taxation takes proceedings under paragraph 26 (a) against the Bell Group of companies, for recovery of the tax payable on the share and property transactions involved in the Elders Goldsbrough Mort takeover; if not, why not.
(3) Will he further instruct the Commissioner to investigate the many similar profit-making schemes and undertakings involving the purchase of property and its resale in the manner used by the Bell Group which have produced such huge tax free profits in recent years; if not, why not.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) It is true that, in the application of the second limb of section 26 (a), there is not the same requirement of identity of property that exists in relation to the first limb of the section.
(2) and (3) These are matters relating to the administration of the income tax law, the responsibility for which has been vested by Parliament in the Commissioner of Taxation. Express provisions of the income tax law preclude the Commissioner from divulging information about the income tax affairs of any taxpayer.
Issue of Collectors' Coins
(Question No. 4283)
Mr Jull asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
(I) How many $200 gold coins were minted during the recent issue.
(2) How many applications for the $200 gold coins were rejected for this issue.
(3) Will he assure the public that any future issue of collectors' coins will be sufficient to meet public demand.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 77,890 gold coins, dated 1981, were issued in uncirculated condition. A gold proof coin was not minted in 1981.
(2) I understand no valid orders were rejected during the period in which the office was open. Marketing of the 1981 gold coin was undertaken on behalf of the Mint through most banks on a commission basis.
(3) Such assurances cannot be given because of the variability in demand and the limited nature of the Mint's production and handling capacities in relation to numismatic coinage. However, every effort is made to meet reasonable levels of demand.
Ethnic Radio
(Question No. 4293)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
What action has been taken to increase the number of ethnic radio stations operated by the Special Broadcasting Service, so that all State capital cities and major provincial centres with large numbers of migrants benefit from this service, as envisaged by the Galbally Report on Migrant Services and Programs.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
For several years, the Government has been involved in the establishment and advancement of ethnic radio services throughout Australia. In addition to providing funds for Radio Stations 2EA and 3EA in Sydney and Melbourne, the Government provides subsidies to public broadcasting stations in all other capital cities and a number of provincial centres which broadcast ethnic radio programs.
The Government is concerned about the extension of ethnic radio services and I have established a working party on this matter. The views of the public will be taken into account to the working party and it expects to produce a discussion paper for public comment later this year.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 659

Sucrose: Effect on Health
(Question No. 4295)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to a report on sucrose in alcoholic carbonated beverages by Dr R. D. Hellyer.
(2) If so, what is the Minister's attitude to the major conclusions of the report regarding the relationships between various health factors and sucrose, and on what authorities are his disagreements or agreements based.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. My attention has been drawn to the Report on Sucrose in Non-Alcoholic Carbonated Beverages. This Report was prepared by Dr R. O. Hellyer of Graham Engel & Associates Pty Ltd.
(2) Having examined the report, together with the comments of experts in my Department and the United States Surgeon General's Report entitled 'Healthy People' (which addresses, inter alia, the nutritional habits of children as they affect health throughout life), I can offer no better advice to the honourable member than to suggest that moderation in the intake of lemonade amongst children is as wise as it ever was.
University of Western Australia Summer School
(Question No. 4311)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 20 April 1982:
(I) Does the University of Western Australian University Extension conduct an annual Summer School to which members of the public are invited to attend, and was the 54th Summer School, devoted to the theme of 'Technological Change and our Community', held in Perth from 18 to 28 January 1982.
(2) Does the Summer School receive public funding by way of subsidy for its activities.
(3) Did the University Extension approach to Australian Broadcasting Commission for permission to borrow and exhibit tapes of the television program Towards 2000 and was the University Extension informed that the hiring charge for the program was $10 per minute; if so, on what basis was the hiring charge calculated.
(4) Is the same rate charged to (a) commercial, (b) non-commercial and (c) publicly-subsidised hirers; if so, will he take steps to ensure that, in future, a cheaper rat~ is charged for ABC programs to adult educational organisations such as the University of Western Australia University Extension.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows, based on advice from the Department of Education and the Australian Broadcasting Commission:
I. Yes.
2. The University of Western Australia Extension Service receives financial assistance through general recurrent funds provided by the Commonwealth Government to the University of Western Australia. The Extension Service uses these funds and income received from fees to conduct various programs including the summer school.

Un3i.veNrosi.tyDorfJW. Ee.stDer.nBAaruksetrra, l1ia98E2xtSeunmsimonerofSfcehreodoltoDpirreocvtiodr~
tapes and pay $300 for copying of certain segments of Towards 2000. In reply he was advised that the standard charge for copying tapes is $100 for an item up to 10 minutes or $270 for the whole half hour program. These copying charges cover the technical and copyright clearance costs.
4. (a) Yes; (b) Yes; (c) Yes.
It is the responsibility of the ABC to set rates of charging for ABC programs.
The present rates provide only a modest return to the ABC; although exceptions have been made in special circumstances, cheaper rates for adult educational organisations would not be viable.
Oil Exploration in Australia
(Question No. 4314)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 20 April 1982:
(I) What is the estimated income from the levy on domestic crude oil production at the current import parity price for each of the next 10 years.
(2) When is oil expected to flow from the Fortescue Field in Bass Strait.
(3) For each of the next 10 years (a) what is the expected rate of production from this field, (b) what income will accrue to the producers from Fortescue oil at the current import parity price and (c) what extra income would accrue to the Commonwealth if Fortescue oil was reclassified as 'old' oil.
(4) Has the Government reviewed its decision to classify Fortescue oil as 'new' oil; if not, will it undertake such a review.
(5) Has the Government considered the application of any other tax or levy on production to increase the public return from Fortescue oil.
(6) Did he state in a letter to me, dated 17 January 1980, that oil companies operating in Australia had a good record in re-investment in the country and between 70 per cent and 80 per cent of petroleum exploration funds in recent years have come from the company profits and that this was, of course, a matter of importance to the Government and he would be keeping it under review.
(7) If so, can he say what proportion of their profits from Australian oil production ESSO and BHP re-invested in oil exploration in Australia in 1980 and 1981, and are these figures regarded as satisfactory.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( I) Projections of production of crude oil are provided to the Government on a confidential basis and I therefore regret that I am not in a position to provide a definitive response to this part of the question. It is expected, however, that productIon of so called 'old' oil will taper off Over the next 10 years and on this basis it follows that, at the current import parity price, crude oil levy proceeds would also taper off.
(2) The Fortescue oil field is currently expected to commence production in the March quarter of 1983.

660 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

(3) See the answer to part (I).
(4) and (5) The Government's 'new' oil pricing policy was introduced to encourage oil exploration and development with a view to minimising our dependence on imports of this vital fuel. The Fortescue field was classified as 'new' oil in accordance with this policy and it retains that classification.
(6) Yes.
(7) Investment expenditures by ESSO Exploration and Production Australia Inc. and Hematite Petroleum Pty Ltd on petrolem exploration and development activities in Australia amounted to 71 per cent of the companies' net profits (after tax) in 1981 and to 75 per cent in 1980. The Government believes that these proportions represent a reasonable level of re-investment in the industry.
Garden Island Naval Dockyard, New South Wales
(Question No. 4350)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) What is the cause of problems with labour recruitment at Garden Island Naval Dockyard, NSW, which have resulted in an expenditure saving of $1 ,275.000.
(2) What type of labour is unavailable and what is the reason for his Department's lack of success in recruitment.
Mr SincIair~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There is a general shortage of skilled tradesmen in the Sydney area and this factor, combined with both wage differentials and the geographic location of Garden Island relative to the main residential areas from which this labour is drawn (southern and western regions of the metropolitan area), gives rise to difficulties in recruitment of the required type of tradesmen.
(2) There are currently shortages in the following trades:
Shipwrights
Coppersmiths
Diesel Fitters
Electrical Fitters
Radio Tradesmen
and the causes of the difficulties in recruitment are as set out in (I) above.
Cockatoo Dockyard, New South Wales
(Question No. 4351)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) Is the Government liable to meet in full or in part the overhead costs incurred at Cockatoo Naval Dockyards during (a) strikes and (b) other forms of industrial action; if so, on what basis are such payments made.
(2) Does his Department make similar payments in respect of other defence establishments.
(3) What (a) was the total cost in each of the last five financial years and (b) is the estimated cost for 1981-82 for such reimbursements.

Mr Sinclair~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Vickers Cockatoo Dockyard Pty Ltd (VCD) is not a Naval Dockyard but rather a commercial undertaking operating on Commonwealth owned premises, in accordance with a Trading Agreement and the Lease between the Commonwealth and the Company. In general terms, the arrangements provide for the Commonwealth to meet overhead costs, irrespective of whether they were incurred during abnormal periods (strikes, industrial action) or not. However, to the extent that the Company is able to obtain and carry out commercial work the Commonwealth's share of these overhead costs is reduced.
(2) Where other commercial establishments undertake work for my Department on a cost plus profit basis and the 'Standard Conditions for the determination of Costs of Contract issued by the Department of Administrative Services', apply then the Commonwealth would be liable for similar payments.
(3) Overhead costs are maintained by VCD under agreed cost headings. No separation is made to account for costs attributable to strikes or other forms of industrial action. Therefore the information required to answer the question is not available.
Refit of HMAS 'Tobruk'
(Question No. 4353)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In view of the fact that HMAS Tobruk entered service in July 1981, what is the nature of the refit for which equipment hire at a cost of $31 ,000 is included in the supplementary estimates for 1981-82 for his Department.
Mr SincIair~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
HMAS Tobruk underwent an Intermediate Docking in January jFebruary 1982 for cleaning of the underwater hull, grit blasting and repainting with some defect rectification. This is normally done on a cyclical basis when ships' hulls have been in the water for two years. HMAS Tobruk was launched in March 1980. The terminology used in the explanatory notes to Appropriation Bill No.3 would have been more correctly expressed as a docking rather than a refit.
Submarine Refit Program
(Question No, 4354)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) Does the variation in the submarine program mean a delay in the refit program.
(2) If so (a) will this affect the availability of Australian submarines to the RAN and operational performance and (b) does it involve delays to subsequent refit schedules.
(3) Does any delay in refits place operational safety at risk because of the extended period beyond normal refit times.
Mr SincIair~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I) The variation in submarine refit expenditure of $3,203,000, indicated in the Additional Estimates for 1981-82

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 661

reflects slippages in the refit programs of HMA Submarines Orion and Onslow due largely to industrial disputes. The completion date of HMAS Orion and the commencement date of HMAS Onslow could be delayed by some two to three months due to these disputes.
(2) (a) There will be no effect on the operational availability of submarines since HMAS Onslow is able to continue operations for the additional period before refitting as is the submarine succeeding HMAS Orion. (b) Yes, however, it is planned that these delays will be made up in subsequent submarine refits.
(3) Operational safety is not placed at risk since the submarines will be technically surveyed in respect of capacity to safely continue operations for the extended periods dictated by the delays.
"MAS 'Supply' Refit Program
(Question No. 4356)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 April 1982.
(I) What is the reason for the cost of HMAS Supply's refit program being reduced by $2,600,000 as a result of its transfer to Garden Island Naval Dockyard, NSW.
(2) Will the transfer affect the workload of the private dockyard originally sccheduled to perform the refit and will this result in any compensation or other offsetting payment.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Original planning had been to undertake HMAS Supply's 1981 refit in two parts: the first by contract; and the second by Garden Island Naval Dockyard. This arrangement was made in order to accommodate the ship's operational commitments. The first part was achieved as planned at the State Dockyard Newcastle between 5 January 1981 and I April 1981. Subsequently, it was thought that Garden Island Dockyard would not have sufficient capacity for its part of the refit, and accordingly provision (totalling $3m) was made in the 1981-82 budget for the remaining element of the work to be carried out by contract.
In the event, however, Garden Island Dockyard did have capacity and work began there as originally intended on 7 September, 1981.
The costs of contract work would have been chargeable to Appropriation Division 235 and would have included not only direct labour costs, but also costs attributable to ma,terials and overheads, together with a margin for profit. In the case of Departmental dockyards, only the direct labour costs are chargeable to Division 235, other related costs being chargeable to the relevant Appropriation Items.
(2) Although budgetary provision had been made, the stage was never reached where the work was allocated to a particular facility and an order placed. Consequently, the question of compensation or other offsetting payment does not arise.
Apprentices: Building and Construction Sector
(Question No. 4375)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:

How many apprentices were taken on in the building and construction sector as a whole in the first 2 months of 1982.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Preliminary figures provided by State/Territory Apprenticeship Authorities indicate that for Australia, there were 788 apprentice commencements in January 1982 and 1142 in February 1982 for the Building Trades Group.
The number of apprentices who actually commenced training would be in excess of the above because of the time-lag between the month an employer takes on an apprentice, and the month the employers make application for commencement/ indenture of apprenticeship.
Tenosynovitis: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 4381)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a) No comprehensive medical examinations are conducted routinely within the Department of National Development and Energy, or statutory authorities within my jurisdiction, beyond those included in the appointment process. However, medical examinations are arranged when staff report symptoms of apparently job related illness or injury. Voluntary eye tests are arranged for staff using screen based equipment for sustained periods in accordance with Departmental policy.
(b) An ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment in all areas where repetitious injuries have been reported has not been undertaken within my Department or the statutory authorities within my jurisdiction. The wide range of occupations in which strain related injuries may occur would make such an assessment impracticable on economic and resource grounds.
In common with all Government departments and instrumentalities, existing work places have been designed, fitted out and equipped having regard to local Government and State safety regulations and relevant standards and guidelines issued by such bodies as the Standards Association of Australia, the National Health and Medical Research Council and the Department of Science and Technology.
The significance of repetition strain injury as an occupational health problem has only recently been recognised. The Department of Health is researching the problem, and it

662 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

is expected that an occupational health guide will be issued to Departments in the near future. My Department and statutory authorities under my jurisdiction, subject to the availability of resources, will endeavour to comply with any recommendations put forward by the Department of Health.
(2) and (3) See (I) above.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 4383)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) and ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) No comprehensive medical examinations beyond those included in the appointment process are conducted routinely. Medical examinations are however arranged when officers or employees report symptoms of apparently jobrelated illnesses or injuries.
(I) (b), (2) and (3) Ergonomic assessments of the work processes, tasks and environments have not been carried out to this time. The significance of repetition strain injury as an occupational health problem has only recently been recognised. The National Health and Medical Research Council issued last month, an occupational health guide on repetition strain injuries. My Department and statutory authorities within my portfolio will make every effort to comply with the Council's recommendations.
Tenosynovitis: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 4384)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been:
(a) medical examinations of all workers, and
(b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) When where the assessments made, and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr Howard-The following answer is provided to the honourable member's question:

(I) (a) Medical examination have been made of certain workers, additional to those associated with appointment processes. Medical examinations are encouraged and arranged when officers or employees report symptoms of apparently job-related illnesses. The Australian Taxation Office arranged for all available data processing operators in one office to be examined by doctors to determine the incidence and possible cause of repetition strain injury. The findings in that office were used as the basis of a number of national recommendations for all identical data processing officers.
(b) Department of the Treasury-Treasury conducted ergonomic assessments of its Automatic Typing Pool (Forerunner to word processing) in 1972 when advanced automatic typewriters were being installed. Each operator was interviewed by a Senior Medical Officer of the School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, University of Sydney. Treasury's Word Processing Centres are currently being reaccomodated and close attention is being given to ergonomic and environmental considerations, including light control, glare and reflection control, acoustic levels as well as to provide a visually pleasant working environment.
No ergonomic assessments have been carried out in the Royal Australian Mint as a direct consequence of repetitious injuries, as no such injuries have been reported.
Australian Taxation OfficeThe Taxation Office has carried out ergonomic assessments of the work environment and furniture in all its major offices.
Australian Bureau of Statistics-The Bureau of Statistics carried out ergonomic assessments of the work process, tasks and work environment in its Sydney and Melbourne Offices and, following a recent increase in the number of occurrences of repetitious injuries in Central Office, an ergonomic study has commenced.
Reserve Bank of Australia-The Reserve Bank of Australia has also undertaken ergonomic assessments of areas where repetitious injuries have occurred or are thought may occur.
Australian Industry Development Corporation (AIDC)- Ergonomic assessments have not been carried out in the AIDC because no cases of repetitious injuries have been reported.
Commonwealth Banking Corporation-The Commonwealth Banking Corporation has not carried out formal ergonomic assessments although staff members claiming work related injuries are medically examined and restrictions placed on their employment are strictly observed.
(2) (a) Department of the Treasury-Following the review of general problems relating to keyboard operations in 1972, continual assessment of keyboard working conditions is undertaken by an officer familiar with ergonomic principles. Suggested improvements are implemented.
Australian Taxation OfficeMedicals in September 1982. Ergonomic Assessments between August and December 1980.
Australian Bureau of Statistics-Sydney Office in June 1980. Melbourne Office in April 1982.
Reserve Bank of Australia-As part of the Reserve Bank's occupational health and safety programme, on-going assessments of work areas have been undertaken continuously for at least 5-6 years.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 663

(b) Department of the Treasury-Following assessment, new ergonomic desks were designed for the equipment; they have recently been replaced by more suitable desks. Ergonomic chairs were also purchased but their early design features dictated a short life expectancy. New ergonomic chairs are proposed for purchase in 1982-83.
Document holders have been used in the past and all WP staff will be provided with them in future. Operational procedures and training will incorporate familiarisation with basic ergonomic principles for example, posture, document holders, and the need for non-screen based tasks to be intermingled with screen based tasks.
Australian Taxation Office-In general terms, and not necessarily applying to all offices, the following matters were highlighted for consideration and improvement without any precise recommendations being advised; provide fully adjustable chairs; brighten up visual environment; provide adjustable tables; modify lighting levels as necessary to accord with Australian standard; eliminate glare from windows; eliminate reflections from overhead luminaires; test document holders.
Bureau of Statistics-SydneyRegular change of posture and movement pattern's, training in correct posture; More variety in the work; Adequate staff numbers to cope with peaks in workload, even in less busy times staff are underutilised; More independence for the individual to organise own work patterns and to have social contact with fellow officers; Better chairs which conform to ergonomic criteria, and training in their use; Provision of appropriate holders for the display of source documents and some further investigation into the suitability of the keyboard design.
Bureau of StatisticsMelbourneProper use of adjustable seating, wrist supports and copy holders; Advice to be sought from the Australian Taxation Office on keyboard workstation design; and use of a consultant to plan ergonomically designed workstation layout for keyboard operation when move to new premises in 1983.
Reserve Bank of Australia-Change of equipment for counting notes and coin. Change of work routines in clearing and in cafeteria areas. Work breaks for operators of YDU equipment.
(3) Department of the TreasuryYes; see answer to 2(b).
Australian Taxation Office-All recomendations, with the exception of brightening-up the visual environment have been carried out. The visual environment will be modified when funds are made available for refurbishing of areas.
Bureau of Statistics-Most of the recommendations have been, or are in the process of being, implemented in the offices concerned. While it is inappropriate to maintain staff numbers at a level to cope with seasonal peak workloads, this situation is kept under review and data entry work is moved between States to avoid overloading of staff.
The Sydney recommendation referring to keyboard design will be examined in detail when existing data entry equipment is replaced, probably in 1983-84.
Reserve Bank of Australia-All recommendations have been implemented.
Tenosynovitis: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 4388)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:

(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr N. A. Brown-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
(I) (a) No. Examinations are conducted in specific cases. The significance of repetition strain injury has only recently been recognised. The Department of Health has reacted promptly in researching the problem and it is expected that a National Health and Medical Research Council (NH and MRC) Occupational Guide will be issued shortly. My Department will make every effort, subject to other restraints, to comply with NH and MRC recommendations.
(b) No. I refer to my answer to the honourable member's Question No. 3021 of 9 September 1981 concerning the incidence of tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome in the Attorney-General's Department and statutory authorities under my jurisdiction. Since that answer there have been two claims for aggravation of pre-existing tenosynovitis conditions by a tea-lady and a typist. The incidence of tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome in my Department and statutory authorities within my jurisdiction would make the ergonomic assessment of any particular work process, task or work environment impracticable on economic and resource grounds. However, the advice of the Departments of Health, Transport and Construction, and Science and Technology is increasingly sought on suitable working environments for operations where the possible existence of health hazards is suspected.
(2) and (3) Not applicable.
Tenosynovitis: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 4398)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been
(a) medical examinations of all workers and
(b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example-, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) ifso,
(a) when were assessments made and
(b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.

664 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) and (b) No.1 am informed by my Department that it has no evidence of repetitious injury as to suggest that the assessments referred to are justified.
(2) Not applicable.
(3) Not applicable.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 4413)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantialIy different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment', (b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties and (c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Copies of PSB Memorandum 81/418 have been distributed to all officers responsible for supervising operators of screen based equipment. The need to provide adequate rest breaks has been stressed and operators have been made aware of their entitlements in this regard.
In practice, operators avail themselves of a rest break as required. Other duties are available to the operators within their work area when they are not operating screen based equipment.
(b) (i) If operators are editing material, they could spend from 60 per cent-80 per cent of their working day concentrating on the screen; if operators are keying in material, they would spend only 20 per cent-40 per cent of their day concentrating on the screen.
(ii) The amount of time operators spend on other duties depends on the type of work being performed.
(c) (i) The number of keystrokes an operator is expected to complete in a 7 hour 21 minute day depends on the nature of the work.
(ii) Accurate details are not available, but depending on the work load, estimates range from 40,000-60,000 keystrokes per operator per day.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 4415)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister, representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:

In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction,
(a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment '.
(b) what percentage of their working day
(i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and
(ii) do operators spend on other duties and
(c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day
(i) are operators expected to complete and
(ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) My department has a statement of policy on eye testing for operators of screen based equipment. The statement was developed following talks with appropriate staff organisations and addresses the need for operators to have regular rest breaks. I will forward a copy of this statement to the honourable member.
My department is also developing an educational package for screen based equipment operators. This package will cover repetition injury and the need for rest breaks, and consider ergonomic aspects of the work place and general safety precautions.
(b) (i) and (ii) Operators of screen based equipment in the Department are generally engaged solely for that purpose. However, ADP personnel and other clerical staff may operate screen based equipment from time to time.
In situations where the work-load does not require an operator's full-time attention, and this will vary from office to office and from time to time, the operator perfonus other clerical duties.
(c) (i) and (ii) The only category of staff in the Department to which key stroke rates are applied is Data Processing Operator. Most operators are employed in Regional Offices and a recent review of these positions recommended that operators should be expected to achieve 40,000 key strokes per day. However, in reality it is unlikely that all operators would reach this level because of such problems as:
(i) inexperience of the operator;
(ii) staff absences;
(iii) the machine being off line for part of the day; and
(iv) irregular flow of work.
Quarantine Station at Torrens Island, South Australia
(Question No. 4443)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 22 April 1982:

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 665

Will the quarantine station at Torrens Island, South Australia, receive bird and/or egg imports; if so, (a) what budgets have been proposed and what funds allocated, (b) what precautions have become available to allow the ban on these imports to be lifted and (c) what conditions will be imposed on applicants for imports.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department has developed a proposal to allow the safe importation of fertile avian hatching eggs. A high security egg hatching facility is presently planned for construction on the Torrens Island Animal Quarantine Station.
(a) $490,000 has been provided for construction of the facility.
(b) Draft conditions of importation for commercial hen eggs have been developed by an expert working party and these are currently under discussion with appropriate Government and industry organisations. A detailed functional brief for the design of a microbiologically secure egg hatching facility has also been developed in consultation with officers of the Australian National Animal Health Laboratory and designs completed by officers from the Department of Transport and Construction. The combination of the conditions of importation and the secure facility would provide the technology not previously available to ensure the degree of quarantine security required to allow safe importation.
(c) It is intended that facilities will be available on an equitable basis to interested parties. It is envisaged that each application to import hen eggs will be considered on its merits. As indicated above, the quarantine conditions have not yet been finalised. In summary, however, provision will be made for selection of fertile eggs from countries and flocks of approved disease status; several series of tests and fumigation procedures in the flocks of origin; secure transport procedures; hatching and rearing in the high security facility, and a further series of tests while in quarantine. The importation of live birds is not envisaged.
Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice Full-time Training Scheme
(Question No. 4463)
Mr Hawke asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 22 April 1982:
(I) How many new apprenticeships have been subsidised under the Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice Full-time Training (CRAFT) Scheme during 1981-82, as at the end of March 1982.
(2) Under which CRAFT rebate have these apprentices been subsidised.
(3) Is it possible for an apprenticeship to attract more than one of the available subsidies; if so, what proportion of subsidised apprenticeships have fallen into this category and what is the justification for the multiple subsidisation.
(4) How many apprenticeships are currently being subsidised under CRAFT and in what trade areas are these apprenticeships.

(5) What sum has been spent on CRAFT subsidisation during 1981-82 until the time of preparation of the answer to this question.

(6) How many apprenticeships receiving CRAFT subsidies have been completed since the CRAFT scheme began operating, and what is the distribution of these apprentice-
ships between trade groups.

(7) What has been the wastage rate amongst apprenticeships receiving CRAFT subsidisation and how does this compare with overall wastage rates.

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) 48,674 new first year apprentices were the subject of CRAFT claims for the first time in the period I July 1981 to 31 March 1982.

(2) During 1981-82, 30,031 apprentices attracted the CRAFT technical education rebate to end March 1982. A further 18,643 apprentices attracted other components of the CRAFT claim as follows:

CRAFT $1000 rebate scheme-9,480 apprentices

CRAFT off-the-job training rebate-6,386 apprentices

CRAFT living away from home allowances-2,777 apprentices.

(3) Yes. The reason for this is that the various components of CRAFT are to meet different purposes-

technical education rebate (TER) is designed to compensate employers for the costs of releasing apprentices to
attend basic trade courses in technical colleges

the off-the-job training rebate (OTJR) supports special skills training in off-the-job training centres in the first year of apprenticeship, thereby making apprentices more productive earlier

the $1000 rebate (now terminated) provided an ad-
ditional incentive to employers to increase apprentice intakes

the living away from home allowance (LAFHA) assists apprentices to meet the costs of board and lodging when they are required to live away from home to undertake an apprenticeship.

It is not possible to separate out data on apprentices who have attracted more than one component of CRAFT.

(4) The number of apprentices attracting CRAFT TER is the best indicator of the numbers being assisted. In the financial year to 31 March 1982 some 72,329 apprentices had
generated such payments.

The proportion of apprentices generating TER between I July 1981 and 31 March 1982 by trade group were:

Metal Electrical Building Printing Vehicle Food Other

41.5 per cent 15.5 per cent 19.4 per cent 2.7 percent 3.9 percent 4.1 per cent 12.9 per cent

(5) By 30 April 1982 some $69.2m had been expended under the CRAFT program.

(6) and (7) Data on the completion rate of apprentices who have attracted CRAFT assistance are not available.

666 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Skills in Demand Program
(Question No. 4465)
Mr Hawke asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 22 April 1982:
(I) What financial assistance has been made available under the Skills in Demand Program during 1981-82.
(2) How many new projects have received assistance under this program during 1981-82 and in what skill areas are these projects operating.
(3) How many trainees are involved in these new projects.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Expenditure under the Skills in Demand Program totalled $2.48m in 1981-82.
(2) In 1981-82,11 new projects were approved involving a total cost to the Commonwealth of $3.26m. Some of these projects will continue beyond 30 June 1982 and consequently the full cost has not been incurred in 1981-82. The projects involve training in the following occupations:
Carpenters and Joiners Civil Engineering Construction Carpenters Bricklayers Fitters and Turners Fitter Machinists Boilermakers Welders Electrical Fitter Machinists Draughtsmen jWomen Secretaries Plant Operators (Grader, Bulldozer, ExcavatorjLoader) Computer Programmers Assistant Fishermen Plasterboard Fixers and Flushers Technical Workers~-Non-destructive Testing Clothing Machinists Semi-skilled Furniture Industry Operatives.
(3) 1086.
Nuclear Fuel Rods: Disposal
(Question No. 4469)
Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
(I) What has been the practice for management of the spent nuclear fuel rods from the HIFAR reactor at Lucas Heights, New South Wales, since the reactor began operation.
(2) Has there been any processing of these spent fuel rods; if so, what has been the nature of the processing.
(3) Where have spent fuel rods and any derived waste been stored or finally disposed of.
(4) What volume of spent fuel rods or derived wastes have been stored or finally disposed of.
(5) What is the current capacity of existing facilities for the storage and final disposal of spent fuel rods and derived wastes.
(6) Is there a projected shortfall in storage or disposal capacity; if so, what arrangements are proposed to overcome the shortfall.

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's questions:
(I) Management of spent fuel elements from HIFAR includes the review of holdings and arrangements for their disposition, security, safeguards, health and safety aspects, as well as the actual handling of fuel elements. Spent fuel elements are stored for two weeks in the HIFAR storage block, then transferred to the pond in the active handling bay for 12 months to allow radiation levels to decrease. The inactive sections are then cropped from the fuel elements, and the elements are transferred to the HIFAR spent fuel element storage facility.
(2) In 1963, spent fuel elements were reprocessed by the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA).
(3) and (4) Products of reprocessing and wastes arising from spent fuel elements referred to in (2) became the responsibility of the UKAEA. Spent fuel elements at Lucas Heights are stored in a spent fuel element storage facility which is subject to IAEA and Australian Safeguards Office surveillance and inspections. The approximate volume (contained uranium aluminium alloy) of spent fuel elements reprocessed by the UKAEA or currently in storage at Lucas Heights is 1.4 cubic metres.
(5) and (6) Storage at Lucas Heights is sufficient to meet current fuel commitments. If required, additional storage capacity can be readily provided.
Lead Monitoring Equipment
(Question No. 4480)
Mr West asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
(I) Was all the $60,000 allocated by the Commonw"alth in 1980-81 to buy and install lead monitoring instruments in major cities spent.
(2) Was equipment purchased in all States; if not, why not, and in which States was money not allocated.
(3) Is monitoring of atmospheric lead being carried out in all State capital cities of Australia and in Canberra; if not, why not.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The funds were used to purchase and install instruments to expand existing State and Territory facilities for atmospheric lead monitoring. These instruments are now deployed in all States and Territories except Queensland which chose not to participate in this Commonwealth prografl-
(3) Yes. (Queensland authorities continue to monitor atmospheric lead levels in Brisbane using instruments previously installed).
Ranger Information Centre: Jervis Bay
(Question No. 4494)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 28 April 1982:
(I) Is the new Ranger Information Centre of approximately 20 squares being built at Jervis Bay, Australian Capital Territory, at a cost of $220,000.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 667

(2) Apart from plumbing services for toilet facilities for disabled people, are there any other special facilities included in the Centre.
(3) What was the price of the site on which the centre is to be built.
(4) Is the average building price per square in Australia of the order of $3,000 and would a 20 square building be therefore expected to cost approximately $60,000; if so, why is there such a large discrepancy between the average cost of a 20 square building and the $220,000 grant on this particular building.
(5) For what period were tenders advertised for this project.
(6) How many tenders were received and which tender was accepted.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The approximate cost of the Visitor Information and Ranger Headquarters Building is $220,000. The building is of two storeys and comprises 204m' of enclosed space plus a 17m' external balcony on the first floor. An ablution block, undercover parking and water tanks are provided on a lower level.
(2) Special facilities include a graded bridge from road level to the first floor that is usable by disabled persons and an external balcony which enables visitors to the Territory to view Jervis Bay and orient themselves before proceeding into the Territory.
(3) All land in the Territory is Commonwealth-owned so that the question of purchase of a site did not arise.
(4) Cordell's Building Cost Indicator suggests that the current cost of basic domestic construction exceeds $3,000 per square.
This particular building is purpose designed and constructed on an unusual site isolated from other buildings and services.
Factors which have added to the cost are:
the elevated nature of the building
the need for the design to provide for higher floor loads than normal to accommodate busloads of visitors
the need for a bridge link from road level
lack of water supply and sewerage in the area
need for a transformer to provide low voltage electricity supply to the building
provision of a track system for internal display lighting and provision of built-in electric space heaters
change of structural system from timber to steel after construction had commenced due to inability of timber industry to supply structural timbers that had been available when design was prepared
foundation problems encountered during construction not evident during initial site investigations necessitating minor relocation of building with consequent redesign of some elements
the delay arising from building relocation.
(5) For five weeks in Canberra, Sydney, Wollongong and Nowra.

(6) Two tenders were received. The lowest tender of $179,999 was submitted by M. J. Davidson, Builders Pty Ltd and was accepted. The final cost of approximately $220,000 is inclusive of the unforeseen electrical work and design variations referred to above. The initial tender estimate prepared by the Department of Transport and Construction was $233,200.
Australian National Railways
(Question No. 4495)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 28 April 1982:
Further to the answer to Question No. 4088 (Hansard, 21 April 1982, page 172), does the Government recognise any responsibility to provide continuing services to people living along the trans-continental line between Port Augusta, South Australia, and Parkeston, Western Australia, many of whom, while not working for Australian National, were encouraged to live in these isolated areas because of the service provided over many years; if not, whose responsibility does the Government consider it to be.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There are very few people living between Port Augusta and Parkeston who are not railway employees but are totally reliant on the railway for necessities. The Australian National Railways Commission is required to operate in a commercial manner and decisions on whether the continuation of a service is justified are made on a commercial basis.
The primary responsibility for the provision of welfare and other government services for persons living at remote locations rests with the States.
Nonetheless the Commonwealth has a number of programs designed specifically to assist people in remote areas including funding for rural roads, subsidised petrol, tax allowances, educational assistance and telephone tariff policies.
The honourable member will also be aware that the domestic satellite will substantially improve communications to remote areas.
National Road Construction Contracts: Tenders
(Question No. 4503)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 28 April 1982:
(I) In respect of each national road construction contract awarded in each State and Territory during the period from 3I August 1981 to the date of preparation of answer to this question, what were (a) the name and address of the successful tenderer and the amount of the successful tender and (b) the names of the unsuccessful tenderers and the amount of their tenders.
(2) Will he provide a specific description of the work involved and the completion time in respect of each contract.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The information requested by the Member for Shortland is attached in tabular form.
Some information is still awaited from the Victorian State Road Authority and this will be provided as soon as it is available.

668 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Work description

Name and address successful tenderer

Tender price $

Name of closest Completion unsuccessful
time tenderer

Number of
tenderers

NEW SOUTH WALES

Sydney to NewcastleDostal & Company Civil 2,477,360 52 weeks from C. Hawkins & Sons

9

Construction between Engineering Pty Ltd,

Nov. 81

Pty Ltd

Hue Hue Rd and Old P.O. Box 1090, Gosford

Maitland Rd 103.6 South 2250

km-109.lkm from

Sydney - ea rt hworks,

drainage and fencing.

Sydney to NewcastleDepartment of Main

369,879 35 weeks from Oct. LUMO Constructions

7

Bridge construction over Roads, 309 Ca~tlereagh

81

PtyLtd

Willow Tree Creek

Street, Sydney 2000

Reconstruction on Pacific Boral Resources Pty Ltd,

22,380 30. 10.82 com - Bitupave Pty Ltd

4

Hwy at Cams Wharf P.O. Box 60, Wickham

pletion

133.98-134.58 km north 2293

of Sydney, northbound

carriageway-su pply

and lay 400 tonnes as-

phaltic concrete, 20 mm

Bridge construction-New Transbridge (Division of 965,574 38 weeks from Oct. Enpro Constructions

6

bridge over Pacific Hwy Transfield Pty Ltd), 100

81

Pty Ltd

at Sparks Road, Wyong Arthur Street, North

Sydney

Minor contract for subsoil Wollongong Constructions

drainage work

Pty Ltd

70,080 ..

Pabasull Services Pty

2

Ltd

Hum e H i g h way - Ground Test Pty Ltd Foundation test bore

2,550 ..

Stewart Bros Pty Ltd

5

New bridge over Pacific
Hwy at Dog Trap Road79.2 km north of Sydney

Ermani Construction, 12 Falcon Street, Crows Nest

366,189 50 weeks

Enpro Constructions

6

Pty Ltd

Goulburn-supply of Slag Lime Fertiliser Pty

146,490 4 weeks from

6

gravel for Hume Hwy

Ltd, Goulburn Street,

18.11.81

Marulan

New bridge over Pacific Ermani Construction, 25A

277,831 45 weeks from Gervay Constructions

6

Hwy 78.2 km north of S p 0 If 0 r t h S t r e e t,

Mar. 82

Pty Ltd

Sydney

Cremorne 2090

Excavation, removal of failed sections, backfilling and overlaying with sound gravel 49.28-53.7 km south Goulburn, Federal Hwy

Department of Main Roads, 309 Castlereagh Street, Sydney 2000

397,699 12 weeks from May 82

Twin bridges over Hillas Nelmac Pty Ltd, P.O. Box

949,247 60 weeks from Jan. Allan Fessier Pty Ltd

6

Creek, proposed devi56, Yackandandah Vic.

82

ation, 28 km south Gun-

dagai, Hume Hwy

New bridge over Pacific Gervay Construction, 12

480,000 40 weeks Feb. 82 Civil build Construc-

4

Hwy 67.3 km north of Falcon Street, Crows

tion Pty Ltd

Sydney

Nest

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 669

Work description

Name and address successful tenderer

Tender pric",
$

Name of closest Completion unsuccessful
time tenderer

Number
of tenderers

Sydney to NewcastleJohn Holland (Construc6,358,304 72 weeks from July Citra Constructions

10

Construct concrete tions) Pty Ltd, 182-186

82

Ltd

pavement between Blues Point Road,

Wyong River and North Sydney

Wallarah Creek Inter-

change 90.3 km-98.2 km

north of Sydney

Supply, delivery, laying Allen Bros, P.O. Box 376, 980T on 10 mm asMilsons Point
phaltic concrete

63,700 23.3.82 completion Canberra Asphalters Pty Ltd

Hume Highway, Shire of Department of Main 1,892,300 40 weeks from Capital Civil Contrac-

8

Gundagai-Construct Roads, Yass Works

June 82

tors Pty Ltd

Tumbalong deviation office

Section IA 11.3

km-13.5 km south of

Gundagai

Sydney to NewcastleAAMM Constructions Pty 444,622 30 weeks from ADUA Contracting

3

New twin bridges over Ltd, 30 Dalrymple Av-

Feb. 82

Pty Ltd.

Deep Creek

enue, Chatswood

Construction between Capital Civil Contractors 1,113,736 75 weeks from MEGA Contractors

4

Rutherford St and Bell Pty Ltd, 19 Bass Street,

June 82

St, Muswellbrook, Queanbeyan, N.S.W.

91.74-93.08 north of

Maitland

Twelve Mile Creek Bridge
and Approaches Miriam Shire, Brisbane-Cairns Highway

QUEENSLAND

Necon Pty Ltd, 38 Avoca Street, Bundaberg, Qld
4670

340,124 120days

Tibrogargan Creek (2 Lane) Bridge Landsborough Shire,
Brisbane-Cairns Highway

Mackay & Son, 4 Butler Street, Gympie, Qld
4570

40,912 I 50 days

Leichhardt River Bridge, C. & B. Kind & Sons Pty

DismalsjBurketown Ltd, 46 Henry Street,

Road

Chermside, Qld 4032

649,766 190 days

7.0m pavement, Churchill Leighton Contractors Pty

Creek-Deep Creek

Ltd, 40 Reginald Street,

Rocklea, Qld 4106

1,234,689 150 days

7 . 0 m p a vern e nt, Penna & Company, Bom-

Marlborough-Churchill bala Street, Townsville,

Creek

Qld 4810

1,545,824 230 days

7.0m pavement and bitumen, Deep CreekMontrose Creek 26-39.6 km from Marlborough

Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd, 40 Reginald Street, Rocklea, Qld 4106

827,155 150days

Bruce Evans Plant

5

Hire, Bundaberg

L. L. & I. E. Atkinson,

6

Gympie

Steelcon Pty Ltd,

5

Toowoomba

PBM Qld Pty Ltd,

5

Brisbane

Negri Contractors

5

(Aust.) Pty Ltd,

Victoria

Negri Contractors

4

(Aust.) Pty Ltd,

Victoria

670 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Work description

Name and address successful tenderer

Burrum River Bridge, Maryborough~Gin Gin

J. B. Davies Enterprises Pty Ltd, 2020 Logan Road, Upper Mount Gravatt, Qld 4122

Tender price $

Name of closest Completion unsuccessful
time tenderer

Number of
tenderers

773,013 200 days

Epoca Constructions

9

Pty Ltd

Pavement Reconstruction, 'Popcorn' section, Ipswich~ Toowoomba,
Warrego Highway

Boral Resources (Qld) Pty Ltd, Cullen Avenue, Whinstanes, Qld 4007

111,947 50 days

Pine Asphalt, Bald

4

Hills,Qld

7.0m two lane bitumen
pavement construction, Deacons Creek~
Kelihers Creek

P.B.M. Queensland Pty
Ltd, P.O. Box 288, Spring Hill,Qld 4001

596,653 250 days

Capital Civil Contrac-

5

tors, Queanbeyan

Black Swamp Creek L. & I. Atkinson, 31 Rifle

Bridge

Range Road, Gympie,

Qld 4570

39,108 100 days

Mackay & Son, Gympie

Approaches to Marion Dabo Constructions Pty Creek Bridge 7.0 m bituLtd, 89 Hollingsworth men pavement and 2 x Street, North
1.0 m edges Basin Rockhampton 4701 Creek~Jibilbie (SE Laurence~ Mackay)
Brisbane~Cairns Highway

777,295 200 days

PBM Q1d Pty Ltd,

7

Brisbane

7.0 m bitumen pavement Thiess Contractors Pty reconstruction and 2 x 1 Ltd, P.O. Box 199, m edge seal 2.8 km Archerfield 4108 Delta~Merinda Bowen Shire, Brisbane Cairns Highway 4.0~6.8 km
South from Bowen

815,039 175 days

Penna & Co., Towns-

2

ville

12 km Ist stage construcMain Roads Department, 830,000

3

tion Morven~ G.P.O. Box 1412, Bris- (with rise

Capital Civil Con-

Augathella section, bane, Qld 400 I

and fall

tractors, Quean-

Brisbane~Darwin

provisions. )

beyan

Highway

SOUTH AUSTRALIA

Surfacing of Port Spraypave Pty Ltd, 1 207,920 1.9.81-27.2.82

Bitumax Pty Ltd

4

Wakefield Road, Manchester Street, Mile

Virginia~ Two Wells End

deviation

Resurfacing of South East Bitumax Pty Ltd, 69

94,827 16.11.81-30.11.81 Spraypave Pty Ltd

4

Freeway and Dukes Mooringe Avenue,

Highway

Plympton

Bituminous Surfacing to Allen Bros Asphalt Ltd, 817,614 70 days from

Spraypave Pty Ltd

4

75 km of Stuart HighAcorn Avenue, Dry

18.11.81

way

Creek

All stage roadworks to Tripodi Constructions Pty, 2,288,037 12 months from L.R. & M. Construc-

8

20 km of Dukes High8 Pittinson Road, New-

9.2.82

tions Pty Ltd

way

ton

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 671

Work description

Name and address successful tenderer

Bitumous surfacing Bitumax Pty Ltd, 69

8 . 7 3 k m -- M u r ray Manchester Street, Mile

Lands District

End

Construction of reinforced concrete end walls to 90 culverts on Stuart Highway (Glendambo to
Pimba)

H.F. Sarah and Son Pty Ltd, II Richard Street,
Hindmarsh

18.500 m concrete median kerbing and gutterSouth East Highway at
Tailem Bend

Davalan Industries Pty
Ltd, 16 Durant Avenue, Rostrevor

Supply and erection of stock and vermin proof
fencing and gates on Dukes Highway

Dave Atkins Fencing, P.O.

Box

Morphett

Vale Central

Rubble haulage-Stuart H. & AJ. Feldhoff, 14 Highway between WirRosefield Lane, Sturt
raminni and Glendambo

Tender price
$

Name of closest
Completion unsuccessful time tenderer

62,050 6 days from 16.2.82 Spraypave Pty Ltd

Number of
tenderers
4

183,857 17 weeks from

S.A. Kerbing

3

18.2.82

125,658 12 months from 2.3.82

Davalan Industries Pty Ltd only tenderer

18,132 9 weeks from

CJ. Farmer & Co.

2

8.4.82

82,350 16.4.82-30.7.82 Hart Brothers

6

WESTERN AUSTRALIA

Primer sealing of Great Main Roads Department,

28,577 18 weeks

Spraypave Pty Ltd

3

Northern Highway-- Waterloo Cresent, East

Rollsbrook East area

Perth

Bituminous concrete surBell Basic Industries Ltd, face to Great Eastern 136 Great Eastern HighHighway, Shire of Swan way, South Guildford
and Bundaring

232,500 3 weeks

Pioneer Asphalts Pty

4

Ltd

Seal 54 km Leonora/LeinConsolidated Construction

68,000 14 weeks

Spraypave Pty Ltd

3

ster Road

Pty Ltd, III Wellington

Street, East Perth

Fencing Leonora/Leinster W. H. & G. M. Dale, 17

Road-225 km

Princess Street, Mer-

ridin

62,840 18 weeks

Westservices Pty Ltd

10

Bituminous sealing and Spraypave Pty Ltd, 584

197,039 10 weeks

Emoleum

2

resealing Wubin area

Hay Street, Subiaco

Bituminous sealing and Spraypave Pty Ltd, 584

76,889 6 weeks

Emoleum

2

resealing on Great Hay Street, Subiaco

Northern Highway, H6

Midland to Bullsbrook

East

TASMANIA

Installation of traffic signs, State Road Authority,

20,274 12 weeks from

Bresprone Ply Ltd

4

Bridgewater to State Offices, 10 Murray

8.12.81

Oa t landsMidland Street, Hobart

Highway

Sealing works on the State Road Authority
Jericho bypassMidland Highway

99,979 4 weeks from

Emoleum (Australia)

3

8.12.81

Pty Ltd

672 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Work description

Name and address successful tenderer

Tender
price $

Name of closest Completion unsuccessful
time tenderer

Number of
tenderers

Chasm Creek BridgeState Road Authority Bass Highway

147,542 24 weeks from

T. G. Matthews Con-

3

8.12.81

structions

Line marking of Jericho State Road Authority bypass and intersecting minor roads-Midland
Highway

7,533 5 days from

Nil

11.1.82

Supply and installation of State Road Authority road (guide) signs.
Oatlands to Launceston Midland Highway

43,800 12 weeks from

Nil

4.3.82

Pavement stabilization State Road Authority and associated works. Bagdad to North Bagdad - Midland Highway

47,271 2 weeks from

Nil

16.4.82

Supply and lay asphalt Tasmanian Roadways Pty Bagdad to North Ltd, P.O. Box 40, Sandy Bagdad - Midland Bay
Highway

59,981 7 weeks from 31.382

Department of Main Roads

Supply and lay asphalt State Road Authority

85,324 2 weeks from

Roadways Pty Ltd

3

Black Snake Lane

22.4.82

InterchangeBrooker

Highway

NORTHERN TERRITORY

Hire of plant and personS.B.S. Constructions Pty 1,201,000 12 months from

K.J. Hinkey

4

nel for reconstruction of Ltd, c/o Gaffney, Har-

5.4.82

isolated sections of Vicvey & Ryan, 69 Second

toria Highway between Street, Katherine

71 km to 390 km

Reconstruction of 313-334 MacMahon Constructions 1,875,203 35 weeks from

Thiess Contractors

3

km Barkly Highway

Pty Ltd, 52 Smith

22.4.82

Street, Alice Springs

Reconstruction of 4.7 km L. Antonio & Co., Nomi1,486,232 36 weeks from

S.B.S. Constructions

7

Stuart Highway, includnees Pty Ltd, c/o Gar-

21.5.82

Pty Ltd

ing culvert crossings at raway and Partners, 84

Phillip, Gibson and Smith Street, Darwin

Hayward

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 673

Australian War Memorial Council
(Question No. 4505)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 28 April 1982:
(I) With respect to the Council of the Australian War Memorial (a) who have been the members of the Council, (b) what was the term of service of each member, (c) what was the age on appointment of each member, and (d) what were the qualifications of each member, during the last 10 years.
(2) Will he provide the information in the detailed form exemplified by the answer to question No. 4614 (Hansard. 22 and 23 March 1972, pages 1068-71).

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The Australian War Memorial has supplied the following details in respect of appointed members of the Board of Trustees of the Australian War Memorial from 1972 to 30 June 1980 and of the Council of the Australian War Memorial from I July 1980 to 30 June 1982. The titles and qualifications given are those which were applicable during the time of appointment. In addition to appointed members, the Chiefs of Naval Staff, the General Staff and the Air Staff are ex-officio members during the periods of their appointments as Chiefs of Staff.

Member

Date of

Date

Age on termination of

appointed appointment appointment

Lt Gen the Hon Sir Edmund Herring, . K.e.M.G., K.B.E., D.S.O., M.e., E.D., K. SU.
Sir Arthur Lee, K.B.E., M.e.
Brigadier Sir Charles Spry, e.B.E., D.S.O., M.e.
Mr R. Kingsland, e.B.E., D.F.e.
Mr H.B.S. Gullett, M.e.
Professor B. H. Gandevia Mr J. B. Howse, e. St. J. V.R.D.
Air Vice Marshal G.e. Hartnell, e.B.E. Wing Officer D. J. Carter, OBE. Lt Gen Sir Thomas Daly, K.B.E., e.B.,
D.S.O. Mr F. R. Birrell, M.P. Mr J. P. F. Dixon The Hon. Sir John Starke
Mr J. N. Parker, A.F.e., D.F.M.
Dr W. D. L. Ride
Hon. Kathleen Venn, M.L.e.
Sir William Keys, OBE., M.e.
Mr M. J. Neil, M.P. Mrs Y. M. R. McComb, OBE. Mr J. N. Davenport, A.O., D.S.O., D.F.e.
& BarG.M. MrD. Beard Senator the Hon. D. B. Scott Admiral Sir Anthony Synnot, K.B.E.,
A.O.

1.7.44
1.7.63
7.6.65
1.7.66
1.7.63
(11.11.66 ( 1.7.76 1.7.67
21.10.68 1.7.69 1.7.72
1.7.73 1.7.74 1.7.74
1.7.75
1.7.76
1.7.75
28.10.75
31.8.76 1.7.78 5.2.81
3.9.81 3.9.81 22.1.82

51

30.6.74 Chief Justice, Victoria

(1944-1964) Veteran both

World Wars

50

15.8.75 National President RSL.

(1960-1974)

54

30.6.72 Former Director General Aus-

tralian Security Service

49

30.6.75 Secretary, Department of Vet-

erans' Affairs

49

30.6.74 Journalist, former M.P. and Am-

bassador

41 51

30.6.75 30.6.83

Medical Specialist

53

30.6.73 Company Director, President

Navy League, former M.P.

52

30.6.76 RAAF (retired)

57

30.6.75 Former Director, WRAAF

59

30.4.82 Company Director, former Chief

of General Staff

58

30.6.76 M.P.

46

30.6.82 Film and TV Director

61

30.6.81 Judge of the Supreme Court of

Victoria

47

30.6.81 Engineer, President of Qld Branch

of Legacy

49

30.6.83 Scientist, former Museum Direc-

tor

48

30.6.78 MLC President Tasmanian RSL

Womens Auxiliary

52

30.6.82 National President RSL former

National Secretary RSL.

(1961-78)

32

30.6.81 M.P. Member of Army Reserve

58

30.6.83 P.R. Consultant

60

5.2.84 Company Director

56

30.6.84 Surgeon, sports medicine

61

30.6.84 Senator

60

30.6.84 Former Chief of Defence Force

Staff

All members listed are ex-servicemen and women.
Aboriginal Health Service: Programs
(Question No. 4516)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 29 April 1982:
What Aboriginal organisations, and in what regions, were

beneficiaries of the $169,500 program of bulk provision of additional support for Aboriginal Health Service (Program No. 101-003, Division 120-4-01) approved by the Minister in the 1981-82 estimates.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

674 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

The original allocation of $169,500 was increased at Additional Estimates to $195,000 and by a further $49,000 by way of later savings from the Northern Territory. The final available funds amounted to $244,000.

The following allocations were made:

New South Wales-

Wilcannia Medical Service

Victoria-

Additional funds to cover new health arrange-

ments in the State

...... .

Queensland-

Yumbah House Rehabilitation Centre,

Rockhampton

AICHS Brisbane

Palm Island Halfway House

South Australia-

Adelaide Central Mission

SA Worna Committee

Pt Lincoln Woma Committee

Davenport Aboriginal Medical Service

Adelaide Aboriginal Medical Service

Aboriginal Sobriety Group, Adelaide

Lower Murray Nungas Club, Murray Bridge

Northern Territory-

Lyappa Congress, Papunya

Urapuntja Medical Service, Utopia

National-

Australian Medical Association, Sydney

Dental Health Education Foundation, Sydney

$
5,000
74,850
6,700 30,000 40,000
2,575 2,620 1,455 2,460 2,000 1,500 1,300
32,000 21,000
10,680 3,338

Subtotal Unexpended as at 30 June 1982

237,478 6,522

Total

244,000

Electoral Division of Gwydir
(Question No. 4535)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) What cost benefit studies were carried out in respect of those sections of the East-West Road in the Electoral Division of Gwydir which he has declared as a development road for purposes of funding as a national road, and who conducted the studies.
(2) What specific information is he able to provide on the results of those studies.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The region served by the East-West Road is significant for the production of cotton, prime hard wheat, grain sorghum, oil seeds, sheep and cattle. Currently the annual agricultural production of the Namoi/Gwydir Valleys, which is only a part of this region, is valued at $250 million and it has the potential, with irrigation, to double this figure.
All local councils involved have nominated this arterial road as their number one priority.
The former New South Wales Minister for Roads, Mr Jensen, during the CastJereagh by-election in 1980, publicly stated the urgent need for an additional Commonwealth category in the Commonwealth's roads legislation to cover remote area developmental roads, such as the East-West Road.
When he approached me on this matter I agreed to broaden the definition of Developmental Roads under the National Roads category in the Roads Grants Act 1981.

The unsealed lengths of the road in the Walgett and Narrabri Shires were subsequently declared as Developmental Roads.
The particular sections of the East-West Road to be constructed were recommended by the N.S.W. Minister for Roads.
The 1981-82 New South Wales National Roads program contained projects for construction on the two declared sections-19 km in the Narrabri Shire and 6 km in the Walgett Shire.
Social Security Appeals Tribunals
(Question No. 4541)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) How many appeals are presently pending before the Social Security Appeals Tribunals in each State.
(2) What was the date of lodgment of the longest outstanding appeal.
(3) How many successful appeals were rejected by the Minister's Department in the last 12 months.
(4) How many overturned appeals have then gone to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
(5) What proportion of appeals to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal regarding social security have been successful.
(6) How many officers make up the Social Security Appeals Tribunals and what are their salaries.
(7) How many support staff are employed by the Tribunals and what are their salaries.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The latest available statistics, those as at 31 March 1982, show that the total numbers of appeals pending before Social Security Appeals Tribunals (that is, appeals referred to the Tribunals from the Department of Social Security and awaiting Tribunal consideration) in each State were as follows:
New South Wales-2927; Victoria-1379; Queensland-928; South Australia-502; Western Australia-230; Tasmania-89; Northern Territory-I 6; Australian Capital Territory-41; Australia-6112.
(2) The date of lodgment of the longest outstanding appeal in each State as at 7 May 1982 was as follows:
New South Wales-2 November 1978; Victoria-15 November 1979; Queensland-8 May 1980; South Australia-25 July 1980; Western Australia-II February 1980; Tasmania-IO September 1981; Northern Territory-16 September 1980 and the Australian Capital Territory-27 October 1980.
(3) In the 12 months ending 31 March 1982, there were 186 appeals in which the Social Security Appeals Tribunals recommended the appeal be upheld but that recommendation was rejected by the Department of Social Security.
(4) Of the 186 appeals referred to in (3), in 45 cases an appeal was lodged with the Administrative Appeals Tribunal as at 31 March 1982.
(5) Since the Administrative Appeals Tribunal assumed jurisdiction in Social Security matters from I April 1980, there have been, as at I May 1982, 87 decisions of that Tribunal which were concerned with a review on the merits of the case.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 675

That is, the statistic excludes cases considered solely on points of jurisdiction. The Administrative Appeals Tribunal has wholly or partly set aside the decision of the Department of Social Security in 56 per cent of those cases.
(6) Social Security Appeals Tribunals are comprised of legal, medical and welfare members (who are not officers of the Department) as well as an officer who is seconded from and independent of the Department of Social Security. These officers are full-time members in all States except Tasmania, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory where the volume of work does not justify full time membership. There is a total of 80 Tribunal members throughout Australia.
The current levels of remuneration for members of the Tribunals other than full time members are set out below.
Actual amounts paid to individual members depend upon how often they have sat on Tribunal hearings.
Chairman (legal member)-$160a day
Other non-medical members-$135 a day
Medical members-$36 an hour
Full time members-all officers are paid in the salary range $25150-26150 except in Tasmania where the officer's salary range is $22750-24050.
(7) Support staff work full time for the Tribunals in all States except Tasmania, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory. In those areas the support staff also work on other departmental duties as well as on Tribunal duties, and it is not possible to accurately apportion the amount of time they spend on Tribunal matters. The staff and their salary ranges are as follows:
New South WalesOne Clerk, Class 6 $20750-22050 One Clerk, Class 5 $18650-20150 One Clerical Assistant, Grade 3 $12310-13120 One Typist, Grade 2 $12150-12730 One Typist, Grade I $5585-11860
VictoriaOne Clerk, Class 6 $20750-22050 One Clerical Assistant, Grade 4 $13420-13980 One Clerical Assistant, Grade I $5495-11300 Two Typists, Grade I $5585-11860
QueenslandOne Clerk, Class 5 $18650-20150 One Typist, Grade 2 $12150-12730 One Clerical Assistant, Grade 2 $11480-12050
South AustraliaOne Clerk, Class 4 $16600-18100 One Typist, Grade 2 $12150-$12730
Western AustraliaOne Clerk, Class 4 $16600-181 00 One Typist, Grade 2 $12150-12730
TasmaniaOne Clerk, Class 4 $16600-18100 One Typist, Grade 2 $12150-12730
Northern TerritoryOne Clerk, Class 6 $20750-22050 One Typist, Grade I $5585-11860
Australian Capital TerritoryOne Clerk, Class 6 $20750-22050 One Typist, Grade I $5585-11860 One Clerical Assistant, Grade 4 $13420-13980

'Help Yourself' Health Promotion Campaign
(Question No. 4593)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister, in his policy statement on 30 September 1980, promise that more funds would be allocated to continuing the national development of the 'Help Yourself health promotion campaign.
(2) If so, what has been the annual appropriation and spending on this campaign since its inception.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2)-

Year

Division Appropriation Expenditure

1979-80 1979-80
1980-81 1981-82

857.02 325.2.11 325.2.11 325.3.14

$ 500000
*
500000

$ 498902
28814 1096
140845

* Included in Departmental Advertising vote.

School to Work Transition Program
(Question No. 4597)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did he. in his policy statement on 30 September 1980, say that the Commonwealth reaffirmed its commitment to provide $150m over five years for the school to work transition program.
(2) If so, what has been the annual appropriation and spending on this program since its inception.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) In his policy statement on 30 September 1980 the Prime Minister reaffirmed the Commonwealth commitment to provide $150m over five years for the school to work transition program.
(2) Transition program grants are provided on a calendar year basis. Annual allocations and spending since its inception has been:

1980

1981

1982

Allocation Expenditure

$'000
23975 16592

$'000

$'000

27426(1) 29988(3)

27 379(2)

(I) In addition, $2 112 000 was allocated for EPUY In July IDec 1981.
(2) In addition, $2105000 was spent on EPUY in JulyIDecember 1981.
(3) In addition, $4 618 000 is allocated for EPUY in 1982.
In 1983 the allocations will be increased by 40 per cent and, in 1984, by a further 14 per cent. In addition, these allocations will be adjusted for cost increases.

676 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

In financial year terms appropriations and expenditures under the program have been as follows:

1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

Appropriation Expenditure

$'000
7000 4524

$'000 32901 23809

$'000 30830(1) 29961 (2)

(I) In addition, $4 369 000 was appropriated for EPUY. (2) In addition, $4312000 was spent on EPUY.

Proposed National Children's Foundation
(Question No. 4606)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister in his policy speech on 30 September 1980, promise to establish a national children's foundation to help tackle the problems of child abuse.
(2) If so, when, and in what form, was this promise implemented.
(3) What was the Commonwealth's appropriation and spending on this foundation in (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Prime Minister announced in his policy speech that the Government would 'establish in conjunction with the States and voluntary organisations a national children's foundation to create greater public awareness of child abuse and to encourage support from voluntary organisations in this field.'
(2) A proposal for the foundation was endorsed by the Acting Prime Minister on 4 August 1981, and sent to all State and Territory Ministers on 28 September 1981 for comment. Responses to the proposal have been received from all States and Territories.
The matter was also discussed at the March 1981 and February 1982 Conference of the Council of Social Welfare Ministers.
I am currently reviewing the Commonwealth's position in the light of State Minister's responses and the known views of representatives of the community and professional disciplines.
(3) There was no expenditure on this item for the years 1980-81 and 1981-82.

Family Support Senices Scheme
(Question No, 4608)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister, in his policy statement of 30 September 1980, promise to commit more funds over the next three years to an expanded family support services scheme.
(2) If so, what was the Commonwealth's spending on the Family Support Services Scheme in each year since its inception.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) In its policy statement of 30 September 1980 the Government announced an 'expansion of the Family Support Services Scheme ($1 Om over three years)'.

In keeping with this commitment, the Government will
provide the $lOm over the period I January 1982 to 31 December 1984.

(2) The Family Support Services Scheme was introduced as a national three-year pilot program in January 1978, with total funding of $8.73m allocated for the period. The Scheme commenced in Victoria, with projects being approved pro-
gressively in other States and Territories. Because of the varying commencement dates, some projects were not due to com-
plete the third year of funding until late 1981/early 1982. Victoria received an additional $0.867m in 1981 for a fourth
year of funding under the pilot Scheme, as for the most part Victorian projects were due to terminate twelve months be-
fore those in other States. Similar but shorter bridging periods were approved in some States. The commencement of the ex-
tended Scheme from I January 1982 subsumed some lateterminating projects.

Because the Scheme is administered by the State and
Northern Territory Governments, with a system of quarterly advances based on reports of actual and estimated expenditure, the amounts paid out by the Commonwealth each finan-
cial year do not relate to the funds received by approved projects in that year. Only in the Australian Capital Territory are payments made direct by the Commonwealth to approved or-
ganisations. The amounts of Commonwealth funds provided
to organisations under the pilot Scheme (January 1978 to December 1981) in each financial year was as follows:

1977-78 1978-79
1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

$
344,977 1,886,792 2,391,918
2,961,723 1,634,127

Health Insurance Funds: Management Expenses
(Question No. 4613)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Are the figures for management expenses as a percentage of contribution income for various health insurance funds in various States given in the table on page 2130 of Hansard, 29 April 1982, correct.
(2) If so, (a) what is the explanation for the large variation in Medibank expenses for different States and (b) why are medibank's expenses so high compared with other large funds in most of the States.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. The percentages shown were derived from the various organisations' annual reports.
(2) (a) I am advised that the major reason for variations between the State ratios of management expenses for Medibank Private was the differing economies of scale that applied in respect of each State. The general position was that fixed costs incurred in the smaller States were, in relation to income, proportionately greater than in the larger States.
(b) The management expense ratios of Medibank Private were higher than those of the other major funds for a number of reasons. The Health Insurance Commission had a legacy of excess staff from the abolition of Medibank Standard. (The Commission was required to the greatest extent possible to use the same staff for the operations of both Medibank Standard and Medibank Private.) Substantial reductions in staff have since taken place. Also, the Commission's salary rates are

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 677

based on those of the Australian Public Service and, for the bulk of its employees, are generally higher than the rest of the health insurance industry. There are, in addition, associated higher costs such as the cost of the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme. Other factors that contributed to Medibank Private's relatively high management expense ratios were of a transitional nature (e.g. a redeveloped computer system more suitable for Medibank Private than Medibank Standard and the opening of branch offices).
Non-destructive Testing Companies: Training Scheme
(Question No. 4630)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) How many non-destructive testing (NDT) companies are involved in the Western Australian NDT training scheme under the skills in demand program.
(2) What are the specific job guarantees given to the 24 unemployed trainees undertaking the training scheme.
(3) Have the same guarantees been given to the remaining 24 trainees.
(4) Do these guarantees extend past the two year training period.
(5) Will these trainees be accredited through the qualifying scheme of the Australian Institute of Non-Destructive Testing (AINDT); if so, (a) what discussions with the AINDT have been held, (b) will the AINDT syllabi be adhered to in the training scheme, (c) will the prerequisites, required for applicants to sit AINDT examinations, be adhered to and (d) who will be required to pay the required application and examination fees.
(6) Has the AINDT been approached for advice on the purchase of equipment required for the training scheme.
(7) What assitance has been given to those persons within the NDT industry, who are not covered by this training scheme, to allow them sufficient formal training to achieve similar accreditation.
(8) What guarantees have been given that persons undergoing this training scheme will not simply displace existing employees within the NDT industry who have been unable to achieve accreditation because of the lack of formal training.
(9) Following the closure of Australian Iron and Steel, the deferring of Alcoa's Wagerup Refinery and the deferral of Woodside's North West Shelf work, do the job guarantees given to the persons undertaking this program still exist in Western Australia, or will these trainees be required to travel interstate or overseas in order to maintain a continuity of workinNDT
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I) Three for the first intake.
(2) Trainees are provided with employment and training for the duration of the program. It is, however, a fundamental objective of the program that all trainees be engaged in permanent full time employment beyond the training period.
(3) Yes.
(4) No. However the Western Australia State Manpower Planning Committee has identified a shortage of persons with

NDT skills. The object of the training program is to overcome the shortage by training new entrants to the industry as well as upgrading the skills of existing industry employees.
(5) Yes.
(a) Representatives of the AINDT are members of the Management Committee which is implementing the program.
(b) Yes.
(c) Yes.
(d) The only fee payable is an examination fee. Previously unemployed trainees will have the whole of this fee paid on successful completion of examinations, half by the Commonwealth and half by industry. Trainees currently employed in the industry will have half of the fee paid by industry and will require to pay the remaining half.
(6) Yes.
(7) No direct assistance is given to these persons. However the equipment provided to the Technical Education Division of the Western Australia Department of Education as a result of the implementation of this program will be available for ongoing training in the industry.
(8) The object of the program is to overcome a shortage, identified by the State Manpower Planning Committee, of skilled persons in the NDT industry by providing training to existing industry employees as well as to new entrants to the industry.
(9) Yes; not applicable.
Early Childhood Education
(Question No. 4647)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the work of Miss loan Fry in the area of early childhood education, in particular, her distinguished work in this area in her position as Early Childhood Consultant and Assistant Secretary of the Education Planning Group in his Department.
(2) Is it a fact that this position will not be renewed as of 1une this year because of staff ceilings in his Department.
(3) If so, will Miss Fry's skills in this area be used elsewhere in his Department.
(4) In what way will the Minister's Department continue to involve itself in early childhood education.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Miss Fry has had a long and distinguished career and has made a major contribution to early childhood education in Australia. Her career has included service with the Commonwealth during the past eight years.
(2) No.
(3) Miss Fry's engagement with the Department has been extended from time to time and will end on 301une 1982.
(4) The Department of Education has no national program responsibilities in early childhood education. It will continue to exercise its limited role in such matters by using its ongoing resources and by seeking outside advice, as appropriate.

678 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Mr Harry M. Miller
(Question No. 4654)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:

(I) On what boards, agencies, corporations or committees within the Minister's responsibilities did Mr Harry M. Miller serve and for what periods did he serve.

(2) What sum was paid to Mr Miller in each case and for what service.

(3) What specific expenditures were incurred by the Minister's department in relation to duties related to Mr Miller's
position.

(4) When and in what circumstances did Mr Miller's service cease in each case.

Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Mr Harry M. Miller served as a member of the Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation from I December
1977 to 16 March 1979.

(2) Mr Miller was paid the following amounts as remuneration, allowances and expenses in respect of his service on the Corporation.

Salary
Travelling Allowances Fares

$ 7,852.14
1,454.54 1,076.00

10,382.68

(3) Nil.
(4) Mr Miller's service with the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation ceased on 16 March 1979 upon his resignation.

Mr Harry M. Miller
(Question No. 4655)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) On what boards, agencies, corporations or committees within the Minister's responsibilities did Mr Harry M. Miller serve and for what periods did he serve.
(2) What sum was paid to Mr Miller in each case and for what specific service.
(3) What specific expenditures were incurred by the Minister's department in relation to duties related to Mr Miller's position.
(4) When and in what circumstances did Mr Miller's service cease in each case.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Mr Miller was appointed a member of the Qantas Board on 25 May 1976 and served on that Board for approximately two and three quarter years.
(2) Mr Miller received $16,580 as a member of the Qantas Board.
(3) None.

(4) Mr Miller resigned as from 16 March 1979, in view of the charges laid against him by the Corporate Affairs Commission of New South Wales.
Movement of Soviet Naval Vessels
(Question No. 2193)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(I) Further to the answer to question No. 671 (Hansard,5 May 1981, page 2005) concerning detailed information in respect of Soviet Naval vessels, has his attention been drawn to recent press reports that there is evidence of superpower political and strategic manoeuvering within a radius of 480 kilometres of Bab el Mandeb.
(2) Is the geopolitical significance of Bab el Mandeb growing with the increased shipping in the Suez Canal and the growth of local Red Sea trade; if so, is there a danger that the surrounding area could become highly volatile.
(3) Is concern mounting over the importance of the Suez Canal and the Red Sea in respect of cargoes of strategic minerals of Western Europe and the United States of America.
(4) Is he able to say whether: (a) the Soviet Union, in particular, uses the Red Sea route to move units of its Black Sea fleet into the Indian Ocean and beyond; (b) the Black Sea fleet of the Soviet Union serves the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea and is the largest of the four Soviet fleets in respect of major surface combat ships; (c) the Soviet Navy has facilities in the Dahlak Islands and at Assab in Ethiopia and at Aden, Mukulla and Socotra Island in South Yemen and (d) the Soviet Union is constructing a new naval base at the Bay of Turbah on the mainland near Perim Island.
(5) Is the Strait of Bab el Mandeb, at the southern end of the Red Sea where Africa and Asia are separated by only 14 nautical miles, crucial to the stability of the Middle East and will an enlarged Suez Canal further increase the volume of traffic and escalate the risk of interference to shipping.
(6) Will he take immediate steps to appoint military attaches to appropriate diplomatic missions in the Middle East, in view of the geopolitical and strategic importance of the Gulf of Hormuz, Bab el Mandeb, the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf, within the highly volatile political instability of the Middle East.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1), (2), (3) Yes. Alternative routes, however, are available and are widely used.
(4) (a) The Soviet Union does on occasion use the Suez Canal route to move units from the Black Sea fleet to the Indian Ocean.
(b) The Soviet North Sea, Black Sea and Pacific fleets are of similar size in terms of major surface combatants. Soviet major surface combatants in the Indian Ocean are drawn from the Pacific fleet.
(c) I understand that the Soviet Navy does use facilities in the Dahlak Islands and at Assab in Ethiopia and at Aden, and Socotra in South Yemen.
(d) Information is not available to confirm development for Soviet naval purposes at the Bay of Turbah.
(5) The stability of the Middle East is complicated by factors other than the one consideration of the Bab el Mandeb. An enlarged Suez Canal is likely to increase the volume of traffic but that increase will not of itself escalate the risk to shipping.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 679

(6) I refer the honourable member to the answer to Questions Nos 4125 and 4126, appearing in Hansard 6-7 May 1982, page 2538.
Development of Competitive Industries
(Question No. 4095)
Mr Lionel Bowen asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 March 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the statement by one of the Commissioners of the Industries Assistance Commission, Dr Mauldon, reported in the Australian Confederation of Apparel Manufacturers' Newsletter of February 1982, that the lAC have begun the task of indentifying competitive industries that could be developed in Australia in the future.
(2) Is the lAC attempting to identify competitive industries that could be developed in Australia in the future; if so, (a) what progress has been made and (b) what industries have been identified.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) My attention has been drawn to the report in the Australian Confederation of Apparel Manufacturers' Newsletter of February 1982. That report is misleading. Dr Mauldon actually said- "Just by way of clarification it is true we have not identified new competitive industries. We have identified classes of existing industries and on Table A1.2 of our discussion paper number 3 we identified there where employment would relocate with a 10 per cent across-the-board reduction in protection." (Transcript p. 1431 of the Inquiry into Approaches to General Reductions in Protection).
(2) No.
Taxation Incentives for the Arts Scheme
(Question No. 4224)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 18 March 1982:
(I) For each donation of works of art and other cultural material made under the Taxation Incentives for the Arts Scheme (a) who was the donor, (b) who were the valuers, (c) what was the value of the donation, as assessed by the approved valuers and (d) what was the taxation deduction.
(2) What was the estimated cost to the tax revenue of taxation incentives made under this scheme in each year since the scheme was begun.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised by the office of the Commissioner of Taxation as follows:
(I) (a), (b), (c) & (d) The secrecy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act prohibit the divulging of information respecting the affairs of a person disclosed or obtained under the provisions of that Act.
(2) The Taxation Incentives for the Arts Scheme provides that gifts of art or other property to the Australiana Fund, public art galleries, libraries or museums are allowable deductions under section 78 (I) (aa) and gifts of property to the

Commonwealth for the Artbank collection made from I July 1979 are allowable deductions under section 78 (I) (ab) of the Income Tax Assessment Act. Information relevant to the
Taxation Incentives for the Arts Scheme is available only in relation to gifts allowable under section 78 (I) (aa). Based on this information the estimated costs to income tax revenue of
the deductions allowed under section 78 (I) (aa) are as follows:

Income Year 1977-78

$ 25,000

1978-79

300,000

1979-80

1,300,000

Chemical Warfare Experiments during World WarII
(Question No. 4232)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 23 March 1982:
(I) Is he able to say whether 10 Department of Defence files relating to chemical warfare experiments during World War II which were forwarded from South Australia to the Australian War Memorial in 1947 caimot now be located by the War Memorial; if so what action is being taken to locate these missing files.
(2) Why has his Department classified a large number of files of these experiments as closed files when his undertaking to the House on 27 October 1981 to place the files in the National Archives clearly indicated his acceptance that the files should be publicly available.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In June 1947 eight files relating to chemical warfare experiments during World War II were transferred along with a large quantity of other records from the 4th Military District Headquarters in South Australia, to the custody of the Australian War Memorial repository in Melbourne. The Australian War Memorial has advised that the eight files were further transferred to the Archives Division of the Commonwealth National Library (now the Australian Archives) in 1952. The Australian Archives has carried out an extensive search for the files and it now appears that they were among a large group of files from the Department of Army in South Australia destroyed in 1959. I should emphasise that this destruction was carried out according to established administrative procedures after a thorough examination had confirmed that the files contained no material likely to be of lasting historical significance. The Department of the Army and the Australian War Memorial were consulted and approved the destruction.
Two other files relating to this topic were listed by a survey team prior to June 1947 to be retained by 4th Military District for continuing use by the Army after the Second World War. Unfortunately they cannot now be located.
(2) A very extensive search of Defence files has been carried out and all material which could reasonably be considered to have any relevance to World War II chemical warfare experiments has now been identified and placed in Australian Archives. This includes files from the Defence Science and Technology Organisation. All these records are available for public access, except for a small proportion of the records which: (a) are of continued national security significance; (b) contain information provided to Australia in confidence by other countries (clearance for these is being sought); or (c) contain personal information public access to which could cause embarrassment to the individuals concerned.

680 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

Defence Expenditure Restraints
(Question No. 4280)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
(I) What proposed extensions to facilities at HMAS. Stirling have been delayed as a result of current defence expenditure restraints and when will work recommence.
(2) What capital infrastructure developments are planned to facilitate the deployment of HMS. Invincible from HMAS. Stirling.
(3) When will his Department proceed with the construction of the planned aircraft carrier wharf at HMAS. Stirling.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) None. The only major work currently in progress at HMAS. Stirling is the construction of the 20000 tonne Oil Fuel Installation. This has not been delayed and is expected to be completed in October 1982.
(2) None. Ships of the HMS. Invincible class can berth and operate from HMAS. Stirling.
(3) No requirement is envisaged at this stage at HMAS. Stirling for a special 'aircraft carrier wharf.
Nuclear Safeguards
(Question No. 4294)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a report in New Scientist, 26 November 1981, that Emanual Morgan, a former inspector for the International Atomic Energy Agency, said, in a report prepared for the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, that the I.A.E.A. is incapable of detecting the diversion of a significant quantity of nuclear fuel in any country with a moderately active nuclear establishment.
(2) Is he able to say (a) what specific criticisms were made by Mr Morgan of the effectiveness of the I.A.E.A. and its ability to detect the deversion of nuclear fuel from nuclear energy generating purposes and (b) what action the I.A.E.A. has taken to either refute these criticisms or to have the problems corrected.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am aware of a number of press reports in November 1981 concerning a report on International Atomic Energy Agency (I.A.E.A.) safeguards prepared before ceasing duty in July 1981 as an employee of the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission by Mr Emanual R. Morgan, a former I.A.E.A. inspector. Some of the press have quoted Mr Morgan as reporting that the I.A.E.A. is 'incapable of detecting the diversion of a significant quantity (of nuclear material) in any state with a moderate to large nuclear establishment.' However, as quoted by the publication 'Nuclear Fuel', Mr Morgan reported it was his personal conclusion that '. . . the Agency is incapable of detecting the diversion of a significant quantity or of several significant quantities, by partitioning, in any state with a moderate to large nuclear energy establishment'. The term 'partitioning' is explained in answer to 2 (b) below.
(2) (a) The publication 'Nuclear Fuel' of 23 November 1981 contains an extensive description of and quotations from Mr Morgan's report.

(b) The I.A.E.A. has prepared a paper containing information and clarifications with respect to the major points raised by Mr Morgan's report as published in 'Nuclear Fuel'. The paper has been made available by the I.A.E.A. to interested persons, including to the media.
In response to Mr Morgan's conclusion referred to in part (I) above, the I.A.E.A. has made the following comment:
'Mr Morgan discusses a hypothetical diversion scenariowhile using language appropriate to a factual statementwhere a State having many nuclear installations would divert from each facility a small quantity of nuclear material so small that it might escape detection (partitioning). Such a strategy would involve different types and classes of material, a concerted effort by a large number of nuclear installations, operators and their staff and therefore an unattractive high-risk strategy. The detection goals used by the I.A.E.A. have to be realistic and credible and have to take account of the technical capabilities of the available verification measures. In designing safeguards approaches for individual facilities the I.A.E.A. uses significant quantities as guidelines for setting inspection goals. The existence of other facilities is taken into account in considering the diversion possibilities of individual facilities. Technical studies have however shown that the I.A.E.A.'s capability to detect "diversion by partitioning" is not significantly affected by using these quantities on a facility basis.
The basis for the statement by Mr Morgan seem to be unavoidable uncertainties of measurements leading to inventory differences-material unaccounted for (MUF)-in material balance areas in bulk handling plants; but it would be wrong to conclude that this would provide an easy possibility for diversion of nuclear material in quantities within uncertainties of MUF'.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 4402)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries, for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so, (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) The significance of repetition strain injury as an occupational health problem has only recently been recognised. The Department of Health has reacted promptly in researching the problem and I understand that the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH and MRC) has recently produced a guide on occupational health.
My Department and the statutory authorities within my jurisdiction will make every effort, subject to the availability of resources, to comply with the NH and MRC recommendations.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 681

No comprehensive medical examinations beyond those included in the appointment process are conducted routinely. However, medical examinations are encouraged when officers or employees report symptoms of apparently job-related illnesses.
The wide range of occupations in which repetition strain injuries are reported would make a program of ergonomic assessment impracticable on economic and resource grounds. However, I understand that the Departments of Health, Housing and Construction and Science and Technology are able to provide advice on suitable working environments for operations where the possible existence of health hazards is expected.
Existing work places have, of course, been designed, fitted out and equipped having regard to safety regulations and relevant standards and guidelines issued by such bodies as the Standards Association of Australia, the NH and MRC and the Department of Science and Technology.
Nuclear Safeguards
(Question No. 4488)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 27 April 1982:
(I) Is the Minister able to state whether a November 1981 report to the United States Regulatory Commission found that
(a) the International Atomic Energy Agency is incapable of detecting the diversion of a significant quantity of nuclear fuel in any state with a moderate to large nuclear energy establishment,
(b) inspectors cannot communicate in the language of parties inspected,
(c) inspectors are prevented from
(i) seeking hidden uranium diversion, processing and storage, and
(ii) inspecting some reprocessing plants and wastehandling plants,
(d) weapons-grade plutonium is transferred frequently to waste-handling plants not subject to inspection,
(e) one plant kept no record of final plutonium disposal, and
(f) some seals on 'nuclear material are of paper, easily duplicated or counterfeited.
(2) Is he further able to state whether
(a) many nuclear facilities are not subject to I.A.E.A. safeguards on uranium and plutonium and not subject to I.A.E.A. accounting,
(b) some facilities inspected, including Urenco Centec's enrichment plants, exclude inspectors from certain areas for commercial intelligence reasons,
(c) inspectors are limited to detecting breaches of agreement after they occur, not to preventing them or pursuing and recovering diverted materials,
(d) the I.A.E.A. lacks staffing, finance and on the spot permanent inspection staff, and
(e) safeguards agreements rely on the good faith of participating countries.
(3) Are the Government's previous assurances of adequacy of safeguards consistent with the situation referred to in parts (I) and (2) and Mr Justice Fox's reports and recommendations.

Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) See response to Question No. 4294.

(b) The author of the report, Mr E. Morgan, has been quoted as stating that 'the I.A.E.A. does not teach languages to inspectors and does not assist inspectors to learn the language of the country which he inspectsOften the inspector cannot communicate with the party being inspected'.

The I.A.E.A. has stated that it runs intensive language classes for its inspectors in seven languages, including its four working languages of English, French, Spanish and Russian. Plant operating records and reports to the I.A.E.A. follow a prescribed format or content and are kept in one of the I.A.E.A.'s working languages. The I.A.E.A. has stated that language problems have not seriously hampered safeguards implementation.

(c) (i) and (ii) Mr Morgan has been quoted as stating that 'the Agency does not attempt to find undeclared fuel'; that one waste handling facility in the F.R.G. is 'not subject to I.A.E.A. safeguards'; and that an 'operator and state had refused to permit the Agency to apply timely detection continuous inspection' at a certain facility. The type of facility is not specified.

Safeguards agreements between the I.A.E.A. and a member state are premised on the declaration by the state of all nuclear material required to be subject to safeguards. The Agency has no right of search for undeclared nuclear material, but it is entitled to seek information regarding nuclear material subject to safeguards. The Agency's safeguards approaches assume the possibility of undeclared facilities and nuclear material.

The I.A.E.A. has stated that it is 'not aware of the (timely detection) situation referred to, that safeguards agreements provide for the I.A.E.A.'s legal right to apply continuous inspection in plants of a certain type with high inventory throughput, and this right is being exercised.'

(d) According to 'Nuclear Fuel', Mr Morgan said that 'in a country such as F.R.G. all waste is transferred to a central waste handling facility which is not subject to I.A.E.A. safeguards'.

The I.A.E.A. has stated that the nuclear waste involved (measured discards) contains 'nuclear material in minute quantities, the recovery of which is quite impracticable. In view of the quantities involved and the technical effort required to recuperate such material this is regarded as an implausible diversion scenario. However, the problem is being addressed'.

(e) According to 'Nuclear Fuel', Mr Morgan stated that

'in one facility, there was no record kept of the final

disposition of plutonium samples. Such samples were

said to be returned to the process .

the

Agency simply does not concern itself with material

control at that level of detail'.

In reply, the I.A.E.A. has stated that the minimum information to be available from a country's records is prescribed by that country's safeguards agreement(s) with the I.A.E.A. and adhered to.

(f) Mr Morgan has been quoted as saying: 'The Agency also uses paper seals. According to expert authority

682 REPRESENTATIVES 18 August 1982

Answers to Questions

they can be duplicated by a good printer'.
The IAEA has stated that 'seals placed on nuclear material are not easily counterfeited or duplicated. A special "fingerprinting" system and periodical change of seals for subsequent detailed investigation make IAEA seals highly tamper resistant. Paper seals are used by the IAEA as well as in domestic safeguards systems as a stress indicating device. They are used only for a short period of time or under special conditions of low safeguards relevance.'
(2) (a) All non-nuclear weapon states parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) are obliged to place their entire civil nuclear industries under IAEA safeguards. Nuclear weapon states parties to the Treaty are not obliged to place any of their nuclear activities under IAEA safeguards. However, the United Kingdom and the United States have both concluded voluntary offer safeguards agreements to cover their civil nuclear activities and the USSR has offered recently to accept IAEA safeguards on selected non-military facilities. France, a nuclear weapon state not a party to the Treaty, but which has declared its intention to act as if it were a party, has also concluded a voluntary offer safeguards agreement. The majority of non-nuclear weapon states not party to the NPT have accepted IAEA safeguards on all their existing civil nuclear facilities. A minority of such states have not accepted safeguards over certain sensitive facilities.
(b) The agreed safeguards approach for a particular facility is that IAEA inspectors have routine access to specified points of the facility. These specified points are detailed in the subsidiary arrangements to IAEA safeguards agreements. The subsidiary arrangements are confidential to the parties to the agreements. Safeguards agreements also provide for ad hoc inspections for specified purposes and for special inspections in cases of suspected loss, breach of containment or inadequacy of information. Such inspections may involve access to information or locations in addition to the points specified for routine inspections.
(c) The objective of IAEA safeguards applied pursuant to the NPT is the timely detection of diversion of significant quantities of safeguarded nuclear material from peaceful nuclear activities to the manufacture of nuclear weapons or of other nuclear explosive devices or for purposes unknown, and deterrence of such diversion by the risk of early detection. This unique verification system cannot physically prevent diversion. However, the capacity to detect in a timely fashion a diversion of nuclear material, as well as the international action which is called for in such an event, has constituted an effective deterrent.
(d) The manpower available for IAEA inspection work is necessarily limited by the financial restraints imposed on the IAEA as for all other international organisations. Expenditure on safeguards is the largest area of IAEA activity, representing approx. 30 per cent of the IAEA budget. In the past year there has been a 25 per cent increase in the available man-years of inspection. A number of member states, including Australia, are providing extra-budgetary technical and financial assistance to the Agency's safeguards system. Permanent 'on the spot' inspection staff are provided for certain sensitive facilities. Also, in order to try to increase inspector availability without significantly adding to costs, a field office has been established in Canada and a group of inspectors have started long-term assignments in Japan. Safeguards inspection is supported by

continuously operating automatic instrumentation.
(e) Safeguards agreements, like all international treaties, constitute legally binding undertakings by the parties to implement their provisions. Safeguards agreements also provide for sanctions to be applied in the event of non-compliance. Safeguards agreements are the measure through which the non-nuclear weapon member states rely upon the IAEA to confirm that their actions conform to their stated intentions not to acquire nuclear weapons. In order to assure the international community of their continuing non-nuclear weapon status, it is in these states' interest that the safeguards applied pursuant to the agreements should be effective.
(3) Yes. The Government is firmly committed to the maintenance and development of IAEA safeguards. It is contributing to this process through the implementation of relevant obligations in Australia's nuclear safeguards agreements and through participation in international activity directed towards improving safeguards; through its support for the Agency as an institution including its annual contributions to the regular budget of the IAEA; and through a separate programme of assistance funded by a voluntary contribution estimated to cost $54 I,000 over three years.
Imports of Pesticides and Herbicides
(Question No. 4573)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to an article in The Age of 3 May 1982, page 4, entitled 'After Spraying, A Shroud of Secrecy'.
(2) Was telodrin, or components used in its manufacture, imported into this country either at the time of its registration or since; if so, what are the details.
(3) What was the (a) quantity, (b) landed value and (c) country of origin of pesticides or herbicides, or components used in their manufacture, imported into Australia in each year from 1960-6 I to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.
(4) What arrangements exist within the Bureau of Customs for the verification of paperwork relating to imports of pesticides and herbicides, or components used in their manufacture, including details of technical testing which may be carried out.
(5) Who is the Bureau of Customs officer responsible for the oversight of these arrangements and what is that officer's substantive grading and salary.
. (6) Do these arrangements require contact with other Commonwealth Departments; if so, what are the details.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Neither telodrin, nor its active constituent, has ever been separately identified in the Australian Customs Tariff. Consequently, import statistics of these commodities are not available.
(3) The information sought is not readily available. The Statistician has advised that to identify all pesticides, and their components, and to compile import statistics of those commodities since 1960-6 I, would be a substantial task for which resources are not available.

Answers to Questions

18 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 683

(4), (5) and (6) The responsibility for the registration, sale and use of pesticides and herbicides rests with the State and Territory governments. No import controls on the products are contained in Customs regulations and no arrangements exist within the Bureau of Customs for special verification or testing of those products.
Disadvantaged Schools Aid Program
(Question No. 4594)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister, in his policy statement on 30 September 1980, promise that the programs of aid for disadvantaged schools and disadvantaged country areas would be continued.

(2) If so, what has been the annual appropriation and spending on each of these programs since their inception.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) In his policy statement on 30 September 1980 the Prime Minister announced that programs of aid for disadvantaged schools and disadvantaged country areas would be continued.
(2) (i) The following table shows the annual appropriation on the Disadvantaged Schools Programs and the Disadvantaged Country Areas Program/Country Areas Program since their inception-

FUNDING OF THE COMMONWEALTH SCHOOLS COMMISSION DISADVANTAGED SCHOOLS PROGRAM AND THE COUNTRY AREAS PROGRAM
$'000
(constant estimated December 1981 price levels)

1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982

Disadvantaged Schools Country Areas

(*) (a) 27,545 27,670 27,670 27,670 27,853 27,853 27,853 - 5,824 5,828 6,377 6,519 6,519 7,953

(*) The actual expenditure for the biennium 1974-75 was $23,364,000. The Commonwealth Schools Commission advises that this cannot be converted readily to estimated December 1981 prices because of lack of detailed data on the amounts spent by each State and non-government authority in each year of the biennium.
(ii) All funds appropriated up to and including 1981 were spent in respect of the relevant program year. Expenditure in 1982 is proceeding.


